the caribbean , encompassing 16 independent nations and 13 overseas territories , is a region of almost 42 million people that includes some of the hemisphere's richest and poorest nations .

although many of these nations have similar characteristics , the region as a whole is more commonly distinguished for its diversity .

the region consists of 13 island nations from the bahamas in the north to trinidad and tobago in the south ; belize , which is geographically located in central america ; and the two nations of guyana and suriname , located on the north central coast of south america .

the largest nations in terms of land area are guyana and suriname , while those with the largest populations are cuba , the dominican republic , and haiti .

the island nations of the eastern caribbean are among the smallest countries in the world .

 ( see tables 1 and 2 and figure 1 . ) .

ethnically , a majority of the regional's population is of african heritage , descendants of slaves brought to the west indies in the 17 th to 19 th centuries to work on sugar plantations .

three nations — guyana , trinidad and tobago , and suriname — have large populations of east indian heritage , descendants of indentured servants who were brought to the west indies in the 19 th and early 20 th centuries .

small minorities of ethnic chinese are also found in several caribbean nations and a javanese population is found in suriname .

both cuba and the dominican republic have large populations of spanish descent , but in both countries , people of mixed african - spanish heritage make up the majority of the population .

descendants of indigenous caribbean peoples , the arawak and carib indians , constitute small minorities in several caribbean island nations , while guyana and suriname have minorities of several amerindian tribes .

belize , in addition to having a small garifuna ( mixed african and amerindian heritage ) population , also has a significant indigenous mayan population .

many countries in the region share a common british colonial heritage , while cuba and the dominican republic were spanish colonies , haiti was french , and suriname was dutch .

stemming from its diverse colonial history , the region includes 12 predominantly english - speaking nations .

in several nations , however , more than one language is spoken , and in several countries , a common patois or dialect is spoken .

haiti has two official languages: creole , the common language spoken by most of the population ; and french , which is spoken only by about 10% of the population .

in several of the english - speaking caribbean nations , a french patois is also spoken , evidence of a historical era when british and france vied for colonial control in the region .

u.s. interests in the caribbean are diverse , and include economic , political , and security concerns .

during the cold war , security concerns tended to eclipse other policy interests , and focused on the potential threat in the region from the soviet union and cuba .

in the aftermath of the cold war , other u.s. policy interests emerged from the shadow of the east - west conflict in the caribbean and u.s. policy priorities shifted from one emphasizing security concerns to a new focus on strengthened economic relations through trade and investment .

with the september 2001 terrorist attacks in the united states , security concerns have re - emerged as a major u.s. interest in the caribbean .

the administration describes the caribbean as america's "third border," with events in the region having a direct impact on the homeland security of the united states .

it describes caribbean nations as "vital partners on security , trade , health , the environment , education , regional democracy , and other hemispheric issues. .

the united states has close relations with most caribbean nations , with the exception of cuba under fidel castro .

the u.s. - caribbean relationship is characterized by extensive economic linkages , cooperation on counternarcotics efforts and security , and a sizeable u.s. foreign assistance program supporting a variety of projects to strengthen democracy , promote economic growth and development , alleviate poverty , and combat the aids epidemic in the region .

the region has had preferential treatment of its exports to the u.s. market since the early 1980s , and u.s. efforts are now focused on helping the region prepare for hemispheric free trade .

despite close u.s. relations with most caribbean nations , at times there has been tension in the relationship .

for example , relations between caricom nations and the united states became strained in the aftermath of the departure of haitian president jean bertrand aristide from power in february 2004 .

caricom nations called for an investigation into the circumstances surrounding aristide's departure , and haiti's participation in caricom was suspended .

after haiti held elections in february 2006 leading to the inauguration of rene préval as president , caricom subsequently reinstated haiti's participation in caricom at their july 2006 summit .

in another example , caribbean nations generally maintain good relations with cuba and venezuela , and resent u.s. expressions of concern about these relations .

many caribbean nations are participating in a venezuelan program known as petrocaribe that offers oil on discounted terms depending on the price of oil .

crs report rl33337 , article 98 agreements and sanctions on u.s. foreign aid to latin america , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33819 , cuba: issues for the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21718 , dominican republic: political and economic conditions and relations with the united states , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31870 , the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21930 , ethanol imports and the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20864 , a free trade area of the americas: major policy issues and status of negotiations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32294 , haiti: developments and u.s. policy since 1991 and current congressional concerns , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32001 , hiv / ai ds in the caribbean and central america , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33693 , latin america: energy supply , political developments , and u.s. policy approaches , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33828 , latin america and the caribbean: issues for the 110 th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22657 , latin america and the caribbean: fact sheet on economic and social indicators , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33162 , trade integration in the americas , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33200 , trafficking in persons in latin america and the caribbean , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32739 , tsunamis: monitoring , detection , and early warning systems , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32487 , u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33951 , u.s. trade policy and the caribbean: from trade preferences to free trade agreements , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32014 , wto dispute settlement: status of u.s .

compliance in pending cases , by [author name scrubbed] .

