the general services administration ( gsa ) manages the federal government's charge card program , known as smartpay .

through smartpay , agencies are able to select charge card products and services from contracts that gsa has negotiated with major banks .

the contracts allow agencies to select different types of charge cards , depending on their needs .

smartpay charge card options include purchase cards ( for supplies and services ) , travel cards ( for airline , hotel , and related expenses ) , and fleet cards ( for fuel and supplies of government vehicles. ) .

this report focuses on purchase cards .

the use of purchase cards has expanded at a rapid rate since the mid - 1990s .

spurred by legislative and regulatory reforms designed to increase purchase card use for small acquisitions , the dollar volume of federal government purchase card transactions grew from $527 million in fy1993 , to $19.3 billion in fy2009 .

while the use of purchase cards has been credited with reducing administrative costs , audits of agency purchase card programs have found varying degrees of waste , fraud , and abuse .

one of the most common risk factors cited by auditors is a weak internal control environment: many agencies have failed to implement adequate safeguards against card misuse , even as their purchase card programs grew .

in response to these findings , congress has held hearings and introduced legislation that would enhance the management and oversight of agency purchase card programs .

in addition , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has issued guidance that requires agencies to implement internal controls that are designed to minimize the risk of purchase card abuse .

this report begins by providing background on agency purchase card programs .

it then discusses identified weaknesses in agency purchase card controls that have contributed to card misuse , and examines legislation introduced in the 111 th congress that would address these weaknesses .

the government's purchase card program has its origins in executive order 12352 , issued by president reagan in 1982 .

e.o .

12352 directed agencies to develop programs that simplified procedures and reduced the administrative costs of procurement , particularly with regard to "small" purchases ( $25,000 or less ) .

several agencies subsequently participated in a pilot program that evaluated the use of a commercial credit card , called a purchase card , as an acquisition tool .

at the time , even a routine order for widely available items , such as office supplies , typically required agency program staff to submit a written procurement request to a contracting officer , who reviewed it , obtained the necessary authorizing signatures , made the actual purchase , and processed the associated paperwork .

to critics , this process was inefficient , especially for small purchases .

not only was it time - consuming for both program and procurement personnel , but it also prevented program offices from quickly filling immediate needs .

under the pilot program , non - procurement staff used purchase cards to conduct small - dollar transactions directly with local suppliers , thus bypassing procurement officers entirely .

a report on the pilot program concluded that purchase cards could reduce administrative costs and improve delivery time , and in 1989 the office of management and budget ( omb ) tasked gsa with making purchase cards available government - wide .

participation in gsa's purchase card program was not mandatory , and card use did not initially grow as rapidly as some had expected .

in 1993 , however , a report issued by the national performance review ( npr ) sparked a number of legislative and regulatory reforms intended to increase purchase card use .

the npr was a clinton administration initiative , headed by vice president al gore , that sought to "reinvent" the federal government by making government operations both less expensive and more effective .

one of the npr's objectives was to identify opportunities to streamline a number of government - wide processes , including procurement .

drawing on input from experts in the public and private sectors , the initial report of the npr recommended expanding the use of purchase cards across the government , a step it said would "lower costs and reduce bureaucracy in small purchases. .

in a separate report that focused solely on procurement , the npr estimated that if half of all small acquisitions were made using purchase cards , the government would realize $180 million in savings annually .

the report further recommended amending the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) — the government's primary source of procurement guidance — to promote the use of purchase cards for small purchases .

building on the npr's recommendations , congress passed the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ; p.l .

103-355 ) in 1994 .

fasa introduced several reforms that increased the use of purchase cards .

among these , title iv of fasa established a simplified acquisition threshold of $100,000 .

purchases at or below the threshold were exempted from the provisions of a number of procurement laws .

this reform significantly reduced the administrative burden and procurement expertise needed to make small purchases .

to further streamline procedures for the smallest acquisitions , title iv also established a "micro - purchase" threshold of $2,500 ( which was increased to $3,000 in 2006 ) .

fasa further exempted micro - purchases from sections of the buy american act and the small business act , and they could be made without obtaining a competitive bid , if the cost was deemed reasonable by the cardholder .

at the same time , the clinton administration took steps to increase the use of purchase cards .

citing the need to make agency procurement procedures "more consistent with recommendations of the national performance review," president clinton issued executive order 12931 on october 13 , 1994 .

e.o .

12931 directed agency heads to ( 1 ) expand purchase card use ; and ( 2 ) delegate the micro - purchasing authority provided in fasa to program offices , which would enable them to make such purchases directly .

e.o .

12931 also directed agency heads to streamline procurement policies and practices that were not mandated by statute , and to ensure that their agencies were maximizing their use of the new simplified acquisition procedures .

in addition , the far was amended in 1994 to designate the purchase card as the "preferred method" for making micro - purchases , and to encourage agencies to use the card for purchases of greater dollar amounts .

card use increased sharply as agencies implemented these reforms .

the dollar value of goods and services acquired with purchase cards increased from $527 million in fy1993 to $19.3 billion in fy2009 .

during that same time span , the number of cardholders nearly tripled to 270,000 , and the number of purchase card transactions increased from 1.5 million to just under 21.8 million in fy2009 .

the flexibility of the purchase card may have contributed to its growth: it could be used for in - store purchases , which allowed the cardholder to take immediate possession of needed goods , or it could be used to place orders by phone or over the internet and have goods delivered .

according to gsa , the use of purchase cards now saves the government $1.7 billion a year in administrative costs .

the federal purchase card program is implemented by individual agencies , with the involvement of gsa and omb .

in broad terms , agencies establish and maintain their own programs , but they select purchase card services from contracts that gsa negotiates with selected banks , and their programs must conform to the government - wide guidance issued by omb .

audits of agency purchase card programs conducted by the government accountability office ( gao ) and agency inspectors general ( igs ) have attracted congressional attention with their revelations of abusive purchases made by government employees .

among the many cases of abuse cited by auditors are a department of agriculture employee who , over a period of six years , used her purchase card to funnel $642,000 to her boyfriend ; a forest service employee who charged $31,342 to his purchase card for personal items , including sony playstations , cameras , and jewelry ; and a coast guard cardholder who used his purchase card to buy a beer brewing kit — and then brewed alcohol while on duty .

congress has held several hearings to address purchase card misuse and the underlying internal control weaknesses that auditors say allowed it to occur .

the following paragraphs discuss these weaknesses identified in audit reports published between 2002 and 2008 .

few agencies are able to dedicate employees to work full - time as aos ; rather , ao duties , which include time - intensive activities such as reviewing cardholder statements , often fall to staff who already have full workloads .

not surprisingly , some aos have said it is difficult to find the time to carefully review purchase card statements because of the demands of their other responsibilities .

this problem may be compounded if the number of cardholders assigned to an ao — referred to as the span of control — increases .

there is no government - wide span of control policy , but gao has recommended that agencies assign no more than seven cardholders to each ao ; beyond that 7:1 ratio , the ability of the ao to conduct effective oversight may be diminished , particularly when the ao has other , significant duties .

although data are limited , audits have found that , at some agencies , the span of control exceeds gao's recommendation .

in 2006 , according to gao , 2,150 purchase card holders at the department of homeland security — nearly 20% of dhs's total number of cardholders — were managed by aos with a span of control in excess of 7:1 .

additional research might be useful for determining whether aos are hindered in their ability to provide effective oversight due to either the number of accounts they are expected to monitor , or to the demands of their other duties , or both .

