n umerous legal and practical obstacles , such as the infeasibility of locating al qaeda operatives , stand in the way of victims seeking to establish liability in u.s. courts against , and recover damages from , the terrorists who planned and carried out the september 11 , 2001 , attacks .

victims , however , have sued numerous individuals and groups with less direct ties to the attackers , including defendants who allegedly provided monetary support to al qaeda prior to september 11 , 2001 .

in r e terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , is a consolidated case that includes , among other claims , claims against the kingdom of saudi arabia , several saudi princes , a saudi banker , and a saudi charity .

plaintiffs argued that these saudi defendants played a "critical role" in the september 11 attacks by giving money to muslim groups , which in turn funded al qaeda .

in august 2008 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit affirmed dismissals of the claims against the saudi defendants .

however , part of the reasoning for the dismissals was later overturned , and the plaintiffs were permitted a second chance to bring their suit against the saudi government and government - owned charity .

this effort also failed on sovereign immunity grounds at the district court , however , and is once again on appeal at the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit .

this report explains the legal bases for the dismissals and provides an update to the status of the case .

to address some issues involving the interpretation of the fsia , among other related matters , congress is considering the justice against sponsors of terrorism act ( s. 2040 , h.r .

3815 ) .this report addresses relevant legislative developments in its final section .

the foreign sovereign immunities act ( the fsia ) applies to all foreign states and their "agencies and instrumentalities. .

immunity for sovereign nations against suits in u.s. courts has a long history and is based on the principle that conflicts with foreign nations are more effectively addressed through diplomatic efforts than through judicial proceedings .

congress passed the fsia to codify these long - standing principles and to clarify limitations on the scope of immunity that had emerged in international practice .

the fsia contains both a general , presumptive rule against litigation in u.s. courts and a number of exceptions permitting suits .

as a general rule , foreign states , together with their agencies and instrumentalities , are "immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the united states and from the states. .

however , the fsia authorizes jurisdiction over foreign nations in several exceptions .

namely , a foreign state is not immune from u.s. courts' jurisdiction where ( 1 ) the foreign state has waived its immunity ; ( 2 ) the claim is a specific type of admiralty claim ; ( 3 )  the claim involves commercial activities ; ( 4 ) the claim implicates property rights connected with the united states ; ( 5 ) the claim arises from tortious conduct that occurred in the united states ; ( 6 ) the claim is made pursuant to an arbitration agreement ; or ( 7 ) the claim seeks money damages against a designated state sponsor of terrorism for injuries arising from a terrorist act .

the exception for designated state sponsors of terrorism provides jurisdiction over cases involving designated "state sponsor[s] of terrorism" in suits involving "personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture , extrajudicial killing , aircraft sabotage , hostage taking , or the provision of material support or resources for such an act if such act or provision of material support or resources is engaged in by an official , employee , or agent of such foreign state while acting within the scope of his or her office , employment , or agency. .

however , the exception seems to apply only to countries designated by the u.s. department of state as state sponsors of terrorism .

this list currently includes iran , sudan , and syria .

at the time suit was brought in the in re terrorist attacks litigation , the previous terrorism exception remained in force .

before asserting jurisdiction to accept a case , a federal court must establish its authority over the dispute involved and the parties to the litigation .

in other words , courts must assert both subject matter jurisdiction over each claim and personal jurisdiction over each defendant in a case .

for cases involving foreign defendants , the analyses for subject matter and personal jurisdiction differ according to whether the fsia applies .

in august 2008 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit ( second circuit ) affirmed dismissals of claims against the kingdom of saudi arabia , a saudi charity , saudi princes , and a saudi banker in in r e terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 .

plaintiffs in the case were victims of the september 11 terrorist attacks .

they alleged that the saudi defendants had supported al qaeda's financial backers prior to the attacks and were therefore civilly liable for plaintiffs' injuries .

however , the court of appeals did not reach the merits of these allegations .

instead , the court held that u.s. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the saudi defendants .

the legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the fsia and lack of personal jurisdiction .

the most significant aspects of the court of appeals' opinion were interpretations of the fsia , namely ( 1 ) its interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under the fsia as extending both to the saudi charity and to individuals sued in their official capacities , and ( 2 ) its interpretation of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the fsia as having a narrower scope than plaintiffs had advocated .

the supreme court later abrogated the first of these holdings , and the second circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity .

in december 2013 , the second circuit ordered these claims against saudi arabia and its agencies or instrumentalities be reinstated in the interest of justice to determine whether the tort exception applies .

the district court again dismissed the claims based on foreign sovereign immunity , and the case is on appeal at the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit .

on remand to the district court , judge daniels of the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york dismissed the claims against the kingdom of saudi arabia and the shc , holding the fsia tort exception does not apply because of the "entire tort" rule , and suggested that the discretionary act exception to the tort exception might otherwise apply to preclude jurisdiction .

in a separate decision in in re terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit affirmed the dismissal of claims against five defendants whose cases had been dismissed by the district court for failure to state a claim on which relief could be granted .

these defendants were ( 1 ) al rajhi bank , ( 2 ) saudi american bank , ( 3 ) saleh abdullah kamel , ( 4 ) dallah al baraka group llc , and ( 5 ) dar al – maal al – islami ( "dmi" ) trust .

plaintiffs brought claims against these defendants under a common - law tort theory as well as the anti - terrorism act ( ata ) , the alien tort statute ( ats ) , and the torture victims' protection act ( tvpa ) .

in terrorist attacks iii , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit adopted narrow interpretations of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the fsia , appearing to preclude efforts by september 11 victims and other plaintiffs seeking recovery in u.s. courts against foreign officials and government - controlled entities like the saudi charity .

plaintiffs' efforts to hold non - government financial institutions liable for providing material to terrorist organizations have also seemingly been stymied by the courts' interpretations of the ata as precluding secondary liability for terrorist acts and requiring that plaintiffs demonstrate that the support alleged was a proximate cause of their injuries or losses .

several bills have been introduced in congress that would broaden the fsia tort exception explicitly to cover terrorist acts that occur within the united states and make other changes that could boost plaintiffs' efforts against some of the saudi defendants .

the 111 th congress held a hearing to consider s. 2930 , the justice against sponsors of terrorism act , which , among other measures , would have amended the tort exception to the fsia specifically to cover terrorist attacks within the united states .

in the 112 th congress , new legislation was introduced to reduce some of the burdens faced by victims of state - sponsored terrorism in the united states who seek to bring lawsuits against foreign officials .

s. 1894 , the justice against sponsors of terrorism act , was ordered to be reported favorably out of the senate judiciary committee in september 2012 .

a companion bill , h.r .

5904 , did not receive further action .

identical versions of the justice against sponsors of terrorism act were introduced in the 113 th congress as s. 1535 and h.r .

3143 .

s. 1535 was reported favorably out of the senate judiciary committee with some amendments to the findings and provisions addressing aiding and abetting liability under the anti - terrorism act , and was passed by the senate in december 2014 .

the house did not vote on either version of the bill .

the bills would have amended the tort exception to the fsia expressly to include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing , aircraft sabotage , hostage taking , terrorism , or the provision of material support or resources for such an act.... " although the aspect of the terrorist attacks iii decision interpreting the tort exception as inapplicable to terrorist acts occurring in the united states was effectively overruled by another panel of judges , it is possible that other courts could read the terrorism exception as foreclosing suits against states not designated as sponsors of terrorism .

the tort exception would also have been amended to clarify that there is no rule holding that the "entire tort" must occur within the united states , but rather that such claims are covered "regardless of where the underlying tortious act or omission occurs. .

additionally , the bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur by amending 18 u.s.c .

section 2337 , which currently exempts all government officials .

the amended version of section 2337 would have exempted only u.s. officials .

h.r .

3143 would have included the provision of material support for terrorism in the jurisdiction provision , although its revision of the ata cause of action did not expressly include liability for material support .

the justice against sponsors of terrorism act ( jasta ) has returned to the 114 th congress as s. 2040 , which the senate passed by voice vote on may 17 , 2016 , after accepting an amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by senator cornyn , and h.r .

3815 , which was introduced late in 2015 and referred to the house judiciary subcommittee on constitution and civil justice .

h.r .

3815 would amend the fsia tort exception in 28 u.s.c .

§1605 ( a ) ( 5 ) by limiting the type of injury to "physical injury" rather than "personal injury," and specifically excluding "any claim for emotional distress or derivative injury suffered as a result of an event or injury to another person that occurs outside of the united states. .

it would include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing , aircraft sabotage , hostage taking , terrorism , or the provision of material support or resources for such an act , or any claim for contribution or indemnity relating to a claim arising out of such an act" to the tortious acts or omissions for which foreign sovereign immunity may be abrogated .

it would also eliminate the "entire tort" rule by providing that the non - commercial tort exception covers physical injuries , deaths , and property damage or loss occurring in the united states "regardless of where the underlying tortious act or omission occurs. .

the discretionary function exclusion would remain unchanged ; however , the bill would include among congressional findings that "no country has the discretion to engage knowingly in the financing or sponsorship of terrorism , whether directly or indirectly. .

s. 2040 ( as passed by the senate ) would create a new exception to the fsia for acts of international terrorism that occur on u.s. territory , to be codified as 28 u.s.c .

§1605b .

"international terrorism" is defined with reference to the ata , including the exclusion for "acts of war. .

the amendment would dispense with the "entire tort" rule and the statutory discretionary act exclusion for such cases only , leaving current law intact with respect to the fsia non - commercial tort exception in other cases .

under the bill , a plaintiff could seek money damages from a foreign state for physical injury to person or property or death caused by both ( 1 ) an act of international terrorism in the united states , and ( 2 ) a tortious act or acts on the part of the foreign state or official , employee , or agent of that foreign state acting within the scope of his or her employment , regardless of where the tortious conduct took place .

the bill would also clarify that a tortious act or omission would not give rise to jurisdiction where it constitutes "mere negligence. .

finally , it would clarify the relationship between the fsia exception and the ata's civil liability exception precluding suits against foreign officials .

if the new fsia exception applies , a u.s. national could pursue an ata lawsuit against the foreign state .

s. 2040 would provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states under the new fsia provision , and would authorize the attorney general to intervene in such cases to seek a stay of the civil action if the secretary of state certifies that the united states is engaged in good faith discussions with the defendant state to resolve the claims .

the court would be authorized to issue a stay for 180 days , which could be renewed for additional 180-day periods if the secretary of state certifies that such negotiations remain ongoing .

all current versions of jasta include a finding by congress that expresses approval in the context of civil liability under the ata for the test established by the d.c .

circuit for aiding and abetting and conspiracy liability .

the d.c .

circuit defined aiding and abetting as including the following elements: ( 1 ) the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act that causes an injury ; ( 2 ) the defendant must be generally aware of his role as part of an overall illegal or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance ; ( 3 ) the defendant must knowingly and substantially assist the principal violation .

conspiracy , according to the d.c .

circuit , gives rise to civil liability when it consists of ( 1 ) an agreement between two or more persons ; ( 2 ) to participate in an unlawful act , or a lawful act in an unlawful manner ; ( 3 ) an injury caused by an unlawful overt act performed by one of the parties to the agreement ; ( 4 ) which overt act was done pursuant to and in furtherance of the common scheme .

the bills would implement secondary liability in somewhat different ways .

s. 2040 ( as passed by the senate ) and h.r .

3815 would amend the ata to provide for secondary liability in the case of an act of international terrorism planned , committed , or authorized by an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization at the time of the planning , commission , or authorization of the attack .

the house bill would also apply liability in the case of an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization as a result of the attack that gives rise to the lawsuit .

secondary liability would attach under the senate bill to any person who "aids and abets , by knowingly providing substantial assistance , or who conspires" with the perpetrator ; it also expressly adopts the definition for "person" from section 1 of title 1 to define who may be held secondarily liable .

the house bill would authorize secondary liability against anyone who aided , abetted , or conspired with the perpetrator , without clarifying what type of intent or knowledge would be necessary to establish liability .

neither bill would explicitly elucidate whether criminal liability under the material support provisions of the ata would also establish civil liability , as some courts have found , but language in the findings section suggest the intent that the knowing or reckless provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization , whether directly or indirectly , should give rise to liability .

h.r .

3815 would amend the ata to remove the immunity of foreign officials from lawsuits as currently provided in 18 u.s.c .

§2337 ( 2 ) .

it would also add a provision to the ata to address issues plaintiffs have confronted in establishing personal jurisdiction over foreign nationals .

h.r .

3815 would declare that the district courts shall have personal jurisdiction , to the maximum extent permissible under the 5 th amendment to the constitution of the united states , over any person who commits or aids and abets an act of international terrorism or otherwise sponsors such act or the person who committed such act , for acts of international terrorism in which any national of the united states suffers injury in his or her person , property , or business by reason of such an act in violation of section 2333 .

s. 2040 ( as passed by the senate ) would leave the foreign official exclusion under the ata intact , but , as noted above , would permit lawsuits by u.s. nationals against the foreign state itself if the new fsia exception is triggered .

aliens as well as u.s. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than the ata if jurisdiction is available under the new fsia exception .

