as congress considers tax reform , an important and challenging component is the tax treatment of the corporation .

some proposals would cut the corporate rate by broadening the base , with an overall revenue - neutral treatment of the corporate sector , while others would propose raising or reducing revenues .

the traditional arguments surrounding the corporate tax , which largely focus on the distortions introduced by the tax , were a focus of a treasury study issued in january 2017 .

this study also discussed choice of organizational form and international issues .

the debate , however , has sometimes focused on arguments that cutting the corporate tax rate would stimulate economic growth , and even raise revenue , or on claims that the tax is a burden not on capital but on labor .

recently , steven mnuchin , secretary of the treasury , advanced the argument that the corporate tax is paid by workers , citing a recent study by azémar and hubbard as evidence .

a recent news report indicated three additional articles referenced by the treasury press office in support of the burden falling on wages ( although the treasury office of tax analysis currently assigns most of the burden to capital income ) : studies by randolph , hassett and mathur , and lui and altshuler .

opinion pieces have referenced a variety of other studies that find large effects of corporate taxes on economic growth or that find the burden of the tax falls on wages , while others have expressed disagreement .

the current debate is similar to one that began over 10 years ago and might be viewed as the beginning of current proposals to cut the corporate rate and broaden the base .

before turning to the basic issues surrounding the corporate tax , it is useful to trace the discussion of issues and proposals for corporate reform .

in november 2005 , president george w. bush's advisory panel on tax reform reported on a variety of proposals for major reform of the tax system , including those for corporate and business income taxes .

hearings were held on these proposals in 2006 , but no further action occurred .

on july 16 , 2007 , the wall street journal published an opinion article by treasury secretary henry m. paulson addressing concerns that the u.s. corporate tax rate is high relative to other countries and announcing a conference to be held july 26 that would examine the u.s. business tax system and its effects on the economy .

the treasury department also released a background paper that addressed several issues associated with the corporate tax , and identified some base broadening provisions .

an opinion piece by r. glenn hubbard , president bush's first chairman of the council of economic advisors , referred to the conference as well as to a study by hassett and mathur finding that the tax fell on labor and a study by devereux considering the revenue - maximizing tax rate .

hubbard concluded by suggesting that cutting the corporate tax rate would reduce a tax that is largely , or even fully , borne by labor and that behavioral responses would offset much of the static revenue cost .

during the conference , discussions included whether business representatives would trade tax preferences for lower rates , whether reform should take the form of lower rates or write - offs of investments , and methods of avoiding the corporate tax by income shifting in a global economy .

some participants complained that the corporate tax is outdated , too complex , distorts decisions , and undermines the ability of firms to complete in a global economy .

echoing some issues raised in hubbard's article , kevin hassett indicated that the corporate tax was not an effective way to raise revenues and suggested that lowering the rate would raise revenues .

at the time of the treasury conference , chairman charles b. rangel of the house ways and means committee released a statement inviting the bush administration to discuss such issues as tax reform , especially the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , addressing tax havens , and increasing equity and fairness in the tax structure .

chairman rangel introduced a bill , h.r .

3970 , on october 25 , 2007 , with a revenue - neutral subsection that included some of the base broadeners included in the 2007 treasury study .

the rate reduction , from 35% to 30.5% , was not as large as that discussed in the 2007 treasury study , 27% .

base broadeners in h.r .

3970 were criticized by some business groups .

the corporate tax debate and the issues of burden and effects on growth continued to be in the news .

in may 2008 , n. gregory mankiw published an article suggesting that most of the burden of the tax falls on labor , and citing research suggesting the corporate tax is borne by labor and that revenue losses may be fully or largely offset by behavioral responses .

in the 111 th congress , s. 3018 , introduced by senators ron wyden and judd gregg , also provided for a lower corporate tax rate in exchange for a somewhat broader corporate tax base .

a similar bill , s. 727 , was introduced by senators wyden and coats in the 112 th congress .

the fiscal commission proposed a corporate reform similar to the wyden - gregg bill .

in addition to the wyden - gregg and wyden - coats proposals and the fiscal commission proposals , there were general proposals by republican leaders in the house ( majority leader eric cantor , ways and means chairman dave camp , and budget committee chairman paul ryan ) for corporate tax reform with rate reductions .

in 2014 , chairman camp introduced h.r .

1 , a comprehensive proposal that reformed both individual and corporate income taxes and was revenue neutral during the 10-year budget horizon , as well as distributionally neutral .

it cut the corporate tax rate to 25% .

president obama also supported revenue - neutral corporate tax reform , although some groups proposed raising additional revenue from corporations .

during 2016 , senator hatch , chairman of the senate finance committee , indicated an interest in corporate tax integration ( where only one level of tax would be imposed on corporate income ) .

most recently , speaker paul ryan and ways and means committee chairman kevin brady proposed a major revision in the tax treatment of business income in their "better way" blueprint .

it partially transformed the current income tax into , effectively , a domestic consumption tax .

the border adjustments that make this proposal a domestic consumption tax appear no longer on the table and a new plan is being formulated in cooperation with the house , senate , and administration .

this report provides an overview of corporate tax issues and discusses potential reforms in the context of these issues , with particular attention to some of the research concerning large behavioral responses and their implications for revenue and distribution .

the first section reviews the size and history of the corporate income tax , and discusses an important issue that has been given little attention by those who propose deep cuts in the corporate tax: its role in preventing the use of the corporate form as a tax shelter by wealthy business owners .

this section also discusses the potential effect of behavioral responses on corporate tax revenues .

the second section examines the role of the corporate tax in contributing to a progressive tax system and discusses claims that the burden falls on workers .

the third section reviews arguments relating to efficiency and revenue yield , and traditional criticisms of the corporate tax as one that causes important behavioral distortions .

one aspect of this discussion is the question of how the tax might be viewed differently in a more global economy .

the final section examines options for reform .

the corporate tax is the third - largest source of federal revenue , but its importance as a revenue source has diminished considerably over time .

although it has long been recognized that there are behavioral responses to the corporate tax ( even aside from the tax sheltering issues indicated above ) , and that these responses have important implications for the efficiency of the economy and the burden of the tax , the issue of a revenue - maximizing tax rate , popularly associated with the "laffer" curve , has rarely entered into the discussion .

a laffer curve graphs revenue against the tax rate , and is based on the notion that revenue is zero at a zero tax rate and zero at a 100% tax rate ( at least with respect to some taxes ) .

in a laffer curve , the revenue first rises with the tax rate and then falls , and at the point it reverses direction is the revenue - maximizing tax rate .

the notion that a corporate tax cut could pay for itself continues to enter the debate in 2017 , as it did more than 10 years ago during that corporate debate , where it was proposed or alluded to in several articles in the popular press during the debate .

one is the article by glenn hubbard , cited above .

in national review , kevin hassett discusses the laffer curve and presents a chart that he indicates is an illustration that appears to show a negative relationship between corporate revenues as a share of gdp and the tax rate .

only 13 countries are shown on this graph , however , and the negative relationship is clearly strongly affected by an outlier , ireland , which is a well - known tax haven ; most economists would not find this illustration persuasive proof .

the hubbard and hassett articles do , however , cite some more sophisticated research .

hassett referred to a paper by kimberly clausing , and hubbard referred to a paper by michael devereux .

in addition , alex brill and kevin hassett also prepared a statistical analysis examining the change in the relationship over time .

a cross - country study was also prepared by mintz .

clausing , who is referred to in the hassett article , is quoted as claiming that the united states is likely to the right of the revenue - maximizing point on the laffer curve , but this statement , presumably from an earlier draft , is not found in her published article .

that article finds a revenue - maximizing tax rate of 33% , in her simple specification , but as she added variables and accounted for other features the revenue - maximizing tax rate seemed to rise , as indicated in table 2 .

large countries and countries that are less open , such as the united states , have a revenue - maximizing tax rate of 57% — much larger than the combined federal and state rate for u.s. firms of 39% .

michael devereux's paper indicates that , while he finds a revenue - maximizing rate of 33% under the same specification as clausing , he finds only weak evidence of a relationship between tax rates and corporate tax revenues as a percentage of gdp .

many of his specifications do not yield statistically significant effects .

brill and hassett find a rate of around 30% , which has been falling over time .

mintz finds a rate of 28% , but his data span only a few years ( 2001-2005 ) .

the remainder of this section first discusses theoretical expectations of this relationship and then examines these empirical studies .

both the theoretical and empirical assessments suggest that the results of these analyses are questionable .

cross - country empirical studies , as noted above , have recently been employed to address the laffer curve issue and , as will be discussed subsequently , the incidence of the corporate tax on wages .

in addition to these direct estimates , there are numerous empirical studies that examine underlying relationships , such as the effect of the user cost of capital ( which incorporates the tax rate along with other variables ) on investment .

most of these studies have found modest effects on domestic investment and have employed times series estimates within the united states .

one recent study on investment , djankov et al. , is similar to the other studies in that it employs a cross - country data base and an independent variable reflecting the tax rate to directly estimate the effect of the corporate tax rate on investment , entrepreneurship and other variables .

the study found no effect on investment for statutory tax rates , but very large effects for constructed first year and five year cash flow tax rates .

this study , unlike the others discussed in this paper , is a single cross section , so there is no way to introduce fixed country effects .

a second issue that was a focus of the hubbard article was the distributional effects of the corporate income tax .

this issue also has been recently referenced by treasury secretary mnuchin , who cited a study by azémar and hubbard as evidence that most of the corporate tax is paid by workers .

if the corporate tax falls on owners of the corporation , or on capital in general , it contributes to a progressive tax system , since higher income individuals have more income from capital than from labor .

based on tax data , for taxpayers with incomes up to $100,000 , over 90% of income is labor income , whereas those with incomes over $1 million , less than a third is labor income .

the traditional analysis of the corporate income tax indicates that the burden generally spread to all capital , but does not fall on labor income .

most government and private agencies that routinely do distributional analysis allocate the corporate tax largely to capital income .

hubbard referred to three studies in his article: a working paper by economist arnold harberger , a working paper by william randolph of the congressional budget office , and a recent empirical cross - country study using data similar to the studies discussed above , by hassett and mathur .

at about the same time or shortly thereafter three other empirical studies that use cross - country data were released in 2006-2008 , by felix , by desai , foley and hines , and by arulampalam , devereux , and maffini .

mankiw refers to the randolph and arulampalam , devereux , and maffini studies , although as will be shown subsequently the arulampalam et al .

study is examining an entirely different phenomenon which is unlikely to be very relevant to the united states corporate tax , as is the case with the azémar and hubbard article recently referred to by the treasury secretary .

these studies reflect differing fundamental approaches to studying corporate tax incidence .

one approach uses a general equilibrium model that estimates incidence based on empirical estimates of various behavioral responses and other aspects ( such as size ) .

the burden that falls on labor versus capital depends on international capital flows and how well they can be used in different countries ( which in turn depend on the technology of production and the preferences of consumers ) .

the second approach is to directly estimate wages as a function of tax rates and other variables from a set of data ( this approach is called a reduced form estimate ) .

these direct estimates , in turn , fall into two types: ( 1 ) some studies are considering the effects of international capital flows and ( 2 ) others are examining the share of the tax on excess profits ( or rents ) that is born by labor by reducing the share of rents that is captured by labor in wage bargaining .

of the studies mentioned in the previous paragraph , two ( harberger and randolph ) are of the general equilibrium type ; three ( hassett and mathur , felix , and desai , foley , and hines ) are reduced form empirical estimates that reflect capital flows ; and two ( arulampalam , devereux , and maffini and azémar and hubbard ) are estimating rent sharing through wage bargaining .

a recent news report indicated three articles referenced by the treasury press office in support of the burden falling on wages ( although the treasury office of tax analysis currently assigns most of the burden to capital income ) : two studies already mentioned , randolph , and hassett and mathur , and a study by lui and altshuler .

the last study does not clarify what behavioral response it is measuring , but because it is based on considering wage effects by industry it would be capturing wage bargaining effects .

the traditional criticism of the corporate tax is that the tax causes distortions , and that these distortions are exacerbated by corporate tax preferences that prevent , for a given level of tax revenue , a lower tax rate .

the issues discussed in this section include allocation of capital within the domestic economy , savings effects , and international capital flows .

a variety of potential revisions could be made to the corporate tax to permit lowering the rate .

the revisions discussed here include ( 1 ) broadening the corporate tax base and using the revenues to reduce the rate or to provide investment incentives , ( 2 ) correcting interest deductions and income for inflation , and ( 3 ) increasing the individual level tax to permit a lower tax at the firm level or taxing large unincorporated firms as corporations .

 ( to provide some reference , latest projections show corporate tax revenues at $300 billion in fy2016 and projected at $429 billion in fy2027 .

in 2007 , prior to the recession they were $370 billion , but they were lower during and after the recession due to cyclical factors and legislative changes. ) .

the first part of this section summarizes the various base broadening tax reform proposals over the years , beginning in proposals advanced in the 2007 treasury study and continuing through the latest budget proposal in 2016 .

the second part calculates how much the corporate rate could be reduced for corporate tax expenditures as well as other potential revisions .

the remaining sections discuss two revenue estimates for two provisions that are not provided by other sources .

is there an urgent need to lower the corporate tax rate , as some recent discussions and analyses have suggested ? .

on the whole , many of the new concerns expressed about the tax appear not to stand up under empirical examination .

the claims that behavioral responses could cause revenues to rise if rates were cut do not hold up on both a theoretical basis and an empirical basis .

studies that purport to show a revenue - maximizing tax rate of 30% contain econometric errors that produce biased and inconsistent results ; when those problems are corrected the results disappear .

cross - country studies to provide direct evidence showing that the burden of the corporate tax actually falls on labor in some cases yield unreasonable results and prove to suffer from econometric flaws that also lead to a disappearance of the results when corrected .

similarly , claims that high u.s. tax rates will create problems for the united states in a global economy suffer from a misrepresentation of the u.s. tax rate compared to other countries and are less important when capital is imperfectly mobile , as it appears to be .

although these new arguments appear to rely on questionable data , the traditional concerns about the corporate tax appear valid .

although many economists believe that the tax is still needed as a backstop to individual tax collections , it does result in some economic distortions .

these economic distortions , however , have declined substantially over time as corporate rates and shares of output have fallen .

there are a number of revenue - neutral changes that could reduce these distortions , allow for a lower corporate statutory tax rate , and lead to a more efficient corporate tax system .

at the same time , the amount of rate reduction that could be achieved with a long run , revenue - neutral corporate tax reform seems limited to a few percentage points .

appendix a. revenue - maximizing tax rates in an open economy for an exploration of corporate tax revenue , consider a very simplified example where there is a u.s. corporate sector and the rest of the world with no tax .

the lowest revenue - maximizing rate would apply in a case where there is a small country which is a price - taker ( that is , worldwide price and rate of return after tax are fixed because there is perfect capital mobility and perfect product substitutability ) .

to determine the revenue - maximizing tax rate , begin with the equation for corporate tax revenues: ( a1 ) where , the corporate capital stock , and , the after - tax rate of return , are potentially functions of the tax rate , .

revenue is maximized when the total differential of equation ( a1 ) with respect to taxes is equal to zero , which is: ( a2 ) assuming the rest of the world can be treated as an aggregate and has a zero capital income tax rate , gravelle and smetters show that , in a case of a small country with perfect substitutability , does not change and ( a3 ) where is the labor share of income and is the factor substitution elasticity .

substituting equation ( a3 ) into equation ( a2 ) will obtain the revenue - maximizing rate of .

to use some common values , if is 0.75 and is 1 , the revenue - maximizing rate is 75% .

since the united states is a large country , the rates would be even higher , because the tax can affect the world wide interest rate .

the gravelle and smetters paper provide effects for and for a given country share , which can also be substituted into equation ( a2 ) .

as a result , the revenue - maximizing tax rate is where is the output share .

for example , if the united states has approximately 30% of the total output , the tax rate would be 81% .

the rates would rise further if capital were not perfectly mobile or products not perfectly substitutable , since these factors would allow to fall further .

at the extreme , it would return to a closed economy solution .

gravelle and smetters present evidence to suggest that the outcome is more similar to a closed economy than a small open economy solution .

this same outcome , a 75% rate , would also apply for the most extreme case of growth models , the ramsey model , where the supply of savings is perfectly elastic .

note that in both of these extreme cases , the after tax return is fixed and the total burden falls on wage income , so that labor income would fall .

one could also calculate a corporate tax rate than maximizes revenue while taking into account the effect on wages and keeping the wage rate constant .

again , relying on the model in gravelle and smetters and maximizing , ( a4 ) where is the tax rate wages , obtain a revenue - maximizing corporate tax rate of .

with an approximate 20% tax rate on labor income , the revenue - maximizing corporate tax rate is 70% .

note however , that this is not the rate that would be found in the cross - section analysis .

appendix b .

data and estimation methods the data used in the hassett and mathur study and the clausing study were obtained .

the data used to replicate the brill and hassett study were obtained from the original sources cited in the study .

the results reported for all studies were replicated .

the data are for several countries for a period of several years , and are known as panel data .

the model of the relationship between the corporate tax rate ( the independent variable ) and the various dependent variables takes a linear form: ( b1 ) where is the dependent variable , is the independent variable ( the corporate tax rate in our case ) , and are the regression parameters to be estimated , and is a random error term .

the subscripts , i and t , indicate that information for a particular observation comes from country i for year t ( for example , information for australia for 1992 ) .

the random error term , , is a random variable and captures omitted and unobservable factors or variables that affect the dependent variable .

the error term will be discussed in further detail below .

if the following conditions are met: the expected value ( mean ) of the random error term , , is zero ; the variance of the random error term is constant for all observations ; the random error term for one observation is uncorrelated with the error term for another observation ; and the random error terms are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables... then the ordinary least squares ( ols ) estimators will yield the best linear unbiased estimators of the parameters ( and ) .

the parameter shows the true relationship between the dependent variable and the independent variable , and is the parameter of interest to us .

denote the estimate of as .

since is an estimate , it is a random variable drawn from a probability or sampling distribution with an expected value ( mean ) and variance .

this estimator will have the following desirable properties: unbiased: the expected value of is ; efficient: the variance of is smaller than the variance of all other unbiased estimators ; and consistent: the probability distribution of collapses on as the number of observations gets arbitrarily large .

estimation problems often arise with panel data because one or more of the conditions listed above are not met .

the result is the ols estimator will be biased and inconsistent .

problems arise with panel data , as is demonstrated when equation ( b1 ) is rewritten as: ( b2 ) the term is an effect ( unobserved heterogeneity ) specific to a particular country capturing differences among countries in ( 1 ) the measurement of economic data , ( 2 ) economic institutions , ( 3 ) laws and regulations applying to business , and ( 4 ) attitudes toward business , among other things .

the term is a time specific effect capturing such things as the international business cycle .

since the corporate tax rate is a reflection of the attitudes toward business in a country , and will be correlated .

ignoring the country - specific unobserved heterogeneity means that the ols estimate of is biased and inconsistent because the error term in equation ( b1 ) is correlated with the explanatory variable — one of the conditions listed above is violated .

another problem often encountered with data that has a time dimension is the error terms are correlated from one year to the next year ( called autocorrelation ) .

statistical tests indicate that these problems exist with the data obtained .

consequently , the parameters of the model are estimated using the fixed effect estimation procedure allowing for an ar ( 1 ) error structure .

identification neither brill and hassett nor clausing offer any justification in their studies for using ols rather than the fixed effects method to estimate the parameters of their model .

a well - known drawback of the fixed effects method is variables that vary across countries , but not across time within a country , cannot be included in the estimation ( that is , the parameters associated with these variables are not identified ) .

devereux ( 2006 ) claims "changes in the statutory [corporate tax] rate within a country are comparatively rare .

in practice , as found by clausing ( 2006 ) , there is not enough variation within country to identify an effect of the statutory rate , conditional on country fixed effects. .

to check the correctness of this statement and the justification for using ols , the variation of the corporate tax rate across countries and over time was directly examined .

table b - 1 displays the results for the data from the three studies reanalyzed .

the first row displays the relevant explanatory corporate tax rate variable used in the study .

the second row reports of mean of the variable .

the third row reports the standard deviation ( a measure of variation of a variable ) of the corporate tax rate variable .

the last two rows decompose the standard deviation into the between country component and the within country component .

if there is no variation in the variable over time within countries , then the within component of the standard deviation will be zero .

consequently , the effect of that variable on the dependent variable is not identified conditional on fixed effects ( that is , it cannot be estimated using the fixed effects procedure ) .

as can be seen from the table , there is almost as much variation within countries ( the within component ) as there is between countries ( the between component ) .

in addition , all oecd countries changed their corporate tax rate at least once between 1979 and 2002 .

four countries ( ireland , norway , spain , and switzerland ) changed their corporate tax rate only once during this period .

in contrast , luxembourg changed their corporate rate 12 times over this period .

on average , oecd countries changed their corporate tax rates once every five years .

therefore , there is no evidence to support the argument that the effect of the corporate tax rate on corporate tax revenues is not identified conditional on fixed effects .

appendix c. modeling problems of the desai , foley , and hines study this appendix explains in further detail the modeling problems associated with the desai , foley , and hines study ( hereinafter , dfh ) , which include the failure to recognize price variability .

this means that their cross - equation restriction is not justified ( and that restriction is what gives rise to their results ) .

the dfh study also fails to correctly interpret their results given that other sectors exist in the economy .

the dfh model effectively begins with an equation that forms a basic part of any general equilibrium model , namely that a percentage change in price is a weighted average of the percentage in costs for small changes .

in the case of an imposition of a tax , that is: ( c1 ) where p is price , r is rate of return , w is the wage rate , is the tax rate and is the share of capital income .

the hat notation refers to a percentage change except in the case of the tax variable , where the hat means the change in tax rate divided by one minus the tax rate .

beginning with a no tax world , that variable is simply .

this relationship can be derived from a profit maximization problem .

dfh derive such an equation to motivate their seemingly unrelated regression model .

they then assume that p , the price of the good , does not change , which produces an equation of the form: ( c2 ) since is an exogenous variable this equation indicates that the change in the tax would be shared by interest rates and wages , and this is the basis for the two seemingly unrelated regressions where the dependent variables are r and w , and the coefficients are constrained so that the burden will add up to one .

the argument for keeping the price fixed is that such a good would have its price fixed due to trade ( eg , all commodities have to sell at the same price ) .

there are two difficulties with this assumption .

first , if consumers in different countries have different preferences for goods based , in part , on country of origin ( i.e. , they do not consider french wine and german wine to be perfect substitutes ) these prices will not be fixed .

indeed , this phenomenon is widely recognized , and the price responses are referred to as armington elasticities — and they have been estimated empirically .

second , their observations are the weighted average of firms in each country but the firms themselves produce heterogeneous products , and all of these product prices cannot stay fixed because they have different capital intensities and because the products will vary from one country to another .

indeed , the trading of heterogeneous products means that fixed prices cannot be assumed because , in such a model , countries could not produce , consume and trade numerous products with differential taxation because such a world economy would be characterized by corner solutions ( i.e. , no internal equilibrium ) .

this problem means that there is another variable — price — that is affecting the results and presumably is correlated with the error term ( that is , the price would tend to be higher when the tax rate is higher , making the regression suspect and that the coefficient restriction is not appropriate .

even if these problems did not exist , there is an additional problem with the interpretation of their findings , namely that they did not adjust for other sectors in the economy , including non - traded sectors and sectors not subject to the corporate tax .

incidence results must be adjusted for the fact that the tax is only a partial one .

to illustrate in the simplest fashion , suppose the remaining sector of the economy is a non - corporate non - traded sector of the economy whose price is denoted by a capital p: ( c3 ) this commodity has no taxes and if the effects on r and w are estimated , those can be used to determine the change in p. what ultimately to be determined is the fraction of the tax , rk c ( where k c is the capital in the corporate traded sector ) that falls on labor , that is what share of ldw , where l is total labor in the economy , is of rk c .

to derive the real change in wages , the change in nominal wage is divided by the change in total price level in the economy , or , if the corporate sector is responsible for ( 1- ) of output in the economy the percentage change in real wage ( which is denoted with a capital w ) can be expressed as follows: ( c4 ) if s is the share of the burden falling on labor income , from equation ( 1 ) , and .

and , by substitution of these values into ( 3 ) and in turn into ( 4 ) , and allowing the initial price level to be normalized at 1 , obtain the equation for incidence in the economy , noting that equals rk c / wl c : ( c5 ) the first term , total labor divided by labor in the tax sector reflects the increased burden from the spread of the nominal fall in wages to the other sector , while the negative terms inside the next parenthesis reflects the rise in real wages due to the fall in the price of the untaxed sector .

whether the burden rises or falls depends on a variety of factors .

as the capital intensity of the untaxed sector rises the burden falls ; at the extreme when becomes 1 , the first term collapses to 1 and the second term is less than s , so the total burden on labor is less in the economy than it is in the estimation .

this possibility is more important than it might initially appear , because one of the most important uses of capital not subject to the corporate income tax is in housing in the united states .

appendix d. bargaining models and rent - sharing of corporate taxes with a number of studies appealing to a bargaining model and rent sharing , it is important to understand the theory implied .

bargaining models start from a standard nash equilibrium which maximizes the product of the welfare of the two recipients .

using the adm notation: ( d1 ) b = {[u ( w ) - u ( w* ) ] n} ( 1- µ ) {π - π*} µ where w is the wage earned , u ( w ) is the utility of the wage earned , w* is the competitive wage , u ( w* ) is the utility of the competitive wage , n is the number of employees , π is the profit in the current undertaking and π* is the alternative profit that could be earned in the competitive industry .

the exponents ( 1- µ ) and µ reflect the bargaining strength of the parties .

the first term in curly brackets is the value of an excess wage to the workers , while the second is the value of excess profits to the owners .

begin with a no tax world .

to maximize b differentiate with respect to the wage ( which appears in the value of excess profits because they are reduced by wn ) , the number of employees and the capital stock ( which is embedded in profits ) .

the result is a bargaining solution of the form: ( d2 ) wn= w*n+[ ( 1- µ ) / µ] ( π - π* ) this solution is derived in adm although they express all of their variables in per worker terms .

assuming away intermediate goods and other costs ( which will make no difference ) π can be defined as pq - wl ( where p is price and q is quantity ) .

π* can be defined as rk where r is the return required to attract capital and the amount earned in the competitive sector .

 ( d3 ) wn= w*n + [ ( 1- µ ) / µ] ( pq - wn - rk ) this form of the bargaining formula is used by adm because they are estimating wages .

it is more instructive in understanding the model , however , to examine not the wage but the excess wage .

with some manipulation , and now dividing the variables by n to get per capita amounts ( with lower cases indicating per capita ) , obtain ( d4 ) w - w* = ( 1- µ ) ( pq - w* - rk ) the last term on the right hand side is excess profit ( revenue minus the competitive wage minus the competitive return .

the left hand side is the wage in excess of the competitive wage .

the workers share is ( 1- µ ) and it is an estimate of this coefficient that the empirical rent sharing literature is intended to identify .

suppose now this bargaining model is being estimated assuming a tax of τ .

now profit , ( π - π* ) is now equal to ( pq – wn ) ( 1- τ ) – rk .

the first order conditions for wages and labor now contain a tax term to reflect the fact that wages are deductible from the tax .

therefore equation d2 now becomes: ( d5 ) wn= w*n+[ ( 1- µ ) / µ] [ ( π - π* ) / ( 1- τ ) ] since the tax term is in the denominator , it suggests that the wage would go up through this effect , which basically indicates that adding to wages saves taxes , and hence the price of paying the surplus in wages is smaller .

at the same time the excess profit is reduced because taxes are applied to revenues , with wages , but not capital deducted , making the profit term ( pq - wn ) ( 1- τ ) – rk .

when this term is substituted to provide a version of ( 4 ) the tax term in the numerator cancels with the tax term in the denominator with the only effect of taxes on rk .

 ( d6 ) w - w* = ( 1- µ ) ( pq - w* - rk / ( 1- τ ) ) a term similar to this one is contained in the felix and hines study .

the important point that comes from this last equation is that in discussing rent - sharing the burden of the tax that falls directly on excess profits is not considered because that tax effect disappears from the formula .

although the pie is smaller by τ ( pq - w ) , the price of the wage share is also lower so the owners bear the entire direct burden of the tax on the firm's excess profits .

the only way that taxes enter is to increase the normal cost of capital .

adm ignore this term in their model because this term and its effects on wages are part of the indirect burden ( which would be determined by general equilibrium economy - wide results ) .

that is , they are interested in the direct effect of taxes outside the general equilibrium effects .

they posit a term ( which is neither observable nor clearly defined ) which is not related to profit , of the form ; ( d7 ) w - w* = ( 1- µ ) ( pq - w* - ϕ / ( 1- τ ) - rk / ( 1- τ ) ) where ϕ represents a tax payment that is not part of profits or of the cost of capital .

it is not clear what qualifies as part of ϕ or how important it is .

most of the examples they mention such as deductions for interest and contributions to pension funds seem to qualify as either part of deductible costs of funds or wage compensation .

and when actually estimating the relationship in d ( 7 ) they have no way to measure this value so the regression they run is actually roughly on total taxes per worker ( conceptually τ ( va – w ) + ϕ ) where va is value added .

the tax term is estimated using instrumental variables such as tax rates since w is a left hand side variable and va. because of this issue , it is difficult to interpret the importance of their result even if they are capturing a rent - sharing effect rather than some other relationship .

felix and hines are estimating the union wage premium , and their version of ( d6 ) is not per worker and the premium is divided by the non - union ( competitive ) wage .

to use their notation , they use l to denote labor .

the left hand side variable is the total excess labor return , ( w - w* ) l which is equal to r. also they denote the competitive wage as w. they also use α as the bargaining share .

 ( d8 ) r = α ( q - wl - rk / ( 1- τ ) ) one peculiar point , to return to , is that they do not have a product price p. they then divide the equation by wl to obtain a ratio: ( d8 ) r / ( wl ) = α ( q / wl - 1-rk / ( wl ( 1- τ ) ) ) they want to deal with the effect of tax rates on the demand for capital and labor and obtain an expression for ( d8 ) .

they also use an optimization model for the firm's factory choices to simplify the expression and this term contains both w and the tax rate .

the felix hines derivation is in error because they have omitted the product price ; as quantity changes so do prices .

the proper form of ( d8 ) is: ( d9 ) r / ( wl ) = α ( pq / wl - 1-rk / ( wl ( 1- τ ) ) ) first , to maximize profit: ( d10 ) profit = pq - wl – rk = p ( q ( k,l ) q ( k,l ) – wl – rk / ( 1- τ ) .

q is a function of k and l and p is a function of q which is in turn a function of k and l. q in turn is a cobb douglas function: ( d11 ) q = ak γ l ( 1-γ ) the two first order conditions for k and l are: ( d12 ) p ( 1-1 / e ) γq / k = r / ( 1- τ ) ( d13 ) p ( 1-1 / e ) ( 1-γ ) q / l = w where e is the absolute value of the elasticity of demand .

one can see from equation ( d13 ) that pq / wl = ( e / ( 1-e ) ) ( 1 / ( 1- γ ) ) and that the last term by dividing d12 by d13 is γ / ( 1- γ ) .

combining all of the terms together: ( d14 ) r / ( wl ) = α [{1 / ( e - 1 ) }{1 / ( 1-γ ) }] what equation ( d14 ) indicates is that there is no effect of the tax or any other factor price on the wage premium .

it is also quite sensible .

if e is infinite which would be the case with a competitive price taking firm , the premium is zero ; as e falls toward one with a less elastic demand ( although one that is of necessity greater than 1 ) the premium becomes larger .

in any case , for a cobb douglas function there is no reason to estimate a wage premium as a function of tax rates .

it also means that rent per employee would fall proportionally with wages .

without presenting the complicated mathematics , the ratio will rise with higher taxes with a factor substitution elasticity of less than one and decline with a factor substitution elasticity higher than one .

in the latter case the effect of the tax on rents via general equilibrium effects is ambiguous .

that is ( d14 ) becomes: ( d14 ) r / ( wl ) = α [{1 / ( e - 1 ) }{1+ ( b / ( 1-b ) s ( r / ( w ( 1- τ ) ) ( 1-s ) }] where s is the factor substitution elasticity .

it is easier to see what happens if expressed as an elasticity: ( d15 ) d ( r / wl ) / ( r / wl ) = ( 1-s ) γ ( dr / r – dw / w+d τ / ( 1- τ ) ) the last set of terms is expected to be positive , and measures how much the ratio of returns to wages changes .

calculations indicate this is a small semi - elasticity ( assuming an overall federal and state tax rate of 30% ) .

if the entire burden is borne by capital the semi - elasticity , as s ranges from 0.5 to 1.5 is 0.09 to - 0.09 , ( as compared with the elasticity of 0.36 found in the study ) .

if the burden were borne entirely by wages , the elasticity would range from 0.21 to - 0.21 .

these calculations assume that γ is 0.25 in the sector under consideration and in the economy as a whole , and the corporate capital stock is half of the total capital stock .

if the incidence falls on returns , kdr = - rk 1 dt / ( 1- τ ) ) where k is the total capital stock and k 1 is the corporate .

if the incidence falls on wages , ldw = - rk 1 dt / ( 1- τ ) ) .

since evidence suggests that , if the factor substitution elasticity is not one , it is probably below 1 , the expectation is that ratio of rents to wages it is difficult to interpret these results without knowing the effect on wages which , in their estimates was actually positive ( although not always statistically significant ) .

however , their interpretation that 54% of the tax falls on rents is not consistent because they are calculating a reduction in the entire corporate wage bill , not the small portion that is the rent .

assume , for example , that the wage does not change and take their 0.36 semi - elasticity .

their formula indicates that dr / r = - .36d τ .

to translate that into incidence on rents , multiply 0.36 times the ratio of rents to corporate tax collects .

rents are the rent premium ( 15% ) times the union share ( 7% ) times the wage share ( about 70% ) , which is 0.7% of output .

corporate taxes are around 2% of output , so the ratio is .0.37 .

thus , at their elasticity the share would 13% .

if the highest elasticity assuming the tax is borne by capital is used the share is about 3% and if the highest amount assuming the tax is fully borne by capital is used , the share is about 5% .

