this report discusses how drought is defined ( eg , why drought in one region of the country is different from drought in another region ) , and why drought occurs in the united states .

how droughts are classified , and what is meant by moderate , severe , and extreme drought classifications , are also discussed .

the report briefly describes periods of drought in the country's past that equaled or exceeded drought conditions experienced during the 20 th century .

this is followed by a discussion of the future prospects for a climate in the western united states that might be drier than the average 20 th - century climate .

the report concludes with a primer on policy challenges for congress , such as the existing federal / nonfederal split in drought response and management and the patchwork of drought programs subject to oversight by multiple congressional committees .

following are brief answers to frequently asked questions related to drought .

what is drought ? .

drought is commonly defined as a lack of precipitation over an extended period , usually a season or more , relative to some long - term average condition .

history suggests that severe and extended droughts are inevitable and part of natural climate cycles .

while forecast technology and science have improved , regional predictions remain limited to a few months in advance .

what causes drought ? .

the physical conditions causing drought in the united states are increasingly understood to be linked to sea surface temperatures ( ssts ) in the tropical pacific ocean .

studies indicate that cooler - than - average ssts have been connected to the severe western drought in the first decade of the 21 st century , severe droughts of the late 19 th century , and precolonial north american "megadroughts. .

the 2011 severe drought in texas is thought to be linked to la niña conditions ( cooler - than - average ssts ) in the pacific ocean .

what is the future of drought in the united states ? .

the prospect of extended droughts and more arid baseline conditions in parts of the united states could suggest new challenges to federal programs and water projects , which were conceived or constructed largely on the basis of 20 th - century climate conditions .

some studies suggest a transitioning of the american west to a more arid climate , possibly resulting from the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere , raising concerns that the region may become more prone to extreme drought than it was in the 20 th century .

some models of future climate conditions also predict greater fluctuations in wet and dry years ; however , the net effect of such fluctuations is difficult to predict .

what is federal drought policy ? .

although drought impacts can be significant , no comprehensive national drought policy exists .

developing a national policy would be challenging because of split federal and nonfederal responsibilities ; the existing patchwork of federal programs ; and differences in regional conditions , risks , and available responses .

in 2000 , the national drought policy commission provided recommendations to congress to improve drought policy .

congress has acted on some of the recommendations ( eg , authorizing the national integrated drought information system ) , but not others ( eg , creation of a national drought council and a fund to support drought planning ) .

given current conditions , congress may review the functioning and adequacy of existing federal responses and programs ( eg , access to and level of assistance provided , incentives for mitigation of drought risk , and preparedness of federal facilities ) .

the likelihood of extended periods of severe drought , similar to conditions experienced centuries ago , and its effects on 21 st - century society in the united states raise several issues for congress .

these issues include how to respond to recurrent drought incidents , how to prepare for future drought , and how to coordinate federal agency actions .

for example , drought often results in agricultural losses , which can have local , regional , and national effects .

it also can affect other industries and services , including power and energy resource production , navigation , recreation , municipal water supplies , and natural resources such as fisheries , aquatic species , and water quality .

how to address these impacts is an often recurring issue for congress .

addressing drought on an emergency basis is costly to individuals , communities , and businesses .

additionally , millions and sometimes billions of dollars in federal assistance can be expended in response to drought's social consequences .

thus , another recurrent policy issue is how to prepare and mitigate future drought impacts and how to do so efficiently across the many federal agencies with various and sometimes overlapping drought responsibilities .

drought has afflicted portions of north america for thousands of years .

severe , long - lasting droughts may have been a factor in the disintegration of pueblo society in the southwest during the 13 th century , and in the demise of central and lower mississippi valley societies in the 14 th through 16 th centuries .

in the 20 th century , droughts in the 1930s ( dust bowl era ) and 1950s were particularly severe and widespread .

in 1934 , 65% of the contiguous united states was affected by severe to extreme drought , resulting in widespread economic disruption and displacement of populations from the u.s. heartland .

drought conditions are broadly grouped into five categories: ( 1 ) abnormally dry , ( 2 ) moderate , ( 3 ) severe , ( 4 ) extreme , and ( 5 ) exceptional .

some part of the country is almost always experiencing drought at some level .

since 2000 , no less than 6.6% of the land area of the united states has experienced drought of at least moderate intensity each year .

the land area affected by drought of at least moderate intensity varies by year and also within a particular year .

for example , since 2000 , the total u.s. land area affected by drought of at least moderate intensity has varied from as little as 6.6% ( july 6 , 2010 ) to as much as 55% ( september 25 , 2012 ) .

based on weekly estimates of the areal extent of drought conditions since 2000 , the average amount of land area across the united states affected by at least moderate - intensity drought has been 26% .

while the previous percentages refer to the extent of drought nationally , there is particular concern about those locations experiencing the most intense drought conditions .

nearly every year , extreme drought affects some portion of the country .

since 2000 , extreme drought or drier conditions have affected approximately 6.4% of the nation on average .

during august 2012 , extreme drought extended over 20% of the country .

since 2000 , exceptional drought conditions have affected approximately 1.4% of the nation on average .

of particular note were the conditions between june and october 2011 ; exceptional drought occurred over the largest land area — greater than 9% — during those months , with the affected areas concentrated in texas .

this year , 2013 , is likely to be another exceptional year in terms of the breadth of drought conditions throughout the country , particularly in the great plains and eastern portions of the midwest .

the severe to exceptional drought conditions throughout the central and western parts of the united states appear to be persisting during spring 2013 .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

in mid - august 2012 , the extent of the drought conditions was significant: over 70% of the land area of the united states ( including alaska and hawaii ) was affected by abnormally dry and drought conditions .

the percentage of land area affected by abnormally dry or drought conditions stayed at or above 65% through february 2013 , and remains above 60% as of mid - april , 2013 .

the intensity of the drought varied across the country , but the regions of extreme and exceptional drought were clustered across the midwest , great plains , southwest , and in the southeast , particularly georgia in 2012 .

the widespread nature of drought and excessive heat conditions in the midwest and great plains in the summer of 2012 contributed to sharply lower yields for major crops , including corn and soybeans .

for example , the average u.s. corn yield was 123.4 bushels per acre , down more than 40 bushels from expectations before the onset of drought .

for all crops , crop insurance indemnities for 2012 losses totaled $16 billion .

in 2013 , continuation of drought in the great plains and western parts of the midwest is affecting prospects for wheat and other crops as well as pasture and forage conditions for livestock producers .

figure 2 shows that texas and portions of florida and georgia experienced exceptional drought conditions ( the worst category of drought ) in early 2012 , while the upper midwest , including most of the mississippi valley experienced normal conditions .

a year later , in early 2013 , the drought had eased somewhat in portions of georgia and florida , but intensified throughout the center of the country from texas to the canadian border .

nearly 12% of the contiguous united states was in exceptional drought conditions from late june 2011 through october 2011 , compared to approximately 6% of the country the following year .

however , exceptional drought conditions persisted over nearly 6% of the contiguous united states from mid - august 2012 through mid - february 2013 .

although less severe for portions of the country , such as texas and florida , the 2012-2013 drought affected broader swaths of the agricultural heartland compared to 2011 ( figure 2 ) .

the 2012-2013 experience illustrates that the extent , timing , and particular features of areas affected by drought — dryland versus irrigated farm regions , or regions that are still recovering from previous droughts — are important in addition to the relative severity of drought conditions .

drought has a number of definitions ; the simplest may be a deficiency of precipitation over an extended period of time , usually a season or more .

drought is usually considered relative to some long - term average condition , or balance , between precipitation , evaporation , and transpiration by plants ( evaporation and transpiration are typically combined into one term: evapotranspiration ) .

an imbalance could result from a decrease in precipitation , an increase in evapotranspiration ( from drier conditions , higher temperatures , higher winds ) , or both .

it is important to distinguish between drought , which has a beginning and an end , and aridity , which is restricted to low rainfall regions and is a relatively permanent feature of an area's climate ( eg , deserts are regions of relatively permanent aridity ) .

higher demand for water for human activities and vegetation in areas of limited water supply increases the severity of drought .

for example , drought during the growing season would likely be considered more severe — in terms of its impacts — than similar conditions when cropland lies fallow .

for policy purposes , drought often becomes an issue when it results in a water supply deficiency: less water is available than the average amount for irrigation , municipal and industrial supply ( m&i ) , energy production , preservation of endangered species , and other needs .

these impacts can occur through multiple mechanisms: decreased rainfall and soil moisture affecting dryland farming ; low reservoir levels decreasing allocations for multiple purposes ( including irrigation , navigation , energy production , recreation , fish and wildlife needs , and other water supplies ) ; low stream flows limiting withdrawals for multiple purposes , including municipal and industrial supplies , among others ; decreased exchange of water in lakes resulting in water quality problems limiting recreation ( eg , blue - green algae restrictions in multiple lakes in oklahoma and texas during 2011 and 2012 drought conditions ) .

at the national level , drought is monitored and reported by the national drought mitigation center in an index known as the u.s. drought monitor , which synthesizes various drought indices and impacts , and represents a consensus view of ongoing drought conditions between academic and federal scientists .

drought can also relate and contribute to other phenomena , such as fires and heat waves .

the immediate cause of drought is: the predominant sinking motion of air ( subsidence ) that results in compressional warming or high pressure , which inhibits cloud formation and results in lower relative humidity and less precipitation .

regions under the influence of semi permanent high pressure during all or a major portion of the year are usually deserts , such as the sahara and kalahari deserts of africa and the gobi desert of asia .

prolonged droughts occur when these atmospheric conditions persist for months or years over a certain region that typically does not experience such conditions for a prolonged period .

predicting drought is difficult because the ability to forecast surface temperature and precipitation depends on a number of key variables , such as air - sea interactions , topography , soil moisture , land surface processes , and other weather system dynamics .

scientists seek to understand how all these variables interact and to further the ability to predict sustained and severe droughts beyond a season or two in advance , which is the limit of drought forecasting abilities today .

in the tropics , a major portion of the atmospheric variability over months or years seems to be associated with variations in sea surface temperatures ( ssts ) .

since the mid - to late 1990s , scientists have increasingly linked drought in the united states to ssts in the tropical pacific ocean .

cooler than average ssts in the eastern tropical pacific region — "la niña - like" conditions — have been shown to be correlated with persistently strong drought conditions over parts of the country , particularly the west .

a number of studies have made the connection between cooler ssts in the eastern pacific and the 1998-2004 western drought , three widespread and persistent droughts of the late 19 th century , and past north american "megadroughts" that occurred between approximately 900 and 1300 a.d .

the precolonial megadroughts apparently lasted longer and were more extreme than any u.s. droughts since 1850 , when instrumental records began .

some modeling studies suggest that within a few decades the western united states may again face higher base levels of dryness , or aridity , akin to the 900-1300 a.d. period .

although the relationship between cooler than normal eastern tropical pacific ssts ( la niña - like conditions ) and drought is becoming more firmly established , meteorological drought is probably never the result of a single cause .

climate is inherently variable , and accurately predicting drought for one region in the united states for more than a few months or seasons in advance is not yet possible because so many factors influence regional drought .

what is emerging from the scientific study of drought is an improved understanding of global linkages — called teleconnections by scientists — between interacting weather systems , such as the el niño - southern oscillation , or enso .

 ( see box for a description of enso. ) .

for example , some scientists link la niña conditions between 1998 and 2002 with the occurrence of near - simultaneous drought in the southern united states , southern europe , and southwest asia .

the relationship between climate change and future trends in droughts is complex and its scientific understanding appears to be evolving .

in 2007 the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) released its fourth assessment report , which stated that , globally , very dry areas have more than doubled since the 1970s due to a combination of el nino - southern oscillation ( enso ) events and global surface warming .

the ipcc report added that very wet areas declined by about 5% globally .

the report asserted that documented trends in severe droughts and heavy rains show that hydrological conditions are becoming more intense in some regions .

in 2012 , however , the ipcc issued a new report that noted: "there are still large uncertainties regarding observed global - scale trends in droughts. .

the new report noted that its earlier assessment , that very dry areas have more than doubled since the 1970s , was based largely on only one study , which relied on a measurement largely related to temperature , not moisture .

a different study , which looked at soil moisture simulations , found that trends in drought duration , intensity , and severity predominantly were decreasing , not increasing , but with strong regional variation .

the 2012 ipcc report assigned medium confidence that there has been an overall slight tendency toward less dryness in north america ( i.e. , a wetting trend with increasing soil moisture and runoff ) .

it noted that the most severe droughts in the 20 th century occurred in the 1930s and 1950s , where the 1930s drought was the most intense and the 1950s drought was the most persistent .

in comparison to the severe megadroughts that occurred in north america hundreds and thousands of years ago , as documented using paleoclimate evidence ( discussed elsewhere in this report ) , these recent droughts were not unprecedented , according to the 2012 ipcc report .

the report concluded that despite new studies that have furthered the understanding of mechanisms leading to drought , there is still limited evidence to attribute observed changes .

the ipcc assessed that there was medium confidence that anthropogenic influence has contributed to changes in drought patterns in the second half of the 20 th century , but gave low confidence to the attribution of changes in drought patterns at the regional level .

the report noted that some regions of the world have experienced trends towards more intense and longer droughts , such as southern europe and west africa .

but in other regions , such as central north america and northwestern australia , droughts have become less frequent , less intense , or shorter .

how the 2011-2012 drought in the central united states may change that assessment in the forthcoming ipcc report ( 2014 ) remains to be seen .

further adding to the complexity and challenge to the scientific understanding of what causes drought was work presented at the european geosciences union meeting in april 2013 that attempted to simulate megadroughts that occurred in the past .

the simulations produced a number of megadroughts that lasted for decades ; however , they did not match the timing of the past documented megadroughts .

the scientists presenting their work at the meeting concluded that the model they used seemed to miss some of the dynamics that drive large droughts .

several recent droughts triggered federal responses .

when a drought is declared for a locality or region by the u.s. president , u.s. secretary of agriculture , or a state governor , it sets in motion a series of alerts , recommendations , activities , and possible restrictions at the local , regional , or state level , depending on the drought length and severity .

ultimately , a drought could initiate a federal response and transfer of federal dollars to the affected area .

before drought severity reaches a level triggering a federal response , many states take action .

the national drought mitigation center posts online copies of drought management , mitigation , or response plans for states and localities , nationwide .

the california and texas governors also have in recent years issued state drought emergency declarations triggering state drought assistance .

some states have also instituted water banks and water transfer mechanisms to deal with water supply shortages ( eg , california , idaho , and texas ) .

predicting the severity and duration of severe drought over a specific region of the country is not yet possible more than a few months in advance because of the many factors that influence drought .

nevertheless , some modeling studies suggest that a transition to a more arid average climate in the american west , perhaps similar to conditions in precolonial north america , may be underway .

some studies have suggested that human influences on climate , caused by emissions of greenhouse gases , may be responsible for a drying trend ; however , other studies appear to indicate an opposite trend or possibility ( see above section on " drought and climate change " ) .

whether future greenhouse gas - driven warming can be linked to la niña - like conditions , or other phenomena related to the el niño - southern oscillation , is unclear .

a likely consequence of higher temperatures in the west would be higher evapotranspiration , reduced precipitation , and decreased spring runoff .

these impacts would result from an "acceleration" of the hydrologic cycle , due to increased warming of the atmosphere , which in turn increases the amount of water held in the atmosphere .

a possible consequence is more frequent , and perhaps more severe , droughts and floods .

however , these changes are unlikely to occur evenly across the united states .

observations of water - related changes over the last century suggest that runoff and streamflow in the colorado and columbia river basins has been decreasing , along with the amount of ice in mountain glaciers in the west , and the amount of annual precipitation in the southwest .

yet the understanding of hydrologic extremes , such as drought , is confounded by other effects such as land cover changes , the operation of dams , irrigation works , extraction of groundwater , and other engineered changes .

forecasting drought conditions at the regional scale , for example for river basins or smaller , is difficult because current climate models are less robust and have higher uncertainty at smaller scales .

 ( for example , see box below on the colorado river's lake mead. ) .

even though forecasting drought at the regional scale is difficult , understanding potential changes in long - term trends is important for water managers at all levels — federal , state , local , and tribal .

water project operations and state water allocations are typically based on past long - term hydrological trends ; significant deviations from such trends may result in difficult challenges for water managers and water users alike .

an example of such a dilemma can be observed in the colorado river basin .

conditions in the colorado river basin over the last decade , including recent low reservoir levels in lake mead and lake powell , and low flows in the upper basin , raise the issue of what is the baseline for average hydrologic cycles now and in the future .

the allocation of colorado river water supplies was agreed upon by lower and upper basin states in the early part of the 20 th century based on hydrologic data from what scientists now know was a relatively wet period in the history of the colorado river basin .

if long - term reduced runoff predictions for the basin are borne out ( see box above on colorado river's lake mead and earlier section on " conditions in the colorado river basin " ) , then water allocation policies for regions like the colorado river basin may again need to be revisited .

in the meantime , colorado river basin states have negotiated "shortage criteria" and "interim guidelines" for managing colorado river water supplies during times of shortages .

additionally , reclamation in december 2012 released a new colorado river basin supply and demand study , which examined several different future water supply and demand scenarios .

severe drought can cause significant economic harm , affect nearly all areas of the country , and exacerbate water competition .

nonetheless , several key factors make comprehensive drought policy at the national level a challenge , including: the gradual , or "creeping," nature of drought ; split federal and nonfederal drought response and management responsibilities ; a patchwork of federal programs and oversight with little coordination ; and differences in regional conditions and drought risk in terms of the drought hazard , vulnerability , and potential consequences .

drought conditions often develop slowly , are not easily identified initially , and are challenging to forecast beyond 30 to 90 days .

consequently , drought declarations are made well after onset — typically once impacts are felt .

this situation makes it difficult to mitigate or prevent drought impacts .

further , even though drought generally is continuously occurring somewhere in the united states , the unpredictability of its location , duration , and severity complicates preparation for implementation of responses .

when severe meteorological drought affects a region , the supply of available water often shrinks before use is reduced .

adjusting down the use of water as drought persists and supplies shrink can be difficult .

actually , droughts can increase demand on water supplies ( eg , lower soil moisture results in increased demand for irrigation and landscape watering ) .

the lack of flexibility of existing water access and use arrangements sometimes limits the scope and speed of some drought responses .

federal , state , and local authorities make water resource decisions within the context of multiple and often conflicting laws and objectives , competing legal decisions , and entrenched institutional mechanisms , including century - old water rights and long - standing contractual obligations ( i.e. , long - term water delivery and power contracts ) .

typically , how access to and competition for water is managed ( eg , permitting of water withdrawals ) and how reductions in water supply are managed ( eg , shared reductions under a riparian system of water rights versus reductions based on the priority in time of a water right ) is determined by state law and at times through interstate compacts .

additionally , state and local laws can determine how easily water can be transferred among users .

these access , reduction , and transfer arrangements can significantly affect the behavior , incentives , and opportunities available to water users during droughts .

fundamental changes to the access , reduction , and transfer arrangements are largely outside of the realm of federal action , and are largely determined by each state ; however , such activities might be directly or indirectly influenced by changes in federal policies and activities .

a mismatch between supply and demand during droughts underscores the responsibility of stakeholders to anticipate the influence of drought and plan and act accordingly .

the federal government has several drought monitoring and response programs .

while drought planning and mitigation responsibilities lie largely at the state and local level , the federal government also provides some drought planning assistance .

much of this assistance historically has been concentrated on the west .

additionally , the federal government often provides emergency funding for drought relief that is primarily aimed at easing the economic impacts .

the national drought commission and others have noted , however , that federal relief programs and emergency funding provide little incentive for state and local planning and efforts to reduce social and economic vulnerability to drought .

a policy issue particularly relevant to state and local decision makers is the role and types of demand management tools to employ during a drought ( eg , lawn watering restrictions , incentives to curtail irrigation during droughts , scarcity pricing ) .

how a state distributes and administers its waters among competing uses can affect what drought response tools are available to it and to water users .

a further challenge is lack of a cohesive national drought policy at the federal level , and lack of a lead agency coordinating federal programs .

rather , several federal programs have been developed over the years , often in response to specific droughts .

additionally , occasional widespread economic effects have prompted creation of several federal relief programs .

these programs are overseen by different congressional committees .

whether this fragmentation results in duplication , waste , and gaps , or whether it reflects the complexity of preparing and responding to drought and the different responses needed by a wide range of stakeholders ( eg , irrigated agriculture , dry land farming , municipal water utilities ) is part of the debate about how to proceed with cost - effective management of the nation's drought risk and who bears the consequences of drought .

 ( see box below for an example of how water access and transfer arrangements played a significant role in shaping australia's drought resilience and adaptation. ) .

the 2012 drought , like other recent severe weather events , has contributed to the ongoing public and policy discussion about the influence of human actions on climate and the future of u.s. actions on climate change mitigation .

for a discussion of climate change science and policy , see crs report rl34266 , climate change: science highlights , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r41973 , climate change: conceptual approaches and policy tools , by [author name scrubbed] , respectively .

congress has long recognized the lack of coordinated drought planning and mitigation activities among federal agencies and the predominance of a crisis management approach to dealing with drought .

over the last 15 years , legislative action has focused on the question of whether there is a need for a national drought policy .

for example , in 1998 , congress passed the national drought policy act ( p.l .

105-199 ) , which created the national drought policy commission .

in 2000 , the commission submitted to congress a comprehensive report that included policy recommendations .

congress has considered recommendations from the commission's 2000 report ; to date , it has enacted one part of the recommendations ( the national integrated drought information system , discussed below ) .

congress also considered , but did not enact , legislation creating a national drought council during deliberations on the 2008 farm bill .

recent congressional deliberations focused on the 2012 reauthorization of the farm bill , which was given a one - year extension ( through 2013 ) in january 2013 , although other legislation is also pending .

the commission findings , the proposed council , and the 2008 and 2013 farm bills are discussed below .

drought is a natural hazard with potentially significant economic , social , and ecological consequences .

history suggests that severe and extended droughts are inevitable and part of natural climate cycles .

drought has for centuries shaped the societies of north america and will continue to do so into the future .

current understanding is that the physical conditions causing drought in the united states are linked to sea surface temperatures in the tropical pacific ocean .

for example , the 2011 severe drought in texas is thought to be linked to la niña conditions in the pacific ocean .

increasingly , studies are projecting the long - term role that droughts may play in regional climate patterns .

nonetheless , available technology and science remains limited to forecasting specific drought a few months in advance for a region .

the prospect of extended droughts and more arid baseline conditions in parts of the united states represents a challenge to existing public policy responses for preparing and responding to drought , and to federal water resource projects in particular , because their construction was based largely on 19 th - and 20 th - century hydrologic conditions .

over time , congress has created various drought programs , often in response to specific droughts and authored by different committees .

crafting a broad drought policy that might encompass the jurisdiction of many different congressional committees is often difficult .

additionally , although many water allocation and other water management responsibilities largely lie at the state or local level , localities and individuals often look to the federal government for relief when disasters occur .

this is similar to the situation for flood policy , and water policy in general , at the national level .

the national drought policy commission recognized these patterns , and they underlie many of its recommendations to congress .

the currently fragmented approach can be costly to national taxpayers ; however , it is not certain that increased federal investment ( especially vis - à - vis the potential for tailored local and state investment ) in drought preparation , mitigation , and improved coordination would produce more economically efficient outcomes .

the overall costs to the federal government and the nation as a result of extreme drought , apart from relief to the agricultural sector , are difficult to assess in part because of the broad nature of drought's impacts .

drought can result in water restrictions affecting municipal and industrial users , decreased hydropower generation and power plant cooling efficiency , navigation limitations and disruptions , harm to drought - sensitive species ( benefits to other species ) , and increased fire risk , among other effects .

congress may opt to revisit the commission's recommendations and reevaluate whether current federal practices could be supplemented with actions to coordinate , prepare for , and respond to the unpredictable but inevitable occurrence of drought .

given the daunting task of managing drought , congress also may consider proposals to manage drought impacts , such as assisting localities , industries , and agriculture with developing or augmenting water supplies .

this could take multiple forms: construction or permitting of reservoirs , the reallocation of water supplies at existing facilities , promotion of alternative water sources ( eg , reuse , desalination ) , or water conservation and efficiency .

congress also may move to examine how the two major federal water management agencies , the corps and reclamation , plan for and respond to severe drought and account for its impacts .

appendix a. drought - related federal response and recovery authorities appendix b. excerpts from the 2000 national drought policy commission report to congress in 2000 , the national drought policy commission published its report to congress , preparing for drought in the 21 st century — a report of the national drought policy commission .

the commission concluded that the united states needed to embrace a national drought policy with preparedness at its core .

it recommended that congress enact a national drought preparedness act , which would establish a federal - nonfederal partnership through a national drought council .

the council would function to further national drought policy goals .

the council's recommended duties included promoting cooperation and effective delivery of drought programs , evaluation of regional needs and opportunities , and assessments of drought - related assistance and initiatives , and post - drought impact assessments .

the commission also recommended five broad national policy goals and a number of recommendations for furthering each of the goals .

below are the five goals and below those are some examples of the types of recommendations accompanying each of the goals ; many more recommendations are proposed in the commission's report .

to date , congress has enacted legislation furthering goal 2 on improved observation .

congress also has taken action on insurance and financial strategies ; their effect on improving drought preparedness ( i.e. , reducing drought vulnerability ) versus increasing the relief for the impacts of drought has not been evaluated .

this type of assessment potentially would fall under the duties of a national drought council as recommended by the commission .

policy statement favor preparedness over insurance , insurance over relief , and incentives over regulation .

set research priorities based on the potential of the research results to reduce drought impacts .

coordinate the delivery of federal services through cooperation and collaboration with nonfederal entities .

goals goal 1 .

incorporate planning , implementation of plans and proactive mitigation measures , risk management , resource stewardship , environmental considerations , and public education as the key elements of effective national drought policy .

goal 2 .

improve collaboration among scientists and managers to enhance the effectiveness of observation networks , monitoring , prediction , information delivery , and applied research and to foster public understanding of and preparedness for drought .

goal 3 .

develop and incorporate comprehensive insurance and financial strategies into drought preparedness plans .

goal 4 .

maintain a safety net of emergency relief that emphasizes sound stewardship of natural resources and self - help .

goal 5 .

coordinate drought programs and response effectively , efficiently , and in a customer - oriented manner .

illustrative recommendations for goal 1 : planning and mitigation congress should adequately fund existing drought preparedness programs .

president should direct appropriate federal agencies to effectively meet the drought planning needs of those areas not traditionally served ( eg , eastern united states ) .

the president should direct all appropriate federal agencies to study their programs for potential impacts on drought .

the president should direct all appropriate federal agencies to develop and implement drought management plans for federal facilities ( eg , military bases , federal office complexes , federal prisons ) .

