each year , the president is required to submit a comprehensive federal budget proposal to congress no later than the first monday in february .

once it is submitted , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) analyzes the proposal using its own economic assumptions and estimation techniques .

the house and senate budget committees then develop their respective budget resolutions after reviewing the president's budget , the views of other committees , and information from cbo .

differences between the houses are supposed to be resolved by april 15 , but this deadline is rarely met .

although it is not binding , the resolution provides a framework for subsequent legislative action .

this report provides information on medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) .

it will be updated to reflect relevant activity until the fy2009 budget is passed and until the next president's fy2010 budget is released .

congressional research service ( crs ) staff contact information by topic area is provided in table 2 at the end of the report .

the president's fy2009 budget contains a number of proposals that would affect medicaid and schip .

some are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending .

for each proposal , this report provides: background ; a description of the proposal based on available information ; and a list of relevant crs reports .

the house and senate adopted their respective budget resolutions for fy2009 in march of 2008 .

a conference agreement on the budget was adopted by both chambers on may 20 .

in early june , the senate and house approved the fy2009 budget federal budget resolution ( s.con.res .

70 — conference report: h.rept .

110-659 ) .

the budget agreement includes a trigger mechanism that would apply to bills or conference reports that would reduce revenue over a five - year period below cbo's baseline .

although the budget resolution does not become law , it establishes spending and revenue targets for discretionary spending .

the resolution also creates a framework for the budget subcommittees to follow in developing 12 annual appropriations bills that will fund fy2009 ( discretionary ) federal programs and operations .

with adoption of the budget proposal , appropriations subcommittees for both chambers may initiate legislation authorizing funding for cabinet departments and federal agencies .

on june 26 , 2008 , the senate appropriations committee approved a $153.1 billion budget for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , as well as the social security administration .

the labor - hhs appropriations bill contained an amendment that would set aside an schip requirements in an august 17 , 2007 , letter to state health officials that limited schip and medicaid coverage expansions for children in families with incomes greater than 250% of the fpl or $53,000 for a family of four in 2008 .

the schip guidance originated in an august 17 , 2007 , letter to state health officials directing states to verify that 95% of children in their states under 200% of fpl were covered by medicaid or schip before cms would approve medicaid or schip program expansions to cover children in families above 250% fpl .

on march 3 , 2008 , the senate budget committee reported a budget resolution ( s.con.res .

70 ) , which was amended and passed by the senate march 6 , 2008 .

the senate budget resolution includes 36 deficit - neutral reserve fund and sense of the senate provisions , including a number of provisions that specifically could affect medicaid and schip: schip .

would reserve up to $50 billion in outlays over five years for reauthorization of schip .

medicaid rules or administrative actions .

would reserve funding to impose moratoria on federal rules covering aspects of the medicaid or schip programs , including targeted case management , rehabilitation , school - based transportation and administration , and graduate medical education ; transitional medical assistance .

in addition , a sense of the senate provision adds more discussion on how the administrative rules and actions should not undermine medicaid nor shift medicaid expenditures to states .

other improvements in health .

would reserve funds to make health insurance coverage more affordable ; improve health care and provide quality health insurance coverage for under - and uninsured ; improve and re - balance ltc ; increase parity between health insurance coverage for mental health and medical - surgical services ; and improve access to pediatric dental care for children from low - income families .

pilot project on ltc provider background checks .

provides up to $160 million for a three - year extension of a pilot program for national and state background checks for direct patient access employees of ltc facilities or providers .

state internet sites to disclose medicaid payments .

would authorize creation of state internet sites for the disclosure of information on providers that participate in and receive payment from state medicaid programs .

demonstration waivers for low - income individuals with hiv .

would provide for a demonstration project to use 1115 waivers for extending medicaid coverage to low - income hiv - infected individuals .

the house budget committee reported a budget resolution ( h.con.res .

312 ) on march 7 , which was passed by the house on march 13 .

the house's budget resolution contained 17 deficit - neutral provisions and 12 sense of the house provisions .

the budget - neutral and sense of the house provisions that would affect medicaid and schip include the following: schip .

the house budget resolution would reserve up to $50 billion in outlays over five years for reauthorization of schip .

health care quality , effectiveness , and efficiency .

this provision would include incentives and other support for health care information technology and electronic prescribing to protect privacy and improve quality .

the provision also would include a public - private initiative for comparative effectiveness research , as well as mental health parity with medical surgical services including public programs , such as medicaid .

medicaid regulations and administrative actions .

the house budget would provide deficit - neutral reserve funds to prevent or delay medicaid regulations such as case management / targeted case management , rehabilitation , graduate medical education , and intergovernmental transfers .

program integrity .

up to an additional $198 million in fy2009 discretionary funding could be appropriated for the health care fraud and abuse control program .

waste , fraud , and abuse , and health coverage affordability .

sense of the house provisions describe the need for additional initiatives to identify and reduce health care waste , fraud , and abuse , as well as funding and programs to increase affordable health insurance coverage .

on may 20 , the house and senate filed a conference agreement on the budget resolution ( h.rept .

110-659 accompanying s.con.res .

70 ) .

on june 4 , the senate adopted a conference report ( s.con.res .

70 , accompanying h.rept .

110-659 ) .

the house adopted the same measure on june 5 .

medicaid provisions in the senate and house conference agreement include: a reserve fund up to $50 billion in outlays over five years for reauthorization of schip that is deficit - neutral in the senate and house .

deficit - neutral reserve funds for: ( 1 ) medicaid and schip regulations and administrative actions ; ( 2 ) a demonstration project to provide medicaid health coverage for low - income hiv - infected individuals ; ( 3 ) increasing access for low - income families to pediatric dental care services ; ( 4 ) extending transitional medical assistance ; ( 5 ) health information technology , including e - prescribing ; ( 6 ) comparative effectiveness research ; ( 7 ) parity between health insurance coverage for mental health and medical surgical services , including public programs , such as medicaid ; ( 8 ) providing quality health insurance for uninsured / underinsured individuals ; and ( 9 ) the use of medicare data to evaluate health care issues ( i.e. , quality , safety , effectiveness , and resource utilization ) in federal programs and the private health care system .

up to an additional $198 million in fy2009 discretionary funding could be appropriated for the health care fraud and abuse control program .

sense of the senate provision on medicaid administrative regulations .

the conference agreement would prevent medicaid administrative regulations from undermining the role of medicaid , capping federal medicaid spending or shifting costs to states or beneficiaries , undermining the federal guarantee of safety net health coverage .

sense of the congress resolutions on seeking opportunities to reduce health care waste fraud and abuse and increasing public access to affordable health coverage .

in general , medicaid and schip spending are not controlled through the annual appropriations process .

as an entitlement program , medicaid's spending level is based on the underlying benefit and eligibility criteria established in law .

federal medicaid expenditures vary depending on the amount of services required and the number of beneficiaries that enroll in any federal fiscal year .

schip is a grant program , so federal spending is capped , with annual schip appropriations specified by law .

the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l .

110-173 ) provides fy2008 and fy2009 schip allotments through march 31 , 2009 , and enough additional funding to cover every state's currently projected federal schip spending through march 31 , 2009 .

as noted above , the administration's fy2009 budget proposal includes additional funding for schip through fy2013 .

even though annual medicaid and schip appropriations are not controlled through the appropriations process , congress can exercise some authority over medicaid and schip spending through the appropriations process by limiting funds for specified activities .

for example , the labor , health and human services , and education appropriations bill regularly contains restrictions that limit circumstances when federal funds may be used to pay for abortions .

a bill , protecting the medicaid safety net act of 2008 ( h.r .

5613 ) , was introduced in march that would impose a one - year moratorium on seven recently issued medicaid regulations .

on april 16 , 2008 , the house energy and commerce committee voted to send h.r .

5613 to the full house .

the house referred h.r .

5613 to the senate after passing the measure on april 23 , 2008 .

among other things , h.r .

5613 would require the secretary to submit a report by july 1 , 2008 , to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

the secretary's report would be required to address three topics: ( 1 ) an outline of specific problems the medicaid regulations were intended to correct , ( 2 ) an explanation of how the regulations would address these problems , and ( 3 ) the legal authority for the regulations .

in addition , h.r .

5613 would require the secretary to retain an independent contractor to prepare a comprehensive report to be completed by march 1 , 2009 , which also would be submitted to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

the independent contractor's report would describe the prevalence of the specific problems identified in the secretary's report , identify existing strategies to address these problems , and assess the impact of the medicaid regulations on each state and the district of columbia .

in the senate , a similar measure to h.r .

5613 , the economic recovery in health care act of 2008 ( s. 2819 ) , was introduced in april .

like h.r .

5613 , s. 2819 , would impose a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of seven medicaid regulations , but also included moratoria on two additional medicaid issues .

one of the moratoriums in s. 2819 would suspend guidance contained in an august 17 , 2007 , letter from cms to state health officials ( 07-001 ) that limited states' ability to expand coverage under schip to families with incomes above 250% of the fpl .

another moratorium would suspend the rules governing department appeals board ( dab ) hearings , which would give expanded authority to the secretary of hhs to review dab decisions involving disagreements between the federal government and states and give the secretary the authority to overturn dab decisions .

on may 22 , 2008 , the senate passed the supplemental appropriations act of 2008 ( h.r .

2642 ) .

the house passed an amended version of h.r .

2642 on june 19 , 2008 .

the house's amendment included a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of six medicaid regulations .

the h.r .

2642 amendments covering medicaid regulations included requirements , similar to h.r .

5613 , for the secretary to submit reports to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

in addition , h.r .

2642 included provisions requiring states to implement a program to verify assets held by financial institutions to assess applicants' eligibility for medical assistance benefits ( medicaid ) .

these asset verification programs would be phased in , so that all states and the district of columbia , but excluding u.s. territories , would have programs by 2013 .

the senate passed the house version of h.r .

2642 without changes on june 26 , 2008 , and the president signed p.l .

110-252 into law on june 30 , 2008 .

the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( s. 3101 ) was introduced in the senate on june 6 , 2008 .

although this legislation would primarily address medicare issues , it contains several related medicaid provisions as well .

there are new requirements for medicare advantage plans that serve medicaid beneficiaries through special needs plans ( snps ) .

under s. 3101 , snps would need to nearly exclusively serve beneficiaries with the types of conditions the plans were organized to offer ; namely , those with chronic or disabling conditions , institutionalized beneficiaries , or medicaid - eligible individuals .

plans would also be subject to new quality monitoring and reporting requirements .

s. 3101 also would extend transitional medical assistance and abstinence education programs at their current levels through fy2009 , as well as continuing special disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) allotment arrangements for tennessee and hawaii through a portion of fy2010 .

other medicaid provisions of s. 3101 include new rules that address administrative review of federal financial participation dis - allowances under medicaid , as well as retaining through september 30 , 2009 , federal upper payment formulas for certain multiple source ( mostly generic ) drugs .

a similar but alternative bill , preserving access to medicare act of 2008 ( s. 3118 ) , was introduced june 11 , 2008 .

s. 3118 would address medicare advantage snps , but unlike s. 3101 , more closely follows rules from a recently released cms regulation on snps and would remove a moratorium on snps .

in addition , like s. 3101 , s. 3118 would extend transitional medical assistance and abstinence education programs at their current levels through fy2009 , as well as continuing special dsh allotment arrangements for tennessee and hawaii through a portion of fy2010 .

other provisions of s. 3118 would include creation of a requirement , similar to h.r .

2642 , that states and the district of columbia implement systems to verify assets held in financial institutions when assessing individuals' eligibility for medicaid ; reduce administrative payments to prevent duplication of administrative payments under the temporary assistance for needy families program ; and require a state plan amendment to limit inpatient hospital payment rates when certain conditions were acquired during beneficiaries' hospital stays .

