pre - disaster hazard mitigation activities were initially funded through a pilot program first provided for in the conference report that accompanied the 1997 appropriations legislation .

the pertinent report language follows: the conferees agree to up to $2,000,000 for fema's participation in appropriate pre - disaster mitigation efforts .

the conferees agree with fema's director that mitigation activities can ultimately save significant sums from post - disaster clean - up and response actions and that the agency should be taking an increasingly active role in developing and participating in pre - disaster mitigation programs .

such programs range in scope from the development and / or funding of mitigation plans for communities to participation with industries , insurers , building code officials , government agencies , engineers , researchers and others in developing systems and facilities to test structures in disaster - like circumstances .

the conferees understand that these activities will require an infusion of considerable up - front financial support as well as the possible movement over time of disaster relief funds to pre - disaster programs , and the agency is expected to use up to the $2,000,000 provided herein in an appropriate manner to begin the process of movement toward a meaningful pre - disaster mitigation program .

expenditure of these funds may not , however , be made until submission to the committees on appropriations of an appropriate pre - disaster mitigation spending plan .

subsequent appropriations measures for fiscal years 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , and 2001 provided $30 million for 1998 and $25 million per year for the next three years .

following four years of funding through appropriations statutes , congress authorized the program from 2000 to 2003 in the disaster mitigation act of 2000 ( dma2k ) which placed the pdm program in the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act as section 203 .

the original project impact , the first pdm program , was closely identified with then - fema director james lee witt .

witt was appointed by president clinton in 1993 and gained a high profile in the course of leading fema's disaster response and recovery efforts .

witt described project impact as "a program designed to break the damage - repair , damage - repair cycle and instead help communities become disaster resistant. .

while the initial funding amounts were relatively small for a national program , project impact was generally considered a success .

one author observed , for example , that "the money was said to have worked wonders. .

in part , this reflected fema's intent to concentrate on outstanding communities , from the mitigation initiative perspective , that could then serve as mentors to others .

however , some observers maintained that if funding were provided through a competitive process the criteria could recognize areas with the greatest risk and where mitigation measures could produce the most beneficial results , rather than areas that may have experienced random disasters but , despite the strength of community involvement , did not necessarily face as grave an ongoing threat .

early in the george w. bush administration , project impact was eliminated from the fy2002 budget on the same day that the mayor of seattle was praising the program for preventing further damage due to the nisqually earthquake .

in 2002 , in light of congressional action fema chose to rebrand project impact as the pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) program .

while this title conformed to the legislative language it also was intended to send another message as then - fema director joe m. allbaugh explained: i want to take the "concept" of project impact and fold it in to the program of mitigation .

project impact is not mitigation .

it is an initiative to get "consumer buy - in. .

in many communities it became the catch - phrase to get local leaders together to look at ways to do mitigation .

for fy2003 and fy2004 , congress increased funding for pre - disaster mitigation to $150 million from the previous $25 million level .

also , congress had inserted legislative language in the fy2003 appropriations act , which became law on february 20 , 2003 , stating that pdm funds "shall be awarded on a competitive basis. .

fema adhered to the direction from congress and made part of pdm a competitive grant program thereafter .

in its fy2003 and fy2004 budget requests , the bush administration proposed consolidating all mitigation funds in the pdm program .

"adoption of this proposal would have terminated funding provided through the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) after a major disaster is declared. .

this referenced section 404 , the hmgp program of the stafford act that generally provides 15% of all disaster costs in the form of a cost - shared mitigation program .

congress did not wish to entirely eliminate the post - disaster mitigation help but did devote more resources to the pre - disaster mitigation program .

in order to shift the resource balance between post - disaster mitigation and pre - disaster mitigation , congress reduced the hmgp amount in the stafford act for post - disaster work from 15% of the total amount spent on the disaster ( less administrative costs ) to 7.5% .

while the post - disaster mitigation pot would shrink , the pdm program would grow .

however , this shifting of resources would be short lived .

over its history , the funding levels for pdm have varied at times and are now falling again .

during the early years the program was given its own separate line item account within the dhs / fema budget but outside of the disaster relief fund .

the changes in the funding levels represented differing approaches not only to pdm but to the mitigation concept as a whole .

the 111 th congress passed legislation which became p.l .

111-351 that sought to increase funding by authorizing the appropriation of $180 million for 2011 , and $200 million for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 .

when the pdm authorizing legislation ( dma2k ) was passed , congress addressed some of the same themes used in project impact but placed the responsibility on the governor of each state to suggest up to five communities to be considered for pre - disaster mitigation assistance .

while the governor nominated potential grantees , fema made the final selections .

in addition , under the statute , fema had the discretion under "extraordinary circumstances" to award a grant to a local government that had not been recommended by a governor .

while the authorization of pdm in fy2000 had recognized , at a minimum , the potential benefit of mitigation prior to disaster events , the substantial funding increase beginning in fy2003 was one component of a different overall approach .

this new approach was targeted not only to pre - disaster mitigation but to mitigation in general .

it represented a shift in thinking regarding the most appropriate time to devote resources to mitigation in disaster - prone communities .

some had suggested that the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) in the stafford act ( section 404 ) , which provides funding to a state following a major disaster to mitigate future disaster damage , was taking the wrong approach , or , more precisely , was in the wrong sequence .

since the funds arrive after the disaster event , and are only available to states that have suffered the impact of a disaster , they cannot be targeted at areas that might have a greater risk of a more costly disaster that has not yet occurred .

pre - disaster mitigation , they argued , would be more effective .

however , others contended that only communities that have had recent disaster experience have the immediate incentive , in the form of a community commitment borne of experience , to take the steps necessary to reduce the risk of future disasters .

as one writer in the field has noted , it is imperative to garner community support around a specific action: this is especially true when those mitigation measures involve cranking up the machinery of government , which , some contend , is especially prone to inertia.... mitigation measures are also most effective when they have the broad support from the greatest number of people across a broad section of the community .

following hurricane katrina , congress chose to reinstate the hmgp to its previous level of 15% for the majority of disasters and established a new graduated scale for larger events .

with that change , smaller amounts were requested and appropriated on an annual basis for the pdm program .

in fy2006 , the appropriated amount was $50 million .

however , congress then appropriated larger sums for the pdm program , equal to or above requested levels from f2008 up to fy2010 .

these increases coincided with studies released in 2005 and 2007 , each of which pointed to savings of $3 to $4 in disaster relief spending for each $1 spent on mitigation .

the findings of these studies were thought to be important to the pdm program since the studies: provide independent evidence to support what nearly every member of the hazards community knows anecdotally — generally , fema mitigation grants are highly cost - effective .

one study , natural hazard mitigation saves: an independent study to assess the future savings f rom mitigation activities , in accordance with the directive from p.l .

106-390 , was completed by the multi - hazard mitigation council ( mhmc ) .

the mhmc study defined a broad number of benefits that reached into not only direct fema disaster costs but also assessed corollary and indirect savings from mitigation at the local level and within the business sector with an impact , or "ripple effect" on the surrounding communities .

the study weighed damages that were not always previously considered when calculating savings , such as business interruption and environmental costs .

the study , released in 2005 before the hurricane season , provided a foundation for mitigation that was previously based on anecdote and conjecture .

the mhmc study listed areas of savings within communities from mitigation and also focused on the long - term beneficial effects that mitigation activities would have on the federal treasury on an annual basis .

building on the mhmc study , in 2007 the congressional budget office ( cbo ) issued its report on pre - disaster mitigation cost savings .

while using slightly different assumptions and cognizant of federal spending time lines , that report also noted a proportional savings derived from the pdm program .

the cbo study explained that pdm savings would likely benefit two fema programs .

any federal savings from pdm - funded mitigation projects would occur largely in fema's disaster relief programs ( which are funded from discretionary appropriations ) and in its national flood insurance program ( which ordinarily is not funded through the appropriation process ) .

these findings provided a justification for increased pdm funding , which followed in fy2007 and continued through fy2010 .

as congress considers reauthorization of the pdm program , there are several issues that have emerged as points of discussion .

these issues include the pace at which grant awards are made , the best methods for funding awards , the priority uses for pdm funds , the amount of resources devoted to the program , the length of authorization for the program , and , most importantly , the direction of pre - disaster mitigation and where it may be best realized given recent presidential action .

also , new initiatives emerged from the 2010 budget and authorizing legislation that suggested new directions for the pdm program .

over the last decade , the pre - disaster mitigation program has developed and grown as mitigation itself has become accepted federal policy .

adoption and expansion of mitigation as a beneficial approach for government has been bolstered by studies that demonstrated cost reductions following disasters due to earlier mitigation investments .

appraisal of the pdm program is open to different interpretations and conclusions .

while program staff at fema point to a program with flexibility and an appreciation of the regulatory challenges faced by communities carrying out mitigation projects , other observers see what appears to be the contrary , citing unspent funds and a perceived rigidity in program guidance that hinders the flexibility of local governments in accessing the pdm funding and in using it in a manner they choose .

while the greatest portion of the program funds are spent on mitigation projects , an even greater number of selected proposals are those associated with the development and improvement of state and local mitigation plans .

as funds have decreased , planning has become a more realistic use of funds for many jurisdictions rather than projects that may require more resources .

the remainder of funds are spent for technical and administrative assistance or held back for "reconsideration" for some awards .

in fy2008 and fy2009 congress directed the funding of some pdm projects .

the earmarks were broadly distributed as previous pdm funding has been .

the congressional earmarks represented 44% and 27% of funds available for the competitive and set - aside pdm grants for 2008 and 2009 , respectively .

the congressionally directed grants also funded some projects that did not appear to be in accord with fema's program guidance .

the earmarks have now ended but the lower appropriated levels leave the program with the same issues regarding its visibility and how best to distribute the funding that remains .

the 111 th congress last reauthorized the pdm program for three years and codified some program practices .

that reauthorization has now lapsed .

however , it is also worth noting that congress's interest in mitigation remains .

as previously noted , legislation has been introduced to reauthorize pdm .

recent legislation has been introduced in the 113 th congress in both chambers to add a mitigation component to fema's fire management assistance grants ( fmags ) which are authorized under the stafford act in section 420 .

within this discussion it should also be noted that while mitigation found its footing over the last 10 years as evidence supported its cost - benefits , the terminology of "resilience" became fashionable and , it could be argued , confusing .

this "rebranding" may have sought to broaden the concept , or simply to provide a new identity to this work to reinvigorate it .

but changing the vocabulary also can sow confusion among potential recipients , causing them to ask: "does mitigation contribute to resilience ? .

or is resilience a broader concept than addressing natural hazards ? .

some have conjectured that resilience is a broader term than mitigation that reaches beyond engineered projects to human habits and desires .

considered in this fashion , mitigation would appear to contribute to overall resilience .

one observer notes the way that resilience and mitigation can co - exist and be complementary: the national preparedness goal defines resilience as , "the ability to adapt to changing conditions and withstand and rapidly recover from disruption due to emergencies. .

the use of steel reinforcement to allow buildings to sway with an earthquake is an example of both mitigation and resilience .

the ability of the internet to allow information - packets to find multiple open channels and opportunistically use whatever is available is another example of resilient design that can mitigate the impact of a threat .

to either further the confusion or bring some clarity to the argument , the president's most recent budget ( fy2015 ) contained an opportunity , growth , and security initiative .

that initiative suggested directing $400 million into the pdm program to promote resilience and mitigation measures .

this was within the same budget that recommended zeroing out the pdm program .

recent budget submissions by the administration , including the recent fy2015 budget , have staked out varying positions on pdm .

those positions , along with the issues discussed in this report , are some of the broader considerations the congress may choose to take up regarding federal mitigation policy in the future and the pdm program's role in that policy .

