the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) is a broad civil rights act prohibiting discrimination against individuals with disabilities .

as stated in the act , its purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. .

the threshold issue in any ada case is whether the individual alleging discrimination is an individual with a disability .

several supreme court decisions have interpreted the definition of disability , generally limiting its application .

since these supreme court interpretations , lower court decisions also interpreted the definition of disability strictly .

congress responded to these decisions by enacting the ada amendments act , p.l .

110-325 , which rejects the supreme court and lower court interpretations and amends the ada to provide broader coverage .

two of the major changes made by the ada amendments act are to expand the current interpretation of when an impairment substantially limits a major life activity ( rejecting the supreme court's interpretation in toyota ) , and to require that the determination of whether an impairment substantially limits a major life activity must be made without regard to the use of mitigating measures ( rejecting the supreme court's decisions in sutton , murphy , and kirkingburg ) .

on september 23 , 2009 , the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) issued proposed regulations under the ada amendments act .

comment on the proposed regulations must be submitted on or before november 23 , 2009 .

the original ada definition of disability was based on the definition of disability used for section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 .

the term disability with respect to an individual was defined as " ( a ) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual ; ( b ) a record of such an impairment ; or ( c ) being regarded as having such an impairment. .

the ada amendments act essentially keeps the same language but rejects the interpretation given to the language by the supreme court .

three supreme court decisions in 1999 addressed the definition of disability , and specifically discussed the concept of mitigating measures .

sutton v. united air lines involved sisters who were rejected from employment as pilots with united air lines because they wore eyeglasses .

the supreme court in sutton examined the definition of disability used in the original ada and found that the determination of whether an individual has a disability should be made with reference to measures that mitigate the individual's impairment .

the sutton court stated , "'a disability' exists only where an impairment 'substantially limits' a major life activity , not where it 'might,' 'could,' or 'would' be substantially limiting if mitigating measures were not taken. .

the court also emphasized that the statement of findings in the ada that some 43 million americans have one or more physical or mental disabilities "requires the conclusion that congress did not intend to bring under the statute's protection all those whose uncorrected conditions amount to disabilities. .

similarly , in murphy v. united parcel service , inc . , the court held that the fact that an individual with high blood pressure was unable to meet the department of transportation ( dot ) safety standards was not sufficient to create an issue of fact regarding whether an individual is regarded as unable to utilize a class of jobs .

the court in murphy found that an employee is regarded as having a disability if the covered entity mistakenly believes that the employee's actual , nonlimiting impairment substantially limits one or more major life activities .

and in the last of this trilogy of 1999 cases , the court in kirkingburg v. albertsons held that a trucker with monocular vision who was able to compensate for this impairment was not a person with a disability .

in the 2002 case of toyota motor manufacturing v. williams , the meaning of "substantially limits" was examined , and justice o'connor , writing for the unanimous court , determined that the word substantial "clearly precluded impairments that interfere in only a minor way with the performance of manual tasks. .

the court also found that the term "major life activity" "refers to those activities that are of central importance to daily life. .

finding that these terms are to be "interpreted strictly," the court held that "to be substantially limited in performing manual tasks , an individual must have an impairment that prevents or severely restricts the individual from doing activities that are of central importance to most people's daily lives. .

since these supreme court decisions , lower courts applied these holdings in various factual situations .

for example , in orr v. wal - mart stores , inc . , the eighth circuit found that a pharmacist with diabetes who takes insulin and eats a special diet was not an individual with a disability because , with the medication and diet , the diabetes did not substantially affect a major life activity .

similarly , in mcclure v. general motors corp. , the fifth circuit found that an electrician with muscular dystrophy who could lift his arms only to shoulder level did not have a disability .

the eleventh circuit examined what are major life activities in littleton v. wal - mart .

the plaintiff , a 29-year - old man who was diagnosed with mental retardation as a child , was not hired for a position as a cart - push associate with wal - mart .

the court found that "[i]t was unclear whether thinking , communicating and social interaction are 'major life activities' under the ada" and noted that even if thinking , communicating , and social interaction were found to be major life activities , the plaintiff did not show that he was substantially limited in these activities .

since the ada amendments act became effective january 1 , 2009 , there have been a number of judicial decisions which have sought to allege violations of the ada as it is amended by the adaaa .

these cases usually have involved fact patterns that took place prior to the adaaa's effective date , and courts have followed the general rule that , absent clear congressional intent , a statute enacted after the events at issue in a suit does not apply .

however , in jenkins v. national board of medical examiners , the plaintiff sought accommodations on the u.s. medical licensing examination and the sixth circuit found that the adaaa did apply .

the court reasoned that since the plaintiff was seeking prospective relief ( i.e. , accommodations for an examination in the future ) , there was no injustice to the defendant .

the case was remanded for consideration and provides no guidance on the substantive interpretation of the adaaa .

although the vast majority of ada amendments act cases still turn on the issue of retroactivity , there are a few district court cases addressing the merits of an ada amendments act issue .

in hoffman v. carefirst of fort wayne , inc. , the district court stated that it had "tried in vain" to find relevant case law , noting that this was one of the first cases of its kind .

the central issue in hoffman was whether an individual whose cancer is in remission is an individual with a disability under the ada as amended .

finding that the plaintiff was an individual with a disability , the court observed that the ada's amended language specifically provides that an impairment that is in remission is a disability if it would substantially limit a major life activity when active and that the question of whether an individual has a disability "should not demand extensive analysis. .

interestingly , the court found this conclusion further bolstered by the eeoc's proposed regulations which provide that cancer is an example of an impairment that will consistently meet the definition of disability and that cancer is an example of an impairment that can be in remission .

there will undoubtedly be more cases involving the ada amendments act .

the eeoc announced on september 9 , 2010 , that it was filing suit in three cases using the new definition of disability .

these cases involved individuals with diabetes , cancer , and severe arthritis .

