since the late 1990s , the united nations ( u.n. ) organization has increasingly recognized violence against women ( hereinafter vaw ) as a global health concern and violation of human rights .

ongoing u.n. system efforts to address vaw range from large - scale interagency initiatives to smaller grants and programs implemented by non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , national governments , and individual u.n. agencies .

a number of u.n. system activities address vaw directly ; however , many are also implemented in the context of broader issues such as humanitarian aid , peacekeeping , global health , and human rights .

most u.n. entities do not specifically track the cost of programs or activities with anti - vaw components .

therefore , it is unclear how much the u.n. system , including individual u.n. agencies and programs , spends annually on programs to combat violence against women .

u.n. member states collectively address vaw through the work of u.n. principal organs such as the general assembly , security council , and economic and social council ( ecosoc ) .

members of these bodies have adopted resolutions and decisions addressing vaw in general , and more specifically violence against women migrant workers ; honor crimes against women and girls ; trafficking in women and girls ; sexual violence in conflict ; vaw prevention ; and women , peace , and security .

many u.n. member states have also ratified international treaties that address violence against women , including the u.n. protocol to prevent , suppress , and punish trafficking in persons , especially women and children ; the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women ( cedaw ) ; and the convention on the rights of the child ( crc ) .

in addition , members of the u.n. human rights council support the work of the u.n. special rapporteur on violence against women , its causes and consequences .

u.n. member states also make voluntary contributions to u.n. funds and other mechanisms that address violence against women .

since 2005 , at the direction of u.n. member states , former u.n. secretary - general kofi annan and current secretary - general ban ki - moon have worked to coordinate and enhance anti - vaw activities among various u.n. entities .

in late 2005 , for example , as part of then - secretary - general annan's in - depth study on all forms of violence against women , the u.n. secretariat's then - division for the advancement of women ( which is now part of the u.n .

entity for gender equality and the empowerment of women , referred to as "un women" ) compiled an inventory of u.n. system activities that address violence against women .

the inventory , which was last updated in february 2011 , identifies 36 u.n. entities that work to combat vaw on a global , national , or local level .

in february 2008 , secretary - general ban ki - moon launched a u.n. system - wide public awareness campaign to end violence against women .

this report provides examples of recent u.n. system efforts to address vaw , including the trust fund to eliminate violence against women , anti - vaw initiatives of past and current u.n. secretaries - general , and interagency activities .

it also discusses selected u.n. agreements , mechanisms , agencies , funds , and programs that — either in whole or in part — work to eliminate violence against women .

it does not assess the scope of u.n. anti - vaw activities or evaluate a u.n. entity's progress in achieving its goal .

this report supplements crs report rl34438 , international violence against women: u.s .

response and policy issues .

when considering u.s. efforts to address violence against women internationally , members of the 112 th congress may wish to take into account ongoing u.n. efforts to address the issue .

were congress to decide to use u.n. mechanisms to combat vaw , a number of policy issues and u.n. system activities might be considered .

the u.n. general assembly was the first international body to agree on a definition of violence against women .

on december 20 , 1993 , the general assembly adopted the declaration on the elimination of violence against women ( devaw ) .

the declaration , which was supported by the u.s. government , describes vaw as "any act of gender - based violence that results in , or is likely to result in , physical , sexual , or psychological harm or suffering to women , including threats of such acts , coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty , whether occurring in public or private life. .

though non - binding , devaw provides a standard for u.n. agencies and ngos urging national governments to strengthen their efforts to combat vaw , and for governments encouraging other nations to combat violence against women .

specifically , the declaration calls on countries to take responsibility for combating vaw , emphasizing that "states should condemn violence against women and should not invoke any custom , tradition or religious consideration to avoid their obligations with respect to its elimination .

states should pursue by all appropriate means and without delay a policy of eliminating violence against women. .

despite the international adoption of devaw , governments , organizations , and cultures continue to define vaw in a number of ways , taking into account unique factors and circumstances .

how vaw is defined has implications for policymakers because the definition may determine the types of violence that are measured and addressed .

the current secretary - general and his predecessors have sought to combat violence against women by supporting various studies and initiatives addressing the issue .

two such efforts — the u.n. study on violence against women , and the secretary - general's unite to end violence against women campaign — are discussed in the following sections .

u.n. funds and programs are engaged in several interagency activities that address specific types and circumstances of vaw directly , or include combating vaw as part of a broader agenda .

this section discusses selected u.n. conferences , agreements , resolutions , and multilateral treaties that address vaw , either in whole or in part .

it does not assess u.n. member state compliance with or implementation of these mechanisms .

this section highlights selected u.n. bodies that — either in whole or in part — address international violence against women , and provides examples of vaw - related activities .

it does not measure the extent to which vaw is directly addressed or is part of a larger initiative or program .

csw , a functional commission under the u.n. economic and social council ( ecosoc ) , is the principal intergovernmental policymaking body on women's issues in the united nations .

it meets annually at u.n. headquarters and is composed of 45 member state representatives elected by ecosoc members ( other non - member states may serve as observers ) .

csw observes , monitors , and implements measures for the advancement of women , including those that address violence against women .

it also reviews and supports the mainstreaming of gender perspectives into the u.n. system .

dpko prepares and manages u.n. peacekeeping operations .

it focuses on all types and circumstances of vaw , particularly sexual exploitation and abuse of vulnerable women and girls by peacekeeping personnel .

in order to prevent and address such abuses , each peacekeeping mission has a gender unit that supports regional and international initiatives addressing violence against women .

the gender units support legal reform processes in particular countries and serve as resources for national authorities and law reform organizations .

gender units also encourage collaboration among law enforcement , victim support organizations , and the judiciary , and work to ensure that women's ngos are included in national efforts to end violence against women .

moreover , several peacekeeping units — including those in the democratic republic of the congo , sierra leone , and timor - leste — have conducted training activities for peacekeeping personnel on preventing and responding to violence against women .

gender advisers and focal points within nine peacekeeping operations also work to guarantee that gender policies are taken seriously and integrated into every mission .

un women is the lead u.n. entity addressing women's empowerment and gender equality .

the organization , which became operational in january 2011 , was established by u.n. member states amid concerns that the way in which the u.n. system addressed gender issues was fragmented , weak , and under - resourced .

it is composed of four previous u.n. entities that addressed women's issues — the office of the special adviser on gender issues and the advancement of women ( osagi ) , the division for the advancement of women ( daw ) , the u.n. development fund for women ( unifem ) , and the u.n. international research and training institute for the advancement of women ( instraw ) .

under the general assembly resolutions establishing un women , the mandates and functions of osagi , daw , unifem and instraw were transferred to the new entity .

their activities related to vaw are expected to continue .

examples include: raising awareness of vaw in local and national governments — particularly among law enforcement , parliamentarians , government ministries , and the judiciary ( formerly unifem ) ; strengthening anti - vaw legislation and policies related to domestic violence , trafficking , and forced marriage , and assisting governments and organizations in implementing such efforts ( formerly unifem ) ; supporting data collection and research on international violence against women ( formerly unifem , daw , and instraw ) ; supporting and servicing agenda items and discussions for u.n. intergovernmental bodies that promote gender equality , including the general assembly , ecosoc , and csw ( formerly daw ) ; conducting research and compiling reports for the secretary - general on violence against women , including the secretary - general's in - depth study on all forms of violence against women and its updates ( formerly daw ) ; supporting the u.n. special adviser on gender issues , promoting interagency collaboration to eliminate vaw , and developing new strategies , programs , and policies to address gender equality in the u.n. system ( formerly osagi ) ; and coordinating and implementing outcomes and follow - up to the 1995 beijing declaration and platform of action , and u.n. security council 1325 resolution on women , peace , and security , both of which address violence against women ( formerly osagi ) .

un women is also the designated coordinator of the secretary - general's unite to end violence against women campaign .

ohchr , which works to promote and protect human rights established under the u.n. charter and international human rights instruments , supports research and operational activities that address violence against women .

ohchr commissions research and analyze access to justice for victims of sexual violence , with a focus on the prosecution of rape under international humanitarian and human rights law .

ohchr field operations work to reduce or eliminate vaw at the national and regional level , providing technical assistance in law reform and government monitoring , and organizing training activities for governments and members of civil society .

ohchr also supports u.n. human rights council country and thematic rapporteurs who address types and circumstances of violence against women and girls .

this includes the position of special rapporteur on violence against women , its causes and consequences , which was established in 1994 by a u.n. economic and social council ( ecosoc ) resolution .

other rapporteurs who address aspects of vaw include the special rapporteurs on trafficking in persons ; the sale of children ; and extrajudicial , summary or arbitrary executions .

the who addresses vaw through various activities , including policy formulation , program guidance , advocacy , and research .

specifically , it has developed a series of vaw norms and guidelines and conducted studies on vaw prevalence .

it also leads a research initiative to develop a network of researchers , policymakers , and activists to ensure vaw is addressed from a variety of disciplines .

it develops training programs and provides technical support on sexual violence for healthcare providers in conflict areas , and works with partners to develop a framework for integrating hiv prevention activities into intimate partner and sexual violence programs .

who also works to raise public awareness of vaw , particularly in the context of hiv / aids .

such activities include vaw sensitization programs for civil servants , journalists , healthcare providers , and policymakers .

undp addresses vaw through programs and activities that involve trafficking , hiv / aids , and disaster , conflict , and post - conflict situations .

it works with governments to develop national strategies to protect victims of intimate partner violence , and aims to incorporate gender perspectives into crises prevention and recovery in conflict situations .

undp also promotes vaw awareness through national and local campaigns , including the "16 days of activism against gender - based violence" campaign and the international day for the elimination of violence against women .

in addition , undp works on a national level to disseminate knowledge and awareness of vaw through radio , television , and posters .

it also supports a website , gendernet , which facilitates discussions on gender and violence against women .

unicef works to protect children's rights , provide for their basic needs , and expand their opportunities .

the majority of unicef's violence against girls programs focus on capacity building , with an emphasis on awareness - raising and research .

on a global level , unicef has developed policies to protect women and girls from sexual abuse by u.n. staff and other aid workers .

on a country level , it addresses different manifestations of vaw , which vary depending by country or region .

national unicef programs address female genital cutting , early marriage , trafficking , domestic violence , school - related violence , and violence in armed conflict .

unicef also assists governments in drafting anti - vaw legislation , and works to raise vaw awareness among teachers , police , and the judiciary .

unhcr's mandate is to provide protection to refugees and other populations of concern .

since 2003 , it has promoted and encouraged prevention and treatment guidelines in field operations to address the prevalence of sexual and gender - based violence .

in march 2008 , unhcr published the unhcr handbook on the protection of displaced women and girls , to distribute to unhcr staff and partners .

in addition , unhcr ( along with nine other u.n. agencies ) signed an interagency statement to address female genital mutilation .

it has sponsored regional and country - level training programs on vaw prevention and response for its staff and implementing partners .

it also works to establish standard operating procedures for the prevention of and response to vaw in each country operation .

unocha coordinates humanitarian response , policy development , and humanitarian advocacy among u.n. agencies and national and international actors .

it serves as the co - chair of the inter - agency standing committee's task force on gender and humanitarian assistance , providing support for the development and implementation of inter - agency standing committee ( iasc ) guidelines for gender - based violence interventions in humanitarian settings .

unocha also implements a confidential complaints mechanism on gender - based violence , and works to raise public awareness of the issue .

the organization's integrated regional information network ( irin ) , for example , has produced several publications and videos on vaw in conflict and female genital cutting .

unfpa aims to help countries improve reproductive health and expand access to family planning services .

it addresses vaw through a combination of research - based and operational activities .

on a global level , unfpa has undertaken studies on the socio - cultural context of vaw , and hosts workshops and meetings on sexual violence .

it develops guidelines and tools to combat vaw , and supports sensitivity training for medical professionals .

on a national level , unfpa works with governments to develop national strategies to address vaw prevention and protection , and provides counseling to girls who experience fgc or forced marriage .

unfpa also supports basic services to vaw victims , including legal and counseling services and access to shelter .

unodc is the guardian of the u.n .

trafficking protocol .

its global program against trafficking in human beings assists member states to implement the trafficking protocol and prevent human trafficking .

it also aims to address domestic violence and human trafficking by developing policies to support women victims of violence , particularly those in prison .

specifically , it works to integrate vaw and gender perspectives into its efforts to build the capacity of criminal justice systems .

in october 2010 , for example , unodc developed an assessment tool which addresses the treatment of women victims of violence in prisons and criminal justice systems as a whole .

the ilo promotes internationally recognized human and labor rights .

it supports a number of programs that combat trafficking and forced and bonded labor , many of which include gender - specific components .

through the international program to eliminate child labor ( ipec ) for instance , ilo works with participating governments to ( 1 ) prevent children from becoming child laborers ; ( 2 ) remove children from hazardous work , including exploitative work like forced prostitution ; and ( 3 ) offer children and their families education , income and employment opportunities .

the ilo conditions of work and employment program researches violence in the workplace , including violence against women .

the ilo labor standards department also conducts research on violence against migrant workers , particularly women , as well as violence against indigenous and tribal women workers .

unaids works with international partners to identify and address the possible links between hiv / aids and violence against women .

it promotes education and awareness of hiv within international peacekeeping operations , and national uniformed services through training and distribution of peer education kits , which include sections on gender issues and sexual violence .

unaids has also worked in southern and eastern africa to determine how to improve health services for women who have experienced violence .

it also supports regional task forces on vaw in emergency settings , collaborates with who to improve clinic services on sexual violence , and works with experts to develop cost estimates for integrating vaw awareness , prevention , and treatment into aids programs .

in addition , the unaids global coalition on women and aids raises public awareness of hiv / aids and vaw linkages .

