congress uses data from the uniform crime reports ( ucr ) , the national incident - based reporting system ( nibrs ) , and the national crime victimization survey ( ncvs ) to inform policy decisions and develop appropriate responses to crime .

such crime data have been used to shape policy in a variety of ways .

for example , in the 103 rd congress , the community oriented policing services ( cops ) program was created to provide state and local law enforcement agencies with grants to help them hire , rehire , and redeploy law enforcement officers to engage in community policing .

congress cited both ucr and ncvs crime statistics when articulating the need for more community policing officers .

in addition to shaping policy , congress has used crime data to develop formula allocations for certain grant programs .

for example , the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program formula uses ucr data to allocate federal funds to state and local governments for criminal justice programs .

in the 110 th congress , two bills have been introduced ( s. 368 and h.r .

1700 ) that would increase authorized funding for and expand the scope of the cops program .

the impetus for the legislation was a recent increase in the violent crime rate as reported by the ucr .

moreover , both the house and senate appropriations committees recommended increased funding for state and local law enforcement to support efforts to fight and prevent crime .

the house report that accompanied the house commerce , justice , and science appropriations bill stated that the committee was concerned about the recent increase in the violent crime rate .

in addition , the house and the senate appropriations committees increased funding for the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) to hire additional agents to investigate violent crime .

the committees felt it was important for the fbi to help state and local law enforcement investigate violent crime in light of the recent increase in the violent crime rate .

the aforementioned legislation and congressional action were based on crime data collected by the ucr and the ncvs .

because of the importance of crime data in both shaping policy and allocating federal funding , it is important to understand how each program collects data and the limitations of the data .

this report reviews ( 1 ) the history of the ucr , the nibrs , and the ncvs ; ( 2 ) the methods each program uses to collect crime data ; and ( 3 ) the limitations of the data collected by each program .

the report then compares the similarities and differences of ucr and ncvs data .

it concludes by reviewing issues related to the nibrs and the ncvs .

when the ucr was established in the late 1920s , it represented the first national , standardized measure of the incidence of crime .

it was originally conceived as a way to measure the effectiveness of local law enforcement to provide law enforcement with data that could be used to help fight crime .

ucr data are now used extensively by academics and government officials for research , policy , and planning purposes , and the data are widely cited in the media .

the ucr also provides some of the most commonly cited crime statistics in the united states .

an effort is currently underway to replace the ucr with the nibrs , a more detailed version of the ucr .

however , the transition from the ucr to the nibrs has been slow .

the national crime victimization survey ( ncvs ) is the primary source for information on the characteristics of criminal victimization and on the number and types of crime not reported to law enforcement .

the ncvs has four major objectives: ( 1 ) developing detailed information about the victims and consequences of crime , ( 2 ) estimating the number and types of crimes not reported to police , ( 3 ) providing uniform measures of selected types of crimes , and ( 4 ) permitting comparisons over time and population types ( eg , urban , suburban , and rural ) .

the department of justice ( doj ) uses both the ucr and the ncvs to measure the magnitude , nature , and impact of crime in the united states .

both the ucr and the ncvs are important because , as one pair of researchers states , "crime , unlike the weather , is a phenomenon that is not directly observable .

no one measure is capable of providing all the information about the extent and characteristics of crime. .

the ucr measures offenses known to the police , and the ncvs collects data on crimes that people have experienced , whether they were reported to the police or not .

doj states , "each program produces valuable information about aspects of the nation's crime problem .

because both the ucr and ncvs programs are conducted for different purposes , use different methods , and focus on somewhat different aspects of crime , the information they produce together provides a more comprehensive panorama of the nation's crime problem than either could produce alone. .

the ncvs was designed to complement the ucr , yet the ucr and the ncvs serve two different purposes .

the primary objective of the ucr is to provide a reliable set of criminal justice statistics for law enforcement administration , operation , and management .

the ncvs was created to provide previously unavailable information about crime ( including crime not reported to the police ) , victims , and offenders .

the ucr and the ncvs collect data on an overlapping , but not identical , set of offenses against an overlapping , but not identical , population .

the ncvs does not collect data on homicide , arson , or commercial crimes , and the ucr does not collect offense data on sexual assaults or simple assaults .

because the ucr collects data on offenses known to police , it includes offenses committed against children under the age of 12 , visitors from other countries , and businesses or organizations .

the ncvs's methodology precludes the survey from collecting data on crimes against these populations .

the methodologies used by the ucr and the ncvs differ in some important aspects .

first , the ucr and the ncvs have different definitions for some crimes .

one example is the definition used by the ucr and the ncvs for rape .

the ucr defines rape as the "carnal knowledge of a female forcibly and against her will" ( see appendix b ) .

however , under the ncvs , rape and sexual assault can be perpetrated against both men and women .

second , the ucr and the ncvs use different methods for calculating the crime rates for some crimes .

the crime rates for all part i offenses are calculated on a per capita basis ( i.e. , the number of offenses per 100,000 people ) .

the ncvs calculates property crime rates ( burglary , theft , and motor vehicle theft ) on a per household basis ( i.e. , the number of crimes per 1,000 households ) .

third , the methodologies used by both programs are subject to limitations and sources of error that can affect the quality , accuracy , and reliability of their estimates and hence influence comparisons of the data produced by the two programs .

as discussed above , the ucr is a voluntary program , which means that some agencies might not submit data for the entire year , or at all .

similarly , because the ncvs interviews a sample of households , its victimization estimates are subject to both sampling and nonsampling errors .

as discussed above , there are issues associated with ucr , nibrs , and ncvs data .

moreover , there are issues congress might face when considering the future of each program , especially the nibrs and the ncvs .

these issues include ( 1 ) barriers to implementing the nibrs nationwide , ( 2 ) potential increases in the crime rate because of transitioning to the nibrs , and ( 3 ) cuts in the ncvs sample size and the effects associated with the decrease in sample size .

each of these issues is discussed in more detail below .

as discussed above , implementing the nibrs system nationwide has been a slow process .

the search group collected data from the 64 largest law enforcement agencies in the united states to determine what impediments they face in making the transition to the nibrs .

search found that some law enforcement agencies' record management systems ( rms ) were more capable of making the switch from the ucr to the nibrs than others .

search reported that some law enforcement agencies have rmss that are unable to report nibrs data , either because the data are in an incompatible format ( i.e. , they still follow the hierarchy rule and fail to capture multiple offenses and victims ) , or because they do not record data for all of the mandatory data elements or code the data in a nibrs - compliant manner .

some law enforcement agencies reported that they had antiquated systems that are fragmented and in need of upgrades or replacement .

other law enforcement agencies have automated incident - based systems that meet the agency's operational needs but fail to capture the necessary data in an appropriate format for nibrs reporting .

law enforcement agencies identified seven general impediments to nibrs implementation in their jurisdictions: funding : search reported that the general perception was that implementing the nibrs is very costly for local law enforcement agencies .

law enforcement agencies are concerned that they will incur a series of new costs , including developing or acquiring new or upgrading existing hardware or software ; implementing automated incident - based reporting at the street level ; hiring new data entry staff to process the additional data collected ; establishing new quality control procedures ; and having to increase the volume and complexity of training .

law enforcement agencies expressed concern that nibrs is not a funding priority among local decision makers and stakeholders .

uncertainty of benefits : law enforcement agencies reported that no clear operational value for the use of nibrs data has been established .

for example , nibrs data do not include information on the address where a crime took place , hence nibrs data cannot be used for crime mapping .

absent a demonstration of its practical use , law enforcement agencies felt that nibrs data were more useful to researchers than to them .

policy concerns : law enforcement agencies expressed concern that reported crime will increase when they implement the nibrs because nibrs does not use the hierarchy rule , meaning that all crimes in an incident will be reported ( a more detailed discussion of this issue can be found below ) .

administrative issues : according to search , there was some concern that law enforcement officers would spend more time completing incident reports , which would decrease the time they have to respond to calls for service .

law enforcement agencies were also concerned about the time that would have to be spent on training officers on how to complete nibrs incident reports and the technical support necessary for ongoing operations .

federal and state reporting : search reported that some law enforcement agencies were concerned about the "all or nothing" policy of nibrs participation , which meant that if law enforcement agencies could not meet every nibrs data reporting element , they could not participate in the program .

law enforcement agencies were also concerned about meeting the reporting requirements set forth by state programs , which had in some cases expanded reporting requirement beyond those required for the national nibrs program .

data elements : law enforcement agencies reported that some of the data elements , such as the victim - offender relationship , multiple offenses , and multiple victims , did not provide investigative value .

other data elements were viewed as being largely subjective ( i.e. , bias motivation and victim ethnicity ) or irrelevant ( i.e. , residential status of an arrestee or the nature of suspected substance abuse ) .

education : search found that law enforcement agencies were concerned that key decision makers and stakeholders did not have sufficient or accurate information regarding the objectives or nature of the nibrs .

it appears that although local law enforcement agencies are receptive to the idea of reporting nibrs data , several barriers prevent law enforcement agencies from making the switch from the ucr to the nibrs .

congress may want to consider whether anything could be done to promote a more rapid expansion of the nibrs program .

policy options for congress might include the following: appropriate grant funds to be awarded to state and local law enforcement agencies to allow them to update or expand their crime data reporting systems .

in 2001 , bjs awarded over $13 million in grants to states for the purpose of implementing nibrs - compatible systems .

grant funds for this purpose have not been available since 2001 .

provide funding to agencies such as the national institute of justice to allow them to develop nibrs software that could be distributed at no charge to local law enforcement .

congress may also consider making grant funds available to local law enforcement agencies to allow them to purchase nibrs software from a vendor .

this could allow law enforcement agencies to customize the software to meet their specifications .

provide funding to an organization such as the justice research and statistics association to allow them to provide training and continued support to local law enforcement agencies that implement nibrs systems .

some local officials have expressed concern that implementing the nibrs will result in a higher reported crime rate in their jurisdictions .

as described above , the nibrs does not use the hierarchy rule , so all crimes in an incident are reported , unlike the ucr , where only the most serious offense in an incident is reported .

therefore , local officials are concerned that crime rates may appear to increase even though the actual number of crimes committed does not change .

bjs conducted a study that compared nibrs - computed crime rates to ucr crime rates for agencies in nine nibrs - certified states for 1991-1996 .

to be included in the study , an agency must have submitted at least one full year of data and it must serve a "nonzero" population ( i.e. , police departments or sheriff's offices , but it would most likely not include state or county police ) .

the study included 4,068 cases from 1,131 unique law enforcement agencies .

summary ucr data were derived from nibrs data by using a computer program that applied the hierarchy rule to reported incidents in the nibrs data .

bjs found that , overall , the difference between the crime rates calculated using nibrs and ucr data was small .

on average , the nibrs index crime rate was 2% higher than the ucr crime rate .

on average , the nibrs violent crime rate was higher than the ucr violent crime rate by less than 1% , and the nibrs property crime rate was higher than the ucr property crime rate by slightly more than 2% .

however , the difference between the nibrs rate and the ucr rate varied depending on the crime .

for murder , the nibrs and ucr rates were the same .

for rape , robbery , and aggravated assault , the difference between the nibrs and ucr rates was , on average , less than 1% .

nibrs larceny / theft rates were , on average , higher than ucr larceny / theft rates by about 3% , and nibrs motor vehicle theft rates were higher than ucr theft rates by about 4.5% .

bjs also individually evaluated each case to see how the nibrs crime rates differed from the ucr crime rates .

as shown in table 1 , in 97% of the cases , the difference between the nibrs crime rate and the ucr crime rate for violent crimes was 5.5% or less .

by comparison , the percentage of cases where there was a 5.5% or less difference between the nibrs crime rate and the ucr crime was smaller ( 90% overall ) for property offenses , which is not surprising given that most property offenses would not be reported under the ucr if they were committed in concert with a violent offense .

bjs reported that the distribution of rate changes for all index offenses showed that 92.5% of the cases had a rate difference of - 0.5% to 15.5% .

almost 48% of the cases had a rate difference between - 0.5% to 0.5% for index crimes , and 39% of the cases had no difference between the nibrs rates and the ucr rates .

for violent crime , the distribution of rate changes showed that 98.9% of the cases had a rate difference between 0% and 15.5% , 84.3% of cases had a rate difference between 0% and 0.5% , and 82.2% of the cases had no difference .

for property crime , 91.7% of the cases had a rate difference between - 0.5% and 15.5% , 48% of the cases had a rate difference between - 0.5% and 0.5% , and 40.1% of the cases had no difference .

overall , the data show that the transition to nibrs can increase the reported crime rate .

in most instances , the increase in the crime rate will be small , and property crimes , rather than violent crimes , are more likely to increase .

however , there are instances where the increase in reported crime rates can be more than 15.5% .

bjs reports that jurisdictions with little crime tend to show exaggerated changes in their crime rates when they switch from the ucr to the nibrs .

hence , most of the drastic changes in reported crime rates likely came from jurisdictions that did not report a lot of crime to begin with .

if or when the fbi chooses to publish crime in the united states using nibrs data , it may influence the way congress uses crimes statistics to develop policy and allocate funding .

as shown above , the change from the ucr to the nibrs may make it appear like the crime rate in some states , counties , and cities has increased .

congress might want to be aware of the impact that the change to nibrs could have on the reported crime rate before deciding whether to allocate more funding to jurisdictions that showed an increased crime rate .

also , the formula for the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program uses ucr violent crime data to allocate funding to state and local governments .

one policy option for congress would be to change the jag formula to incorporate nibrs data .

another policy option would be to leave the jag formula as it currently is and require the fbi to modify each state's nibrs data to produce summary ucr data .

the sample size used in the ncs / ncvs has decreased since it was first conducted in the early 1970s .

in june 1984 , the ncs's sample size was cut from the original sample size of 72,000 households to 59,000 households .

additional cuts to the sample size were instituted in 1992 ( a 10% reduction ) , 1996 ( a 12% reduction ) , and 2002 ( a 4% reduction ) .

all decreases in the sample size were done to reduce costs .

even with the ncvs's decreasing sample size , the size of the sample is still much larger than most other surveys conducted in the united states .

however , as one researcher warned , decreases in the sample size can affect the ability of the ncvs data to produce reliable annual measures and changes in annual rates of statistically rare forms of victimization ( such as rape ) .

as the size of the sample decreases , the standard error associated with the estimate of the victimization statistic can increase , which could make it harder to detect statistically significant changes in the annual victimization rates or differences in the victimization rates of two different subgroups of people .

for example , if a decrease in sample size results in an increased standard error for the estimation of assault victimizations , researchers might not be able to determine whether a change in reported assault victimizations reflects an actual change in nationwide assault victimizations or simply statistical variation .

congress may want to consider whether to provide additional funding to bjs to allow it to expand the sample size of the ncvs .

additional funding could allow bjs to expand the sample size to what it was in the 1970s , thereby allowing for more accuracy in estimating national victimization rates .

appendix a .

status of ucr and nibrs reporting , by state appendix b. ucr part i and part ii offenses the fbi collects data on both the number of offenses known to police and the number of arrests made for all part i offenses .

the fbi collects data on the number of arrests made for all part ii offenses .

the offenses listed under the "part i offenses" heading are ranked according to the ucr's hierarchy rule .

part i offenses criminal homicide forcible rape robbery aggravated assault burglary larceny - theft ( except motor vehicle theft ) motor vehicle theft arson part ii offenses other assaults forgery and counterfeiting fraud embezzlement stolen property: buying , receiving , or possessing vandalism weapons: carrying , possessing , etc .

prostitution and commercialized vice sex offenses drug abuse violations gambling offenses against the family and children driving under the influence liquor laws drunkenness disorderly conduct vagrancy all other offenses suspicion curfew and loitering laws ( persons under 18 ) runaways ( persons under 18 ) appendix c. ucr hierarchy of part i offenses 1 .

criminal homicide a .

murder and nonnegligent manslaughter b. manslaughter by negligence 2 .

forcible rape a. rape by force b .

attempts to commit rape by force 3 .

robbery a. firearm b .

knife or cutting instrument c. other dangerous weapon d. strong - arm — hands , fists , feet , etc .

4 .

aggravated assault a. firearm b .

knife or cutting instrument c. other dangerous weapon d. strong - arm — hands , fists , feet , etc .

5 .

burglary a. forcible entry b .

unlawful entry — no force c. attempted forcible entry 6 .

larceny - theft ( except motor vehicle theft ) 7 .

motor vehicle theft a .

autos b .

trucks and buses c. other vehicles 8 .

arson a. - g .

structural h. - i .

mobile j .

other appendix d. nibrs data elements administrative segment 1 .

ori number 2 .

incident number 3 .

incident date / hour 4 .

cleared exceptionally 5 .

exceptional clearance date offense segment [1 .

ori number] [2 .

incident number] 6 .

ucr offense code 7 .

offense attempted / completed 8 .

offender ( s ) suspected of using 8a .

bias motivation 9 .

location type 10 .

number of premises entered 11 .

method of entry 12 .

type of criminal activity / gang information 13 .

type of weapon / force involved property segment [1 .

ori number] [2 .

incident number] 14 .

type property loss / etc .

15 .

property description 16 .

value of property 17 .

date recovered 18 .

number of stolen motor vehicles 19 .

number of recovered motor vehicles 20 .

suspected drug type 21 .

estimated drug quantity 22 .

type drug measurement victim segment [1 .

ori number] [2 .

incident number] 23 .

victim ( sequence ) number 24 .

victim connected to ucr offense code ( s ) 25 .

type of victim 26 .

age ( of victim ) 27 .

sex ( of victim ) 28 .

race ( of victim ) 29 .

ethnicity ( of victim ) 30 .

resident status ( of victim ) 31 .

aggravated assault / homicide circumstances 32 .

additional justifiable homicide circumstances 33 .

type injury 34 .

offender number ( s ) to be related 35 .

relationship ( s ) of victim to offender ( s ) offender segment [1 .

ori number] [2 .

incident number] 36 .

offender ( sequence ) number 37 .

age ( of offender ) 38 .

sex ( of offender ) 39 .

race ( of offender ) arrestee segment [1 .

ori number] [2 .

incident number] 40 .

arrestee ( sequence ) number 41 .

arrest ( transaction ) number 42 .

arrest date 43 .

type of arrest 44 .

multiple arrestee segments indicator 45 .

ucr arrest offense code 46 .

arrestee was armed with 47 .

age ( of arrestee ) 48 .

sex ( of arrestee ) 49 .

race ( of arrestee ) 50 .

ethnicity ( of arrestee ) 51 .

resident status ( of arrestee ) 52 .

disposition of arrestee under 18 appendix e. relationship between nibrs data elements appendix f. nibrs group a and group b offenses group a offenses 1 .

arson 2 .

assault offenses aggravated assault simple assault intimidation 3 .

bribery 4 .

burglary / breaking and entering 5 .

counterfeiting / forgery 6 .

destruction / damage / vandalism of property 7 .

drug / narcotic offenses drug / narcotic violations drug equipment violations 8 .

embezzlement 9 .

extortion / blackmail 10 .

fraud offenses false pretenses / swindle / confidence game credit card / automated teller machine fraud impersonation welfare fraud wire fraud 11 .

gambling offenses betting / wagering operating / promoting / assisting gambling gambling equipment violations sports tampering 12 .

homicide offenses murder and nonnegligent manslaughter negligent manslaughter justifiable homicide 13 .

kidnapping / abduction 14 .

larceny / theft offenses pocket picking purse - snatching shoplifting theft from building theft from coin - operated machine or device theft from motor vehicle theft of motor vehicle parts or accessories all other larceny 15 .

motor vehicle theft 16 .

pornography / obscene materials 17 .

prostitution offenses prostitution assisting or promoting prostitution 18 .

robbery 19 .

sex offenses , forcible forcible rape forcible sodomy sexual assault with an object forcible fondling 20 .

sex offenses , nonforcible incest statutory rape 21 .

stolen property offenses ( receiving , etc. ) .

22 .

weapons laws violations group b offenses 1 .

bad checks 2 .

curfew / loitering / vagrancy violations 3 .

disorderly conduct 4 .

driving under the influence 5 .

drunkenness 6 .

family offenses , nonviolent 7 .

liquor law violations 8 .

peeping tom 9 .

runaway 10 .

trespass of real property 11 .

all other offenses appendix g. ucr offense definitions part i offenses criminal homicide ( a. ) .

murder and nonnegligent manslaughter: the willful ( nonnegligent ) killing of one human being by another .

deaths caused by negligence , attempts to kill , assaults to kill , suicides , and accidental deaths are excluded .

justifiable homicides are classified separately and the definition is limited to: ( 1 ) the killing of a felon by a law enforcement officer in the line of duty ; or ( 2 ) the killing of a felon , during the commission of a felony , by a private citizen .

 ( b. ) .

manslaughter by negligence: the killing of another person through gross negligence .

deaths of persons due to their own negligence , accidental deaths not resulting from gross negligence , and traffic fatalities are not included in the category "manslaughter by negligence. .

forcible rape the carnal knowledge of a female forcibly and against her will .

rapes by force and attempts or assaults to rape , regardless of the age of the victim , are included .

statutory offenses ( no force used — victim under age of consent ) are excluded .

robbery the taking or attempting to take anything of value from the care , custody , or control of a person or persons by force or threat of force or violence and / or by putting the victim in fear .

aggravated assault an unlawful attack by one person upon another for the purpose of inflicting severe or aggravated bodily injury .

this type of assault usually is accompanied by the use of a weapon or by means likely to produce death or great bodily harm .

simple assaults are excluded .

burglary ( breaking or entering ) the unlawful entry of a structure to commit a felony or a theft .

attempted forcible entry is included .

larceny - theft ( except motor vehicle theft ) the unlawful taking , carrying , leading , or riding away of property from the possession or constructive possession of another .

examples are thefts of bicycles , motor vehicle parts and accessories , shoplifting , pocket - picking , or the stealing of any property or article that is not taken by force and violence or by fraud .

attempted larcenies are included .

embezzlement , confidence games , forgery , check fraud , etc .

are excluded .

motor vehicle theft the theft or attempted theft of a motor vehicle .

a motor vehicle is self - propelled and runs on land surface and not on rails .

motorboats , construction equipment , airplanes , and farming equipment are specifically excluded from this category .

arson any willful or malicious burning or attempt to burn , with or without intent to defraud , a dwelling house , public building , motor vehicle or aircraft , personal property of another , etc .

part ii offenses other assaults ( simple ) assaults and attempted assaults which are not of an aggravated nature and do not result in serious injury to the victim .

stalking , intimidation , coercion , and hazing are included .

forgery and counterfeiting the altering , copying , or imitating of something , without authority or right , with the intent to deceive or defraud by passing the copy or thing altered or imitated as that which is original or genuine ; or the selling , buying , or possession of an altered , copied , or imitated thing with the intent to deceive or defraud .

attempts are included .

fraud the intentional perversion of the truth for the purpose of inducing another person or other entity in reliance upon it to part with something of value or to surrender a legal right .

fraudulent conversion and obtaining of money or property by false pretenses .

confidence games and bad checks , except forgeries and counterfeiting , are included .

embezzlement the unlawful misappropriation or misapplication by an offender to his / her own use or purpose of money , property , or some other thing of value entrusted to his / her care , custody , or control .

stolen property: buying , receiving , possessing buying , receiving , possessing , selling , concealing , or transporting any property with the knowledge that it has been unlawfully taken , as by burglary , embezzlement , fraud , larceny , robbery , etc .

attempts are included .

vandalism to willfully or maliciously destroy , injure , disfigure , or deface any public or private property , real or personal , without the consent of the owner or person having custody or control by cutting , tearing , breaking , marking , painting , drawing , covering with filth , or any other such means as may be specified by local law .

attempts are included .

weapons: carrying , possessing , etc the violation of laws or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture , sale , purchase , transportation , possession , concealment , or use of firearms , cutting instruments , explosives , incendiary devices , or other deadly weapons .

attempts are included .

prostitution and commercialized vice the unlawful promotion of or participation in sexual activities for profit , including attempts .

to solicit customers or transport persons for prostitution purposes ; to own , manage , or operate a dwelling or other establishment for the purpose of providing a place where prostitution is performed ; or to otherwise assist or promote prostitution .

sex offenses ( except forcible rape , prostitution , and commercialized vice ) offenses against chastity , common decency , morals , and the like .

incest , indecent exposure , and statutory rape are included .

attempts are included .

drug abuse violations the violation of laws prohibiting the production , distribution , and / or use of certain controlled substances .

the unlawful cultivation , manufacture , distribution , sale , purchase , use , possession , transportation , or importation of any controlled drug or narcotic substance .

arrests for violations of state and local laws , specifically those relating to the unlawful possession , sale , use , growing , manufacturing , and making of narcotic drugs .

the following drug categories are specified: opium or cocaine and their derivatives ( morphine , heroin , codeine ) ; marijuana ; synthetic narcotics — manufactured narcotics that can cause true addiction ( demerol , methadone ) ; and dangerous nonnarcotic drugs ( barbiturates , benzedrine ) .

gambling to unlawfully bet or wager money or something else of value ; assist , promote , or operate a game of chance for money or some other stake ; possess or transmit wagering information ; manufacture , sell , purchase , possess , or transport gambling equipment , devices , or goods ; or tamper with the outcome of a sporting event or contest to gain a gambling advantage .

offenses against the family and children unlawful nonviolent acts by a family member ( or legal guardian ) that threaten the physical , mental , or economic well - being or morals of another family member and that are not classifiable as other offenses , such as assault or sex offenses .

attempts are included .

driving under the influence driving or operating a motor vehicle or common carrier while mentally or physically impaired as the result of consuming an alcoholic beverage or using a drug or narcotic .

liquor laws the violation of state or local laws or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture , sale , purchase , transportation , possession , or use of alcoholic beverages , not including driving under the influence and drunkenness .

federal violations are excluded .

drunkenness to drink alcoholic beverages to the extent that one's mental faculties and physical coordination are substantially impaired .

driving under the influence is excluded .

disorderly conduct any behavior that tends to disturb the public peace or decorum , scandalize the community , or shock the public sense of morality .

vagrancy the violation of a court order , regulation , ordinance , or law requiring the withdrawal of persons from the streets or other specified areas ; prohibiting persons from remaining in an area or place in an idle or aimless manner ; or prohibiting persons from going from place to place without visible means of support .

all other offenses all violations of state or local laws not specifically identified as part i or part ii offenses , except traffic violations .

suspicion arrested for no specific offense and released without formal charges being placed .

curfew and loitering laws ( persons under age 18 ) violations by juveniles of local curfew or loitering ordinances .

runaways ( persons under age 18 ) limited to juveniles taken into protective custody under the provisions of local statutes .

appendix h. nibrs offense definitions group a offenses arson to unlawfully and intentionally damage or attempt to damage any real or personal property by fire or incendiary device .

assault offenses an unlawful attack by one person upon another .

aggravated assault an unlawful attack by one person upon another wherein the offender uses a weapon or displays it in a threatening manner , or the victim suffers obvious severe or aggravated bodily injury involving apparent broken bones , loss of teeth , possible internal injury , severe laceration , or loss of consciousness .

simple assault an unlawful physical attack by one person upon another where neither the offender displays a weapon , nor the victim suffers obvious severe or aggravated bodily injury involving apparent broken bones , loss of teeth , possible internal injury , severe laceration , or loss of consciousness .

intimidation to unlawfully place another person in reasonable fear of bodily harm through the use of threatening words and / or other conduct but without displaying a weapon or subjecting the victim to actual physical attack .

bribery the offering , giving , receiving , or soliciting of anything of value ( i.e. , a bribe , gratuity , or kickback ) to sway the judgment or action of a person in a position of trust or influence .

burglary / breaking and entering the unlawful entry into a building or other structure with the intent to commit a felony or a theft .

counterfeiting / forgery the altering , copying , or imitation of something , without authority or right , with the intent to deceive or defraud by passing the copy or thing altered or imitated as that which is original or genuine or the selling , buying , or possession of an altered , copied , or imitated thing with the intent to deceive or defraud .

destruction / damage / vandalism of property to willfully or maliciously destroy , damage , deface , or otherwise injure real or personal property without the consent of the owner or the person having custody or control of it .

drug / narcotic offenses the violation of laws prohibiting the production , distribution , and / or use of certain controlled substances and the equipment or devices utilized in their preparation and / or use .

drug / narcotic violations the unlawful cultivation , manufacture , distribution , sale , purchase , use , possession , transportation , or importation of any controlled drug or narcotic substance .

drug equipment violations the unlawful manufacture , sale , purchase , possession , or transportation of equipment or devices utilized in preparing and / or using drugs or narcotics .

embezzlement the unlawful misappropriation by an offender to his / her own use or purpose of money , property , or some other thing of value entrusted to his / her care , custody , or control .

extortion / blackmail to unlawfully obtain money , property , or any other thing of value , either tangible or intangible , through the use or threat of force , misuse of authority , threat of criminal prosecution , threat of destruction of reputation or social standing , or through other coercive means .

fraud offenses the intentional perversion of the truth for the purpose of inducing another person or other entity in reliance upon it to part with something of value or to surrender a legal right .

false pretenses / swindle / confidence game the intentional misrepresentation of existing fact or condition or the use of some other deceptive scheme or device to obtain money , goods , or other things of value .

credit card / automated teller machine fraud the unlawful use of a credit ( or debit ) card or automatic teller machine for fraudulent purposes .

impersonation falsely representing one's identity or position and acting in the character or position thus unlawfully assumed to deceive others and thereby gain a profit or advantage , enjoy some right or privilege , or subject another person or entity to an expense , charge , or liability that would not have otherwise been incurred .

welfare fraud the use of deceitful statements , practices , or devices to unlawfully obtain welfare benefits .

wire fraud the use of an electric or electronic communications facility to intentionally transmit a false and / or deceptive message in furtherance of a fraudulent activity .

gambling offenses to unlawfully bet or wager money or something else of value ; assist , promote , or operate a game of chance for money or some other stake ; possess or transmit wagering information ; manufacture , sell , purchase , possess , or transport gambling equipment , devices , or goods ; or tamper with the outcome of a sporting event or contest to gain a gambling advantage .

betting / wagering to unlawfully stake money or something else of value on the happening of an uncertain event or on the ascertainment of a fact in dispute .

operating / promoting / assisting gambling to unlawfully operate , promote , or assist in the operation of a game of chance , lottery , or other gambling activity .

gambling equipment violations to unlawfully manufacture , sell , buy , possess , or transport equipment , devices , and / or goods used for gambling purposes .

sports tampering to unlawfully alter , meddle in , or otherwise interfere with a sporting contest or event for the purpose of gaining a gambling advantage .

homicide offenses the killing of one human being by another .

murder and nonnegligent manslaughter the willful ( nonnegligent ) killing of one human being by another .

negligent manslaughter the killing of another person through negligence .

justifiable homicide ( not a crime ) the killing of a perpetrator of a serious criminal offense by a peace officer in the line of duty , or the killing , during the commission of a serious criminal offense , of the perpetrator by a private individual .

kidnapping / abduction the unlawful seizure , transportation , and / or detention of a person against his / her will or of a minor without the consent of his / her custodial parent ( s ) or legal guardian .

larceny / theft offenses the unlawful taking , carrying , leading , or riding away of property from the possession or constructive possession of another person .

pocket - picking the theft of articles from another person's physical possession by stealth where the victim usually does not become immediately aware of the theft .

purse - snatching the grabbing or snatching of a purse , handbag , etc. , from the physical possession of another person .

shoplifting the theft by someone other than an employee of the victim of goods or merchandise exposed for sale .

theft from building a theft from within a building which is either open to the general public or to which the offender has legal access .

theft from coin - operated machine or device a theft from a machine or device that is operated or activated by the use of coins .

theft from motor vehicle ( except theft of motor vehicle parts or accessories ) the theft of articles from a motor vehicle , locked or unlocked .

theft of motor vehicle parts or accessories the theft of any part or accessory affixed to the interior or exterior of a motor vehicle in a manner which would make the item an attachment of the vehicle or necessary for its operation .

all other larceny all thefts that do not fit any of the definitions of the specific subcategories of larceny / theft listed above .

motor vehicle theft the theft of a motor vehicle .

pornography / obscene material the violation of laws or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture , publishing , sale , purchase , or possession of sexually explicit material ( eg , literature or photographs ) .

prostitution offenses to unlawfully engage in or promote sexual activities for profit .

prostitution to unlawfully engage in sexual relations for profit .

assisting or promoting prostitution to solicit customers or transport persons for prostitution purposes ; to own , manage , or operate a dwelling or other establishment for the purpose of providing a place where prostitution is performed ; or to otherwise assist or promote prostitution .

robbery the taking or attempting to take anything of value under confrontational circumstances from the control , custody , or care of another person by force or threat of force or violence and / or by putting the victim in fear of immediate harm .

sex offenses ( forcible ) any sexual act directed against another person , forcibly and / or against that person's will or not forcibly or against the person's will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent .

forcible rape the carnal knowledge of a person , forcibly and / or against that person's will or not forcibly or against the person's will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent because of his / her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity .

forcible sodomy oral or anal sexual intercourse with another person , forcibly and / or against that person's will or not forcibly or against the person's will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent because of his / her youth or because of his / her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity .

sexual assault with an object to use an object or instrument to unlawfully penetrate , however slightly , the genital or anal opening of the body of another person , forcibly and / or against that person's will or not forcibly or against the person's will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent because of his / her youth or because of his / her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity .

forcible fondling the touching of the private body parts of another person for the purpose of sexual gratification , forcibly and / or against that person's will or not forcibly or against the person's will in instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent because of his / her youth or because of his / her temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity .

sex offenses ( nonforcible ) unlawful , nonforcible sexual intercourse .

incest nonforcible sexual intercourse between persons who are related to each other within the degrees wherein marriage is prohibited by law .

statutory rape nonforcible sexual intercourse with a person who is under the statutory age of consent .

stolen property offenses receiving , buying , selling , possessing , concealing , or transporting any property with the knowledge that it has been unlawfully taken , as by burglary , embezzlement , fraud , larceny , robbery , etc .

weapons laws violations the violation of laws or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture , sale , purchase , transportation , possession , concealment , or use of firearms , cutting instruments , explosives , incendiary devices , or other deadly weapons .

group b offenses bad checks knowingly and intentionally writing and / or negotiating checks drawn against insufficient or nonexistent funds .

curfew / loitering / vagrancy violations the violation of a court order , regulation , ordinance , or law requiring the withdrawal of persons from the streets or other specified areas ; prohibiting persons from remaining in an area or place in an idle or aimless manner ; or prohibiting persons from going from place to place without visible means of support .

disorderly conduct any behavior that tends to disturb the public peace or decorum , scandalize the community , or shock the public sense of morality .

driving under the influence driving or operating a motor vehicle or common carrier while mentally or physically impaired as the result of consuming an alcoholic beverage or using a drug or narcotic .

drunkenness to drink alcoholic beverages to the extent that one's mental faculties and physical coordination are substantially impaired .

family offenses ( nonviolent ) unlawful , nonviolent acts by a family member ( or legal guardian ) that threaten the physical , mental , or economic well - being or morals of another family member and that are not classifiable as other offenses , such as assault , incest , statutory rape , etc .

liquor law violations the violation of laws or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture , sale , purchase , transportation , possession , or use of alcoholic beverages .

peeping tom to secretly look through a window , doorway , keyhole , or other aperture for the purpose of voyeurism .

runaway a person under 18 years of age who has left home without the permission of his / her parent ( s ) or legal guardian .

trespass of real property to unlawfully enter land , a dwelling , or other real property .

all other offenses all crimes that are not group "a" offenses and not included in one of the specifically named group "b" crime categories listed previously .

appendix i .

number of households and persons interviewed for the ncvs , by yea .

