homebuyers who were unable to close on their purchases by the june 30 , 2010 , deadline imposed by the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-92 ) have been granted an additional three months in which to complete their sales and still qualify for the first - time homebuyer tax credit .

on july 2 , 2010 , president obama signed h.r .

5623 ( p.l .

111-198 ) , which was introduced and passed by the house on june 29 , 2010 , and passed in the senate by unanimous consent on june 30 , 2010 .

the law's provisions to extend the homebuyer tax credit mirror those contained in an amendment to h.r .

4213 that was offered by senator reid .

the law only affects those people who would have qualified for the credit if they had completed their purchase before july 1 , 2010 .

this means that before may 1 , 2010 , they must have entered into a binding contract to purchase a residence and that contract must have called for closing before july 1 , 2010 .

those who had such contracts , but were unable to close on the sales by june 30 , 2010 , are allowed to close before october 1 , 2010 , and treat the purchase as if it had occurred before july 1 , 2010 .

the new law modifies a provision of the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-92 ) that extended the eligible dates of purchase to include purchases before may 1 , 2010 , as well as those that were under a binding contract on that date if the contract provided for closing the sale before july 1 , 2010 , and the sale was completed before that date .

previously , there had been no exception that allowed closing after the statutory deadline for the purchase .

the credit was created in 2008 as part of the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) in response to the housing crisis in 2007 and 2008 .

as originally enacted , the credit was available only for purchases made after april 8 , 2008 , and before july 1 , 2009 .

the credit also had two characteristics that made it unlike most other tax credits — it was refundable , and it was repayable ; however , the repayment requirement was subject to certain exceptions .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) modified the first - time homebuyer tax credit for those taxpayers purchasing principal residences in 2009 , increasing the amount of the credit , extending the eligible purchase dates through november 30 , 2009 , and generally eliminating the repayment provision for purchases after 2008 .

in addition to extending the eligible dates of purchase and allowing an additional two months in which to complete the purchase , the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 expanded the statutory definition of "first - time homebuyer" by introducing an exception for those who have owned and used the same residence as their principal residence for any period of five consecutive years during the eight - year period that ends on the date they purchase a subsequent property to use as their principal residence .

these "long - time residents" generally are treated as first - time residents ; however , their credit is capped at $6,500 .

p.l .

111-92 also raised the income limitation for all qualifying purchases , making more buyers eligible to claim the full credit .

however , the law imposed new restrictions on qualifying for the credit .

for purchases after november 6 , 2009 , property costing more than $800,000 is no longer eligible for the credit .

eligible purchasers must be at least 18 years old and cannot be eligible to be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer's tax return .

for all tax returns for calendar year 2009 and later , taxpayers must attach a copy of their settlement statement to their tax returns .

certain members of the military , foreign service , and intelligence communities received special consideration under p.l .

111-92 .

for those who either sold or ceased using their property as their principal residence as a result of official government orders , the repayment requirement was virtually eliminated .

those who served on qualified official extended duty outside the united states for a period of at least 90 days during the period beginning january 1 , 2009 , and ending april 30 , 2010 , may qualify for the credit if they purchase a residence before may 1 , 2011 , or have entered into a binding contract by that date ; if the contract calls for closing before july 1 , 2011 ; and if they close before july 1 , 2011 .

the recent three - month extension for closing provided by p.l .

111-198 does not apply to allow them the credit if they close after june 30 , 2011 , and before october 1 , 2011 .

the credit is called the "first - time homebuyer credit. .

taxpayers must purchase property within a prescribed time period , use the property as their principal residence , and meet the definition of "first - time homebuyer" as provided in the law .

beginning on november 7 , 2009 , some who did not previously meet the statutory definition will qualify for the credit ; however , their credit will be subject to a lower dollar limit .

for purchases after november 6 , 2009 , qualified purchasers must be at least 18 years old and cannot be eligible to be claimed as dependents on any other taxpayer's return .

additionally , taxpayers will not qualify for the credit if the purchase price of the residence is more than $800,000 and it is purchased after november 6 , 2009 .

the credit is calculated as 10% of the residence's purchase price , which is defined as its adjusted basis in the taxpayer's hands on the date of acquisition .

however , the amount of the credit is limited in two ways — by dollar amount and by modified adjusted gross income .

the credit may be claimed on the tax return for the tax year in which the property is purchased .

however , taxpayers may choose to treat the property as if it had been purchased on december 31 of the prior calendar year .

since most individual taxpayers are calendar year taxpayers , this provision generally means that taxpayers may choose to claim their credit on the tax return for the tax year prior to the tax year in which they actually make the purchase .

a taxpayer purchasing an eligible property before filing the prior year's tax return would be able to claim the credit on that year's original return .

if a taxpayer had already filed the prior year's tax return , an amended return could be filed to claim the credit .

taxpayers choosing to claim the credit for their 2009 purchase on their 2008 tax return would still be able to claim up to $8,000 as their credit even though the limit for 2008 purchases is $7,500 .

likewise , long - term residents would be able to claim their credit ( up to $6,500 ) on the tax return for the year prior to the year in which they purchased their subsequent principal residence .

the advantage to claiming the credit on the prior year's tax return is that the credit could produce a refund sooner than if it were claimed on the return for the year of purchase .

in the case of a taxpayer who would otherwise have a balance due on the prior year's return , claiming the credit for that prior year would reduce or eliminate the balance due .

the credit for a purchase after december 31 , 2008 , generally does not have to be repaid , and claiming the credit on the 2008 return would not change this .

taxpayers choosing not to claim the credit for their purchase on their prior year's tax return could still effectively receive their credit before filing their return for the year of purchase .

to do this , they would adjust the amount they pay toward their federal taxes for the remainder of the year .

for taxpayers with wage income , this can be done by filing a new form w - 4 with the employer , increasing withholding allowances to adjust withholdings so that the total withheld for the year is reduced by an amount equal to their anticipated credit .

taxpayers who must pay quarterly estimated taxes can make similar adjustments to their quarterly payments .

however , to avoid a possible penalty on underpayment of estimated taxes , they should adjust the payments equally rather than reducing the payment in early quarters by the entire amount of the credit .

in mid - 2009 , the fha announced a program that would allow homebuyers to "sell" their tax credits and thereby effectively receive the money prior to the purchase so that it could be used toward the down payment , prepaid expenses , and closing costs .

fha - approved entities and federal , state , and local governmental agencies may "purchase" the credits .

a number of state housing finance agencies ( hfas ) are offering short - term loans that can be repaid with the credit when the taxpayer receives it .

some loans may have no interest , and others may have very low interest .

additionally , some may require a monthly payment , but others may be "silent" and require only a lump sum payment when the credit is received .

even those who meet the definition of first - time homebuyer and purchase property to use as a principal residence within the time frame required by the statute may not qualify for the credit .

in some cases , the purchase date of the principal residence will determine whether a particular factor will disqualify the purchaser from taking the credit .

for purchases made in any year , the following taxpayers do not qualify for the credit: non - resident aliens ; those whose home is located outside the united states ; those who inherited their principal residence ; and those who purchased their principal residence from a related party .

those purchasing their residence in 2008 would not qualify for the credit if they financed their new residence with the proceeds of a tax - exempt mortgage revenue bond or if they ( or their spouses ) who also qualified for the first - time homebuyer credit in the district of columbia in the current taxable year or in any prior taxable year .

however , taxpayers who purchase their principal residence after 2008 will still qualify for the credit even if their new residence was financed with the proceeds of tax - exempt mortgage revenue bonds .

additionally , taxpayers purchasing their property after 2008 would be eligible for the § 36 credit even if they had been eligible to claim the d.c. credit in an earlier year .

purchases after 2008 will not be eligible for the d.c. credit if they are eligible for the § 36 credit .

p.l .

111-92 imposed several limitations regarding purchases after november 6 , 2009 .

individuals will not qualify for the credit if they are eligible to be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer's tax return ( whether or not they actually are claimed ) .

taxpayers who are under 18 years old at the time of purchase are not eligible for the credit unless married at that time .

additionally , taxpayers will not be eligible for the credit if their principal residence cost more than $800,000 .

effective for all tax returns for tax years ending after november 6 , 2009 , as a matter of procedure , taxpayers will not be eligible for the credit unless their tax return includes "a properly executed copy of the settlement statement used to complete such purchase" as an attachment to the return .

for credits claimed on the 2009 calendar year tax return , this provision applies to all purchases , including those occurring before november 7 , 2009 .

as enacted by the housing assistance tax act of 2008 , the first - time homebuyer tax credit was essentially a no - interest loan with a 15-year repayment period .

this repayment provision is called "recapture" in the statute .

this is a term that is used for other credits ; however , for those credits recapture generally is required only when the taxpayer ceases to qualify for the credit .

in contrast , for credits based on property purchased in 2008 , the entire amount of the allowed first - time homebuyer credit must be repaid even if the taxpayer continues to live in the property as a principal residence for 30 years .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 modified the recapture requirement so that it more closely resembles the recapture provisions for other credits .

for credits based on property purchased in 2009 , no recapture of the credit is required unless , within 36 months of the purchase date , the taxpayer ceases to use the property as the taxpayer's principal residence .

p.l .

111-92 eliminated the repayment provisions for certain members of the military , foreign service , or intelligence community who cease to use their property in connection with government orders for qualified official extended duty received by either the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse .

taxpayers who receive the first - time homebuyer tax credit are not required to reduce the basis of their residence by the amount of the credit .

this differs from most tax credits , which generally have required taxpayers to reduce the basis of assets on which a credit was based by the amount of the credit .

however , there is no general section of the internal revenue code that requires this basis reduction when claiming a credit .

generally , the sections specific to the credit have a subsection requiring basis reduction .

there is nothing in § 36 that would require an adjustment to basis .

since credits based on 2008 purchases must be repaid , there being no adjustment to basis is harmonious with other tax law — long - term , the taxpayer's investment is the full amount paid for the property .

however , since the post - 2008 credit is generally not repaid by the taxpayer , arguably the taxpayer's actual investment is less than the amount paid for the property , and basis should be reduced to reflect the credit received .

nevertheless , § 36 does not require basis adjustment for these purchases .

it is unclear whether the lack of basis adjustment was intentional or inadvertent .

