on october 16 , 2008 , epa administrator stephen johnson announced his final approval of a more stringent national ambient air quality standard ( naaqs ) for lead .

the publication of the revised standard in the federal register , on november 12 , 2008 , was the final step in a multi - year review process .

when the previous standard for lead was promulgated in 1978 , lead was a widespread air pollutant .

eighty to ninety percent of it was emitted by the nation's automobiles and trucks , a majority of which ran on leaded gasoline .

leaded gasoline was gradually phased out in the 1970s , 1980s , and early 1990s , and both emissions and concentrations of lead in the air plummeted .

emissions fell more than 98% from 1980 to 2007 .

ambient concentrations ( the quantity of lead in the air ) fell by 94% .

as of march 12 , 2008 , only two areas with a combined population of 4,664 people had air that remained in violation of the 1978 lead naaqs .

these developments led some to suggest that there was no longer a need for an ambient air quality standard for lead .

others , including the independent scientific advisory panel that advises epa's administrator , concluded that the 1978 naaqs was far too lenient , that lead in ambient air still poses a threat to public health , and that the naaqs needed to be significantly strengthened as the result of the recent review .

in promulgating a new standard , the administrator agreed with his scientific advisers , lowering the standard to 90% below the 1978 standard and setting new requirements for monitoring .

this report provides background on naaqs , the process used to establish them , the factors leading to the reduction in lead emissions , the proposed and final changes to the lead standard and related monitoring requirements , as well as information regarding the potential effects of the revision .

the reduction of lead emissions is often described as one of the key successes of the clean air act and of the environmental protection agency .

in 1970 , emissions of lead totaled 224,100 tons .

by 2007 , emissions had been reduced more than 99% , to 1,300 tons .

little of that success is attributable to the setting of a naaqs , however .

the agency did not set a naaqs for lead until 1978 ( by which time lead emissions had already declined about 40% ) , and it established the naaqs then only as a result of a lawsuit filed by the natural resources defense council and others .

after promulgating the naaqs , the agency did not identify nonattainment areas until 1991 .

the great bulk of the lead reductions "occurred prior to 1990," according to epa .

so , in general , the reduction of lead in ambient air did not come about as a result of the 1978 naaqs , or in the manner prescribed by title i of the clean air act , wherein nonattainment areas are identified and the states or areas in which they are located submit to epa state implementation plans that identify local and national measures that will be implemented to help such areas reach attainment .

most of the reduction was a side - benefit of other clean air act programs , especially the regulation of emissions from new automobiles , beginning in the 1970s .

in order to meet more stringent requirements for emissions of hydrocarbons , nitrogen oxides , and carbon monoxide , which took effect in 1975 , the auto industry installed catalytic converters on new cars .

gasoline with lead additives would have fouled the catalytic converters , rendering them useless ; so , in anticipation of the converters' widespread adoption , epa mandated the sale of unleaded fuel in the early 1970s , and eventually banned the use of lead in gasoline entirely .

being a metal , lead remains in the environment even though emissions have declined .

thus , although human exposure to lead has declined , it has not done so by as much as the decrease in emissions would suggest .

furthermore , research conducted since the 1970s suggests that lead has significant health impacts at levels well below those previously considered safe .

current sources of emissions include utility and other boilers , leaded fuel still used in some general aviation airplanes , trace lead contaminants in diesel fuel and gasoline , lubricating oil , iron and steel foundries , primary and secondary lead smelters , hazardous waste incinerators , and about 30 smaller categories of sources .

in addition , there continues to be exposure from lead particles in soil or dust re - suspended in the atmosphere as a result of vehicular traffic , construction , agricultural operations , and the wind .

as a result of the review it completed in 2008 , epa decided to deal with the remaining issue of lead in ambient air by both strengthening the lead naaqs and by expanding the network of monitors that are used to measure attainment .

perhaps the two largest issues raised during the lead naaqs review process — whether a naaqs was still needed , and whether the administrator's proposed range of standards reflected the scientific advice he received — have been resolved , with little remaining controversy .

casac and epa staff both concluded that airborne lead still meets the naaqs criteria ( endangerment of public health or welfare , and numerous or diverse sources ) .

rather than support the deletion of lead from the list of criteria pollutants , they concluded that lead in ambient air still poses a threat to public health , that the old naaqs ( established in 1978 ) was far too lenient , and that the 1978 naaqs needed to be significantly strengthened .

the administrator agreed .

a second major issue was whether the proposed range of standards ( as opposed to the final , promulgated version ) was supported by the available science .

the range proposed by the administrator , while substantially stronger than the 1978 standard , would have allowed him to set a final naaqs 50% higher ( i.e. , less stringent ) than the least stringent level recommended by both epa's scientific staff and by the independent casac panel .

given uncertainties in the science ( particularly the estimated correlation between airborne lead and blood lead levels and the uncertainties in the concentration - response functions — i.e. , the effect that changes in blood lead levels have on iq ) , the administrator stated in the may 2008 proposal that his decision would be supported by the science at any point in the proposed range of 0.10 to 0.30 µg / m 3 .

his final choice ( 0.15 µg / m 3 ) fell within the range recommended by epa staff and casac , and , thus , did not provoke controversy .

at that level , the standard was supported by the staff's conclusions , which were themselves based on the review of more than 6,000 scientific studies , and by the unanimous conclusions of the 22-member casac review panel .

there are , of course , some who wanted weaker or stronger standards .

in comments on the proposed range , some commenters expressed disappointment that the administrator did not consider the potential economic impacts in making his choice .

these comments were echoed by the association of battery recyclers ( abr ) , following the administrator's decision: in press reports , an abr representative stated that the new standard "potentially threatens the viability of the lead recycling industry. .

the clean air act does not allow the consideration of costs or economic impacts in the setting of naaqs , however — a point underlined by the supreme court in a unanimous 2001 decision , and repeated by the agency in announcing the final decision .

thus , the administrator appears to have been on firm ground in rejecting economic arguments .

others , including epa's children's health protection advisory committee ( chpac ) , argued for a stronger standard .

chpac cited evidence that lead exposure at low levels poses even greater harm per unit of lead than does exposure at higher levels , and argued that the standard should be set at 0.02 µg / m 3 , almost an order of magnitude below the administrator's final choice .

despite that recommendation , criticism was muted in the wake of the administrator's decision , with most environmental groups expressing support .

a typical reaction was that of dr. john balbus , a member of chpac and the chief health scientist on the staff of the environmental defense fund: "while epa's own analysis justifies an even lower lead standard , this tenfold reduction will go a long way to protecting children most at risk from airborne lead... .

it's refreshing to see the agency follow the science and the advice of its experts in making this decision. .

although the administrator is prohibited from taking costs or economic factors into consideration in setting a naaqs , the agency generally does prepare a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) for information purposes , and to comply with an executive order .

the ria analyzes in detail the costs and benefits of new or revised naaqs standards .

the agency released an ria for the final lead standard as part of the final regulatory package , october 16 , 2008 .

the ria presented a range of both costs and benefits from the new standard , assuming full implementation of control measures in 2016 .

both the cost and benefit ranges were large , and epa stressed that "there are important overall data limitations and uncertainties in these estimates. .

in general , costs and benefits may be understated , because the study developed estimates only for the 17 counties that currently have monitors showing nonattainment .

until new monitors are installed , the agency has no way of estimating how many additional areas will be affected by the standard , but the ria emphasizes that "... there may be many more potential nonattainment areas than have been analyzed in this ria. .

the lead naaqs was less controversial than the recent naaqs decisions on ozone and particulate matter , both of which were challenged in the d.c .

circuit court of appeals ; but , given the importance of its potential health benefits and the uncertainties regarding both the number of areas affected and the means by which areas will reach attainment , implementation of the naaqs may continue to be of interest to the congress .

an immediate issue is the need for additional funds for monitoring and implementation of the naaqs .

epa has requested a substantial increase in its fy2011 budget for state and tribal assistance grants , in order to fund both new monitors and the increased state workload involved in implementing the revised naaqs for lead and other pollutants .

