in his state of the union address on january 28 , 2008 , president bush called upon congress to approve this year pending free trade agreements ( ftas ) negotiated with colombia , panama , and south korea .

he emphasized the importance to u.s. economic growth of opening up new markets overseas and noted how these ftas "will level the playing field" in giving the united states better access to 100 million customers in these three countries .

on january 23 , senator baucus ( chairman of the senate finance committee ) called for the quick conclusion of a new import protocol with south korea ( consistent with internationally recognized guidelines ) providing full access for u.s. beef , regardless of the cut of beef or the age of cattle .

in a letter to u.s. trade representative schwab , he again reiterated that the fta negotiated with korea will not move forward in his committee until such a protocol is in place and u.s. beef sales have resumed .

the senator stated the protocol must clearly outline the criteria u.s. beef producers must meet to sell to the korean market , and must include both a process for handling problems that arise and a mechanism to quickly resolve disputes on administering or interpreting the protocol's terms with minimal trade disruption .

from january 14 to 18 , u.s. trade officials held the eighth formal negotiating round on a bilateral fta with their malaysian counterparts .

press accounts report that the bush administration seeks to conclude a trade agreement by late spring with the intent to present it to congress for approval this summer .

on december 14 , 2007 , president bush signed into law ( p.l .

110-138 ) a measure to implement the fta with peru .

earlier on november 8 , the house passed the united states - peru trade promotion agreement implementation act ( h.r .

3688 ) ; the senate approved it on december 4 .

u.s. farmers and ranchers , agribusiness firms , and food manufacturers view efforts to expand commodity and food exports as vital to improving farm income and business profitability .

for this reason , many u.s. policymakers since the mid - 1980s have viewed negotiating trade agreements as a way to create opportunities to increase agricultural sales overseas , primarily by seeking to lower and / or eliminate other countries' trade barriers ( eg , tariffs and quotas ) .

to accomplish this , the united states has had to reciprocate by lowering similar forms of border protection on farm and food products imported from prospective trading partners .

because of the import sensitivity of some u.s. commodity sectors ( eg , beef , dairy , and sugar , among others ) to the prospect of increased competition from foreign suppliers , the executive branch has had to take the concerns of producers of these commodities into account during negotiations , in order to secure congressional approval of concluded trade agreements .

the 1994 uruguay round agreement on agriculture negotiated under the structure of the multilateral institution that preceded the world trade organization ( wto ) created substantial export opportunities for u.s. agriculture and agribusiness by partially lowering then - existing trade barriers worldwide .

however , the u.s. ftas that took effect with canada in 1989 and with mexico in 1994 ( when both were combined into the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) ) were more ambitious than the uruguay round in reducing barriers to bilateral agricultural trade .

with these two trade agreements setting into motion a process that removed many , or all , forms of border protection by the end of 10 or 15 year transition periods , respectively , canada and mexico became two of the fastest - growing markets for u.s. agricultural exports .

during the period from the mid - 1980s to 2001 , the united states also entered into two other ftas — with israel and jordan ( table 1 , top ) .

since 2002 , the bush administration has pursued a strategy that emphasizes negotiating trade agreements on three fronts — the multilateral , the regional , and the bilateral .

this policy of "competitive trade liberalization" advocates using comprehensive bilateral ftas as leverage to advance u.s. trade objectives in the multilateral wto and regional ( such as the failed hemispheric free trade area of the americas ) trade negotiations , including those objectives laid out for agriculture ( see next section ) .

applying this strategy under trade promotion authority , the bush administration since mid - 2002 initiated fta negotiations with 23 countries , and concluded agreements with 14 of them .

of these , congress has approved eight ftas with 12 countries .

agreements with 10 countries have gone into effect ( table 1 , bottom ) .

ftas with three other countries ( costa rica , oman , and peru ) have been approved by congress but not yet implemented for various reasons .

three ftas await congressional consideration ( colombia , panama , and south korea ) .

negotiations with malaysia are continuing despite the expiration of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , while talks with thailand are suspended ( table 2 ) .

see key steps before an fta can take effect ( below ) for an explanation of the terms used to signify steps from when the decision is made to negotiate through when an fta is fully implemented .

this report looks at developments in u.s. agricultural trade with each current and prospective fta partner , and the issues that came up during negotiations or that are still outstanding .

since mid - 2002 , the bush administration's fta negotiations have been guided by provisions spelled out in tpa authority in support of the overall agricultural negotiating objective: "to obtain competitive opportunities for u.s. agricultural commodities in foreign markets and to achieve fairer and more open conditions of trade in bulk , specialty crop , and value - added commodities. .

other stated u.s. objectives pertinent to negotiating bilateral ftas are: to 'seek to' eliminate 'on the broadest possible basis' tariffs and other charges on agricultural trade ; to 'seek to' eliminate non - tariff barriers to u.s. exports , including licensing barriers on agricultural products , restrictive administration of tariff - rate quotas , unjustified trade restrictions that affect new u.s. technologies ( i.e. , biotechnology ) , and other trade restrictive measures that u.s. exporters identify ; to provide adequate transition periods and relief mechanisms for the u.s. agricultural sector to adjust to increased imports of sensitive products ; to seek to eliminate partner government practices that adversely affect u.s. exports of perishable or cyclical agricultural products ; to eliminate any unjustified sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) restrictions imposed by the prospective partner and seek its affirmation of its wto commitments on sps measures ; and to develop a mechanism with each partner to support the u.s. objective to eliminate all agricultural export subsidies in the wto negotiations .

in the fta negotiations initiated by the bush administration , u.s. officials frequently have affirmed their position that no product or sector should be excluded , particularly when partner negotiators ( in jockeying for leverage ) seek to exclude their sensitive agricultural commodities from coverage in the final agreement .

also , u.s. officials repeatedly have made clear that the issue of u.s. farm support or subsidies , which some countries have sought to place on the fta negotiating table , will only be addressed in the wto multilateral negotiations .

ftas negotiated by the united states are generally comprehensive in scope .

in addition to addressing market access for agricultural and food products , they cover trade in all other goods ( including textiles and apparel ) , improved market access commitments for services and government procurement , protections for investment and intellectual property rights ; and include provisions on dispute settlement , labor , the environment , customs administration , among other matters .

ftas establish a framework for liberalizing trade in agricultural commodities and food products between partners within an agreed - upon time period .

achieving preferential access as much as possible to each other's market is the primary objective in negotiations , with the intent also to secure a competitive edge over third countries that sell into an fta partner's market .

accomplishing this requires that negotiators work to reduce and eventually eliminate tariffs and quotas on most agricultural goods .

because the united states and each prospective fta partner have some agricultural products that benefit from high levels of border protection , negotiators spend much of their time wrestling with how to transition these import - sensitive products towards free trade .

the united states also has sought to address other non - tariff barriers ( particularly those dealing with food safety and animal / plant health — commonly referred to as sps measures ) on a separate , but parallel , track .

though u.s. negotiators assert that resolution of outstanding bilateral sps disputes is not on the formal fta negotiating agenda , press reports point toward negotiators on both sides seeking to resolve such disputes and using them as leverage to achieve other fta negotiating objectives .

further , resolving these disputes is viewed as essential to ensure that fta partners do not resort to using these barriers to undercut the openings created for u.s. exporters in market access talks .

two - way agricultural trade with the 13 countries with which the united states has approved ftas since 2004 and with colombia , panama , and south korea , whose ftas await congressional consideration , could be an estimated 4.1% to 4.3% higher than would occur without these trade agreements .

u.s. agricultural exports would be higher , largely because of the market openings created as most fta partners' high agricultural tariffs and most other border protections are largely eliminated over time .

u.s. agricultural imports would also rise , primarily from australia , chile , and colombia , as u.s. tariffs on farm products of export interest to these countries and quotas on u.s. sensitive agricultural commodities ( except sugar ) are phased out completely .

of the 10 u.s. ftas now in effect , only three have operated for more than 10 years ( those with israel , canada and mexico ) .

except for the jordan fta , six trade agreements have taken effect since 2004 ( table 1 ) .

one - third of total two - way u.s. agricultural trade is accounted for by canada and mexico , largely because of the market openings created by nafta many years ago and both countries' proximity to the u.s. market .

the rate of growth in bilateral agricultural trade with canada and mexico , but not with israel , has been higher compared to the rate of increase in u.s. agricultural trade with the rest of the world during the time period that each agreement has been in effect .

because six ftas are relatively new ( i.e. , with implementation periods of four years or less ) , it is difficult to determine whether the growth in two - way trade is attributable solely to liberalizing trade provisions .

a portion of the increase is also due to growing populations , per capita income growth , and changing diets .

also , u.s. consumers' growing demand for fruits and vegetables would likely have been met in part by imports from these partners , even without these ftas .

the more significant market access provisions gained for u.s. exporters will take time to take effect , with the long transition periods negotiated for sensitive commodities .

a more detailed analysis would be required to correlate changes in commodity trade flows to specific tariff and quota provisions in these ftas .

agriculture as covered by each of the current ftas is examined below in the order each country ranks in its bilateral agricultural trade with the united states ( as shown in table 5 ) .

the next section surveys agriculture with prospective fta partner countries .

the 110 th congress in coming months may consider the ftas concluded with colombia , panama , and south korea under current trade promotion authority , or fast track rules , that limit debate , prohibit amendments to implementing legislation , and require a simple up or down vote .

the fta with south korea would be the most commercially significant for u.s. agriculture since nafta took effect with mexico in 1994 .

though already approved by the united states , the ftas with oman and peru will not take effect until ustr concludes that each country has conformed its laws and regulations to reflect each agreement's commitments .

an early may 2007 agreement between house leadership and the bush administration on a new trade framework added labor , environmental , and other provisions to the three pending ftas and the peru fta .

though this framework is not expected to require changes to these four ftas' agricultural provisions , domestic agricultural groups will be involved in the legislative process to point out that they expect either to benefit or not to benefit from these agreements .

the timing of when congress might consider the pending ftas is uncertain .

the outlook for the colombia fta is clouded by some members' concerns over labor union violence in that country .

while some members of congress want to renegotiate the auto provisions in the korea fta , the south korean government is reluctant to incorporate the new trade framework's labor provisions or reopen the issue of auto access .

the earliest the panama fta might be sent to congress for consideration is early fall , after the term of a controversial legislator alleged to have murdered a u.s. soldier ends .

nevertheless , since early january 2008 , president bush has repeatedly called for the approval of these three ftas , starting with the agreement with colombia .

however , congressional leadership have signaled that taking up these trade agreements is not a priority while other members have raised the concerns mentioned above .

agriculture as covered in each pending ftas is examined below in the order each country ranks in its bilateral agricultural trade with the united states ( as shown in table 6 ) .

fta negotiations with two other countries — thailand and malaysia — did not conclude before the end of march 2007 deadline that would have allowed for congressional consideration under tpa authority .

talks with malaysia are continuing , with many issues ( including some on agriculture ) reportedly still outstanding .

at present , negotiations with thailand likely will not resume , because of significant thai public opposition .

if negotiations on either of these ftas do conclude , congress may consider such an agreement under new tpa provisions ( if and when approved ) .

but the bush administration also could decide to press ahead for congressional consideration without such authority .

this would depend on whether political advisors gauge that the level of opposition to either fta likely will not be overwhelming enough to result in congressional rejection .

agriculture as handled in talks to date is examined below in the order each country ranks in its bilateral agricultural trade with the united states ( as shown in table 6 ) .

most of the recently negotiated ftas will open to varying extents markets for u.s. agriculture in countries with high levels of border protection for their agricultural sectors .

in particular , u.s. agricultural trade with those fta partners that have benefitted from a long period of preferential access to the united states will quickly take on a more reciprocal character .

as their trade barriers to imports of u.s. agricultural products are reduced , u.s. agriculture and agribusiness exporters , where they have a competitive edge over other countries in these markets , will be able to take advantage of sales opportunities .

at the same time , some u.s. commodity sectors will face competition from increased imports under these ftas .

the degree of such competition will be mitigated by negotiated long transition periods and by likely continued growth in u.s. demand for such products due to population growth .

looking ahead , as transition periods to free trade for the more sensitive agricultural products near their end , disputes are likely to arise .

this has been the case under nafta for several agricultural products , as free trade loomed , or actually took effect , and led affected producers in canada , mexico , and the united states to seek relief from the impacts of increased imports .

reflecting this outlook , most u.s. agricultural commodity groups , agribusiness and food manufacturing firms have supported these recently negotiated ftas , looking to benefit from preferential and guaranteed increased access to these markets .

the largest general farm organization — the american farm bureau federation — has supported all of these ftas but did not expect the agreement with australia to result in an overall net gain for u.s. agriculture .

the farm bureau views these trade agreements as the best way to reduce foreign barriers and expand export opportunities or face the prospect of reduced domestic farm production .

the two leading national cattlemen trade organizations have held similar , but at times , differing positions on the beef provisions in certain ftas , in large part due to the different geographic base of their membership .

opposition to ftas has come from those u.s. commodity groups concerned with the impact of increased competition from foreign producers .

the extent of opposition has varied by agreement , depending upon the sensitivity of increased imports from each fta partner , the length of transition periods , and whether special provisions are included to provide some measure of long - term protection .

such groups represent producers and processors of sugar , cotton ( initially with respect to dr - cafta ) , and certain processed vegetables .

another general farm organization — the national farmers union ( nfu ) — opposed dr - cafta .

the nfu views other trade agreements as forcing u.s. producers to compete unequally with farmers from fta partner countries , who have a cost of production advantage because they are not required to meet the same labor and environmental standards .

taking into account this mix of support and opposition to ftas found in the agricultural and related food sectors , u.s. trade negotiators have sought to craft bilateral trade agreements keeping in mind the political realities involved in securing final congressional approval .

it reflects a ustr fta negotiating strategy to limit u.s. trade concessions on u.s. sensitive agricultural commodities in order to minimize opposition in congress on any concluded agreement .

the projections developed to illustrate expected changes to u.s. agricultural exports and imports as these ftas are implemented vary significantly , because of the different analytical approaches used to derive them .

what is common in the simulations developed by the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) and the american farm bureau federation ( afbf ) is that they seek to present what would happen to u.s. agricultural trade under each fta compared to a "baseline" that represents what each expects such trade would be without an agreement .

their approaches , however , differ in the scope of analysis undertaken and in how each handles the timing of full implementation of an fta's agricultural trade liberalization provisions .

these differences , in turn , largely explain the difference in estimates in the change in u.s. agricultural exports and imports attributable just to these agreements ( table 7 ) .

the usitc employs a multi - country and multi - commodity / services sector econometric model to quantify what the broad and sectoral impacts of fta market access provisions would mean for the entire u.s. economy .

the afbf also uses an econometric model , but employs a narrower methodology to examine what only happens to each fta partner's main agricultural commodity sectors as border protection is eliminated .

it then quantifies the resulting demand that would be met with increased agricultural imports from the united states .

another significant difference is that the usitc assumes all fta provisions are fully implemented and its full effects felt immediately ( i.e. , in the first year that an agreement takes effect ) .

in other words , the u.s. economy is no different in this first year from what it is in the baseline — with the same population , resources , and other economic characteristics .

by contrast , the afbf projects the change in an fta partner's agricultural trade with the united states at a point during , or at the end of , long transition periods .

this is derived by looking at the impact of adjustments expected to occur in each country's agricultural sector ( as trade liberalization takes effect over time ) , population growth , and assumed higher economic growth and per capita incomes associated in part because of its fta with the united states .

because usitc analyses do not take into account that the more significant agricultural provisions in an fta are staged in over long periods ( up to 20 to 25 years ) , nor that income levels and population likely will grow over time , its projections probably understate the magnitude of the change in u.s. agricultural exports and imports attributable to these agreements .

the farm bureau's estimates may overstate the magnitude of the projected higher level of u.s. agricultural exports , because of overly optimistic assumptions on the potential future u.s. market share for key agricultural commodities in some fta partner countries .

for more information , please see the following crs products: crs report rl33463 , trade negotiations during the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33743 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) : issues , options , and prospects for renewal , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl31356 , free trade agreements: impact on u.s. trade and implications for u.s. trade policy , by [author name scrubbed .

