since 2007 , at least 19 state legislatures have introduced bills that would require the creation of state do not mail ( dnm ) registries .

although each state's bill is unique , all the bills attempt to curb the delivery of unsolicited advertising mail — often referred to as "junk mail" or "direct mail marketing. .

each bill would permit a resident to submit his or her name and address to a state agency or department , which would compile all the names and addresses into a registry that would then be distributed to direct mail marketers .

marketers who knowingly ignored the registry and sent unsolicited direct mail advertisements to individuals on a state's registry could be charged a fine for each infraction .

this report focuses on the environmental and economic issues associated with state dnm statutes , recognizing that there may be constitutional impediments to their full implementation should they be enacted .

table 1 includes states that have introduced do - not - mail legislation in 2007 and 2008 .

environmental groups , including greendimes , proquo , forestethics , and the new american dream , state that unsolicited mail creates large amounts of paper waste , invades individuals' privacy , renders individuals more susceptible to identity theft and mail fraud , and is a nuisance .

direct mail marketers and the united states postal service ( usps ) , however , state that advertising mail is an extremely successful means for businesses and not - for - profit organizations to communicate with potential customers and donors that causes minimal environmental impact , creates jobs , and adds billions of dollars to the domestic and global economies .

usps estimates that it could lose between $4 billion and $10 billion in annual revenue if every state created a do not mail registry and every consumer placed his or her name on it .

the public's dislike of unsolicited advertising mail may be prompting state legislative initiatives to give consumers a way to opt out of receiving it .

a 2003 pew internet and american life project telephone poll of 2,200 adults found that 19% of respondents thought unsolicited advertising mail was a "very big intrusion" in their own life ; 33% found unsolicited advertising mail a "big intrusion," and 29% said it was a "small intrusion. .

some 17% of respondents found unsolicited advertising mail to be "no intrusion at all. .

private sector organizations and the usps have been increasing efforts to recycle unwanted advertising mail and use certified paper providers .

dma , for example , requires its members to progress toward a "green 15" — 15 business practices "that are well understood to deliver environmental benefits , with sensitivity toward an organization's bottom line. .

included among the guidelines are requirements to "encourage paper suppliers to increase wood purchases from recognized forest certification programs" and "encourage packaging suppliers to submit alternate solutions for environmentally preferable packaging. .

while the dma requires its members to follow the guidelines , it does not have a penalty for those who ignore them .

other organizations , including the national recycling coalition , verso paper , and time , inc. , have joined forces to create the recycling magazines is excellent ( remix ) campaign in five u.s. cities .

the effort , according to a gao report , increased the recycling of magazines and catalogs in one city 19% .

usps generates nearly $7.5 million per year through recycling efforts — recycling about 1 million tons of waste paper per year .

usps also hosts a website http: / / www.usps.com / green / greenmail.htm that includes information on how customers can reduce , reuse , and recycle their mail .

the usps greenmail website includes a link to the dma's mail preference service .

a recent gao report that examined usps recycling efforts stated that the service recently established "annual goals to increase its revenue from mail - related recycling from $7.5 million in fiscal year 2007 to $40 million in fiscal year 2010. .

usps also is increasing recycling efforts related to undeliverable - as - addressed ( uaa ) mail .

according to a gao report , "usps treatment of uaa mail depends on the mail class. .

first class mail is returned to the addressee if a return address is available .

if no return address is available , the item is sent to a usps mail recovery center .

generally , according to gao , all standard mail that is undeliverable — including uaa mail — is treated as waste , most of which is recycled .

nearly 317,000 tons of standard mail was uaa mail in 2006 .

beginning march 2009 , usps will begin using the intelligent mail barcodes to tally the amount of uaa mail created by organizations that send large quantities of mail .

state - level dnm bills inherently generate issues of federalism because such bills could affect the operations and revenue stream of a federal quasi - governmental agency: the usps .

moreover , the bills may raise constitutional questions related to post offices and postal roads as well as the regulation of interstate commerce , powers that the u.s. constitution grants to congress .

the national impact of state - level legislation may be of concern to lawmakers at all levels of government .

efforts to protect both the environment and consumer identity may negatively affect job creation and usps self - sustainability requirements .

existing private - sector efforts that allow a consumer to tailor the solicitations that arrive in his or her mailbox may significantly reduce the amount of unsolicited advertising mail he or she receives .

the mail registries , however , have no authority to fine or otherwise penalize organizations that do not heed the lists .

congress may consider potential legislative options related to reduction of unsolicited advertising mail .

one option would be to seek legislation that is nearly identical to many of the pending state dnm bills .

the bill might specify which agency would manage the dnm registry and / or whether its maintenance could be awarded as a private contract .

direct mail marketers would need to access the list at intervals determined by the legislation .

the bill could also determine the penalties for direct mail marketers who fail to heed the list — or leave that determination to the entity managing the list .

creating such legislation would have costs and benefits .

constituents with concerns about environmental waste or identity theft could sign up for the registry and reduce unsolicited advertising mail from their mailboxes .

organizations that rely on advertising mail for revenue , however , could suffer economic losses that prompt a rise in pricing or lead to the elimination of jobs .

congress may also consider other legislative action to help usps generate revenues to replace those lost , including increasing federal building flexibilities for usps .

current statutes and usps policies place restrictions on renting space in post offices to private vendors like banks and coffee shops .

by allowing usps greater flexibility to rent some of its retail space , the service could collect additional revenue to help close its current budget shortfall and possibly replace revenue that could be lost if state or federal level dnm legislation were passed .

in regard to resource usage concerns , congress may consider policies that would provide mailers with incentives to use environment - sensitive products and methods .

a gao report suggested the creation of a green rate , or "discounted postal rate ... for mailers that use recycled and / or certified paper. .

the report states that "stakeholders in the environmental advocacy industry" suggested the idea , which "would help mailers offset the increased costs associated with using recycled paper and would provide an incentive for mailers to use certified paper. .

a green rate could also be used to reward direct mail marketers who heed existing private do not mail registries .

if marketers demonstrated that they did not contact consumers who opted out of receiving unsolicited marketing , the company could be deemed eligible for the green rate .

additionally , the green rate could also be made available to "demonstrate measurable reductions in the amount of [undeliverable - as - addressed] uaa mail they send" and "use mail materials efficiently. .

gao stated that a green rate could increase usps revenue , but added that usps would have to conduct a variety of "feasibility studies" to ensure that the service had the technology and resources needed to create a new mail class .

usps may need both congressional and postal regulatory commission approval to create a new class of mail .

congress could equally choose to not take any legislative action , but instead provide constituents and governmental entities guidance on how to manage the volume and impact of direct mail .

members could inform constituents of the previously discussed private registries available to manage advertising mail as well as other options that could reduce it .

