nanotechnology has been an issue of interest to congress for a number of years , coming into focus in 2000 with the launch of the u.s. national nanotechnology initiative ( nni ) by president clinton in his fy2001 budget request to congress .

from fy2001 through fy2015 , congress appropriated approximately $20.9 billion for nanotechnology research and development ( r&d ) .

president obama has proposed $1.5 billion in nni funding for fy2016 .

the nni's efforts have been directed at advancing understanding and control of matter at the nanoscale , where the physical , chemical , and biological properties of materials differ in fundamental and useful ways from the properties of individual atoms or bulk matter .

the development and application of nanotechnology — more fully explained below — across a wide array of products and industries holds the potential for significant economic and societal benefits .

to capture these benefits , the united states will have to effectively address a variety of technical and policy challenges that stand as potential barriers to commercialization , including environmental , health , and safety ( ehs ) concerns and their implications for workplace , environmental , food , and drug regulations ; development of standards , reference materials , and consistent nomenclature ; development of new measurement methods and tools ; effective technology transfer to the private sector ; protection of intellectual property ; availability , affordability , and patience of investment capital ; ethical , legal , and societal concerns ; public understanding , support , and acceptance ; and development of a world - class scientific and technical nanotechnology workforce .

this report provides an overview of nanotechnology , the national nanotechnology initiative , possible reauthorization of the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-153 ) , and appropriations issues .

the economic and societal promise of nanotechnology has led to involvement and investments by governments and companies around the world .

in 2000 , the united states became the first nation to establish a formal , national initiative to advance nanoscale science , engineering , and technology — the national nanotechnology initiative .

since then , the united states has emerged as a global leader in nanotechnology .

however , the competition for global leadership is intensifying as foreign investments in nanoscale science , engineering , and technology increase .

other nations have followed the u.s. lead and established their own national nanotechnology programs , each with varying degrees of investment , foci , and support for industrial applications and commercialization .

today , almost every nation that supports research and development ( r&d ) has a national - level nanotechnology program .

in 2014 , lux research , an emerging technologies consulting firm , estimated total ( public and private ) global nanotechnology funding for 2012 to be approximately $18.5 billion .

lux research had previously estimated that in 2010 corporate r&d had surpassed publicly funded r&d for the first time .

global investments in nanotechnology have begun to yield economic benefits as products incorporating nanotechnology enter the marketplace .

nano - enabled products are estimated to have produced $731 billion in revenues in 2012 .

by tapping the unique properties that emerge at the nanoscale , proponents maintain that nanotechnology holds the potential for products that could transform existing industries and create new ones , clean and protect the environment , extend and improve the quality of our lives , and strengthen national security .

most nanotechnology products currently on the market — such as faster computer processors , higher density memory devices , lighter - weight auto parts , more energy - efficient computer and television displays , stain - resistant clothing , antibiotic bandages , cosmetics , and clear sunscreen — are evolutionary in nature , offering incremental improvements in characteristics such as performance , aesthetics , cost , size , and weight .

evolutionary nanotechnology products , however , represent only a small fraction of what many see as the substantial longer - term economic and societal promise of nanotechnology .

a 2014 estimate by lux research projects nanotechnology product revenues would reach $4.4 trillion by 2018 .

many nanotechnology advocates — including business executives , scientists , engineers , medical professionals , and venture capitalists — assert that in the longer term , nanotechnology , especially in combination with information technology , biotechnology , and the cognitive sciences , may deliver revolutionary advances , including new prevention , detection , and treatment technologies that could reduce substantially death and suffering from cancer and other deadly illnesses ; new organs to replace damaged or diseased ones ; contact lenses , skin patches , and glucose - sensing tattoos that monitor diabetics' blood sugar levels and warn when too high or low ; clothing that protects against toxins and pathogens ; clean , inexpensive , renewable power through energy creation , storage , and transmission technologies ; inexpensive , portable water purification systems that provide universal access to safe water ; energy efficient , low - emission "green" manufacturing systems ; high - density memory systems capable of storing the entire library of congress collection on a device the size of a sugar cube ; inexpensive , flexible , durable , low - voltage "electronic skin" sensors that allow robots and prosthetic limbs to detect changes in pressure , humidity , and temperature ; agricultural technologies that increase crop yield and improve nutritional value , reducing global hunger and malnutrition ; self - repairing materials ; powerful , small , inexpensive sensors that can warn of minute levels of toxins and pathogens in air , soil , or water ; and decontaminated industrial sites through environmental remediation .

while some applications of nanotechnology have proven market - ready , much fundamental research remains ahead , including efforts to advance understanding of nanoscale phenomena ; characterize nanoscale materials ; understand how to control and manipulate nanoscale particles ; develop instrumentation and measurement methods ; and understand how nanoscale particles interact with humans , animals , plants , and the environment .

in addition , several federal agencies — such as the departments of defense , energy , and homeland security — see the potential for nanotechnology to help address mission requirements .

historically , the federal government has played a central role in funding these types of r&d activities .

though federal nanoscale science , engineering , and technology r&d had been underway for over a decade , the nni was first initiated as a presidential technology initiative in 2000 .

the original participating agencies were the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , the department of commerce's ( doc ) national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the department of health and human services' national institutes of health ( nih ) .

in 2013 , 27 agencies participate in the nni , including 16 that have received appropriations to conduct and / or fund nanotechnology r&d .

since its first year of funding in fy2001 , the nni's annual appropriations grew four - fold to a peak of $1.9 billion in fy2010 .

since then , however , federal nanotechnology funding has declined , falling to an estimated $1.5 billion in fy2015 .

president obama has requested $1.5 billion in nni funding for fy2016 .

in 2003 , congress provided a statutory foundation for some of the activities of the nni through the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-153 ) .

the act established a national nanotechnology program ( nnp ) and provided authorizations for a subset of the nni agencies , namely the nsf , doe , nasa , nist , and environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

the act , however , did not address the participation of several agencies that fund nanotechnology r&d under the nni , including dod , nih , and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

nevertheless , coordination of nanotechnology r&d activities across all nni funding agencies continues under the national science and technology council's ( nstc's ) nanoscale science , engineering , and technology ( nset ) subcommittee .

according to the nset subcommittee's 2004 nni strategic plan , "for continuity and to capture this broader participation , the coordinated federal activities as a whole will continue to be referred to as the national nanotechnology initiative. .

accordingly , the functions and activities established under the act are incorporated into the executive branch's implementation of the nni .

the thrust of the nni has primarily been the development of fundamental scientific knowledge through basic research .

investments at mission agencies , such as dod , have supported nanotechnology applications development for which they are a primary customer .

other investments have supported infrastructural technologies .

for example , nist has contributed to developing tools and standards that enable measurement and control of matter at the nanoscale , thereby supporting the conduct of r&d and the ability to manufacture nanoscale materials and products .

as understanding of nanotechnology has matured , the nni has worked with a variety of industry organizations to facilitate the movement of research results from the laboratory bench to the marketplace in fields as disparate as semiconductors , energy , concrete , and forest products .

the nni agencies also have sought to address research needs and regulatory issues related to environmental , health , and safety , as well as issues such as public understanding and workforce education and training .

the nni agencies actively engage in a variety of international fora , such as the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) and the international standards organization ( iso ) , to cooperatively address nanotechnology issues related to ehs , metrology and standards , nomenclature , and nanoscale materials characterization .

maintaining u.s. leadership poses a variety of technical , economic , and policy challenges , including safeguarding the environment and ensuring human health and safety ; creating the standards , reference materials , nomenclature , methods , and tools for metrology to enable the manufacturing of nanoscale materials and products ; developing a world - class scientific and technical nanotechnology workforce ; translating research results into products , including effective technology transfer to the private sector ; understanding public perceptions and attitudes and fostering public understanding ; addressing ethical , legal , and societal implications ; protecting intellectual property ; securing investment capital for early - stage research , development , and commercialization ; and fostering and facilitating international cooperation and coordination .

proponents of the nni assert that nanotechnology is one of the most important emerging and enabling technologies and that u.s. competitiveness , technological leadership , national security , and societal interests require an aggressive approach to the development and commercialization of nanotechnology .

critics of the nni hold a variety of competing views , asserting that government is not doing enough , is doing too much , or is moving too quickly .

some in industry have criticized the nni for being overly focused on basic research and not being aggressive enough in moving nni - funded r&d out of government and university laboratories and into industry .

others in industry have criticized the federal government for not providing mechanisms to help advance nanotechnology r&d to the point where it becomes economically viable for venture capitalists , corporations , and other investors to create products and bring them to market .

some refer to this gap as the "valley of death. .

still others in industry have criticized the nni for not adequately supporting the development of metrology , standards , equipment , and processes necessary to manufacture nanotechnology materials , products , and systems at a commercial scale .

conversely , some supporters of industry - driven market investments contend that extensive government support for nanotechnology may supplant the judgment of the marketplace by picking "winners and losers" in technological development .

for example , the size and directions of the nni investments may encourage industry to follow the government's lead rather than independently selecting r&d directions itself or , alternatively , may result in the promotion of a less effective technology path over a more effective one .

others assert that federal government funding of scientific research is often wasteful , driven by political considerations and not scientific merit .

some non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) are critical of nanotechnology for its potential adverse impacts on human health and safety and on the environment .

they assert that the government is pushing ahead too quickly in developing nanotechnology and encouraging its commercialization and use without adequately investing in research focused on understanding and mitigating negative ehs implications .

they argue that the very characteristics that make nanotechnology promising also present significant potential risks to human health and safety and the environment .

some of these critics argue for application of the "precautionary principle," which holds that regulatory action may be required to control potentially hazardous substances even before a causal link has been established by scientific evidence .

at least one ngo has called for a moratorium on nanotechnology r&d and new commercial products incorporating synthetic nanoparticles .

in 2014 , the european parliament committee on the environment , public health , and food safety voted to adopt a draft report that "proposed a moratorium on the use of nanomaterials in food , based on the precautionary principle. .

the national nanotechnology initiative is an interagency program that coordinates federal nanoscale science , engineering , and technology r&d activities and related efforts among participating agencies .

the 21 st century nanotechnology r&d act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-153 ) requires periodic external reviews of the national nanotechnology program ( nnp ) by the national research council ( nrc ) of the national academy of sciences ( nas ) , and by the national nanotechnology advisory panel ( nnap ) , directing the president to "establish or designate a national nanotechnology advisory panel. .

both president obama and president bush issued executive orders designating the president's council of advisors on science and technology to serve as the nnap .

references to pcast in this section refer to the council operating in its capacity as the nnap .

under the act , the nnap is to report to the president and congress on its assessments of the nnp at least once every two years on a variety of factors , including trends and developments in nanotechnology science and engineering ; progress made in implementing the nnp ; the need to revise the program ; the balance among the program components , including funding levels for the program component areas ; whether the program component areas , priorities , and technical goals developed by the nstc are helping to maintain u.s. leadership in nanotechnology ; the management , coordination , implementation , and activities of the program ; and whether societal , ethical , legal , environmental , and workforce concerns are adequately being addressed .

in addition , the act directs the nnco to enter into an arrangement with nrc to conduct a triennial review of the program .

each review is to include an evaluation of the technical accomplishments of the program , including the following: a review of whether the program has achieved the goals under the metrics established by the nstc ; a review of the program's management and coordination across agencies and disciplines ; a review of the funding levels at each agency for the program's activities and the ability of each agency to achieve the program's stated goals with that funding ; an evaluation of the program's success in transferring technology to the private sector ; an evaluation of whether the program has been successful in fostering interdisciplinary research and development ; an evaluation of the extent to which the program has adequately considered ethical , legal , environmental , and other appropriate societal concerns ; recommendations for new or revised program goals ; recommendations for new research areas , partnerships , coordination and management mechanisms , or programs to be established to achieve the program's stated goals ; recommendations on policy , program , and budget changes with respect to nanotechnology research and development activities ; recommendations for improved metrics to evaluate the success of the program in accomplishing its stated goals ; a review of the performance of the nnco and its efforts to promote access to and early application of the technologies , innovations , and expertise derived from program activities to agency missions and systems across the federal government and to u.s. industry ; an analysis of the relative position of the united states compared to other nations with respect to nanotechnology r&d , including the identification of any critical research areas where the united states should be the world leader to best achieve the goals of the program ; and an analysis of the current impact of nanotechnology on the u.s. economy and recommendations for increasing its future impact .

the pcast has produced five assessments of the nni and the nrc has produced two .

the assessment reports are: the national nanotechnology initiative at five years: assessment and recommendations of the national nanotechnology advisory panel , nnap / pcast , may 2005 ( hereinafter referred to as " first assessment " ) .

a matter of size: triennial review of the national nanotechnology initiative , nas / nrc , 2006 .

the national nanotechnology initiative: second assessment and recommendations of the national nanotechnology advisory panel , nnap / pcast , april 2008 ( hereinafter referred to as " second assessment " ) .report to the president and congress on the third assessment of the national nanotechnology initiative , nnap / pcast , march 2010 , ( hereinafter referred to as " third assessment " ) .

report to the president and congress on the fourth assessment of the national nanotechnology initiative , nnap / pcast , april 2012 ( hereinafter referred to as " fourth assessment " ) .

triennial review of the national nanotechnology initiative , nrc , 2013 .

report to the president and congress on the fifth assessment of the national nanotechnology initiative , nnap / pcast , october 2014 ( hereinafter referred to as " fifth assessment " ) .

highlights of recommendations included in the fifth assessment are provided below , followed by selected findings and recommendations of each of the assessments grouped by broad issue area .

many expect nanotechnology to bring significant economic and societal returns .

the united states was the first government to launch a national - level nanotechnology program and has invested more than any other nation .

many experts believe that , as a result of this focus and these sustained investments , the united states enjoys a technological leadership position in nanotechnology .

other nations are investing heavily and some industrialized and emerging economies have formidable capabilities in nanotechnology .

assessments of the national nanotechnology initiative have concluded that the effort is well - managed and has been successful in achieving its objectives so far .

however , these assessments have recognized that the nni faces a variety of challenges in ensuring that the full promise of nanotechnology is realized and that the united states remains the global leader in nanoscale science , engineering , and technology .

congress may choose to address some or many of the issues identified in the body of this report in the course of deliberation on the reauthorization of the 21 st century nanotechnology r&d act of 2003 or , alternatively , in separate legislation .

the 21 st century nanotechnology r&d act's funding authorizations extended through fy2008 .

the 109 th congress , 110 th congress , 111 th congress , and 113 th congress considered legislation to reauthorize the program .

if the 114 th congress opts to consider reauthorization of the act , some of the issues it may wish to consider include budget authorization levels for the covered agencies ; r&d funding levels , priorities , and balance across the program component areas ; administration and management of the nni ; translation of research results and early - stage technology into commercially viable applications ; environmental , health , and safety issues ; ethical , legal , and societal implications ; education and training for the nanotechnology workforce ; metrology , standards , and nomenclature ; public understanding ; and international dimensions .

consideration may also be given to the establishment of an independent review panel and to coordination of the timing for the nnap assessment , the nrc assessment , and the nset subcommittee's strategic plan for the nni .

selected nanotechnology legislation in the 114 th , 113 th , 112 th , and 111 th congresses h.r .

1898 ( 114 th congress ) — america comp etes reauthorization act of 2015 h.r .

1898 , the america competes reauthorization act of 2015 , was introduced on april 21 , 2015 , and referred to the house committee on science , space , and technology and the house committee on education and the workforce .

in august 2015 , the house committee on science , space , and technology referred the bill to the subcommittee on research and technology .

no further action had been taken as of the date of this report .

the provisions of the bill's nanotechnology subtitle — which are nearly identical to those included in h.r .

4159 ( 113 th congress ) — include the following: the national science and technology council would be required to publish a strategic plan every three years to guide the activities of the nni .

the strategic plan is required to include near - term and long - term objectives for the nni , the anticipated timeframe for achieving the near - term objectives , and the metrics to be used for assessing progress toward the objectives .

federal agencies would be directed to support nanotechnology standards development efforts .

funding for the national nanotechnology coordination office would be provided by each nni agency in proportion to its share of total nni funding for the previous fiscal year ; the director of the nnco would be authorized to establish a minimum contribution level or other exception for agencies whose share of total funding is below a threshold level .

the nnco would be required to maintain ( 1 ) a publicly accessible database of nni - funded environmental , health , and safety ( ehs ) activities ; and ( 2 ) links to agency information on nanotechnology facilities that are accessible to individuals from academic institutions and industry .

the national nanotechnology advisory panel would be required to produce triennial reviews of the nni , and to do so , to the extent practicable , in the year following each review by the national research council .

the director of the nnco would be required to enter into an arrangement with the national research council of the national academies of sciences to produce a triennial report on the nni , including an evaluation of research priorities , technical content , scientific and technological accomplishments , success in technology transfer , and adequacy of the nni's activities addressing ethical , legal , environmental , and other appropriate societal concerns , including human health .

the director of the president's office of science and technology policy would be required to designate a coordinator for environmental , health , and safety research to provide oversight of coordination , planning , and budget prioritization of research and other activities related to nanotechnology ehs research .

the coordinator would be required to develop and update a research plan triennially .

nset agencies would be encouraged to introduce nanoscale science , engineering , and technology into undergraduate science and engineering education by supporting the development of courses of instruction or modules to existing courses , faculty professional development , and acquisition of equipment and instrumentation suitable for undergraduate education and research in nanotechnology .

these educational efforts would be coordinated by the nset subcommittee and the nstc committee on science , technology , engineering , and math education ( costem ) .

any nanotechnology educational activity supported under the nni's education and societal dimensions program component area would be required to include an educational component on the ehs aspects of nanotechnology .

agencies supporting nanotechnology research would be required to provide remote access to their facilities via the internet by secondary school students and teachers .

agencies supporting nanotechnology research would be required to provide access to their nanotechnology research facilities to companies for the purpose of assisting the companies in the development of prototypes of nanoscale products , devices , or processes for determining proof - of - concept .

the nni would be directed to support signature initiatives — nanotechnology research and development activities directed toward application areas that have the potential for significant contributions to national economic competitiveness and for other significant societal benefits .

the nni would be directed to support nanomanufacturing research , including the development of instrumentation and tools required for the rapid characterization of nanoscale materials and for monitoring of nanoscale manufacturing processes , and approaches and techniques for scaling the synthesis of new nanoscale materials to achieve industrial - level production rates .

certain nni centers would be directed to support "green manufacturing" activities , including research on methods and approaches to develop environmentally benign nanoscale products and nanoscale manufacturing processes , fostering the transfer of research results to industry , and providing for the education of scientists and engineers through interdisciplinary studies in the principles and techniques for the design and development of environmentally benign nanoscale products and processes .

s. 2757 ( 113 th congress ) — america competes reauthorization act of 2014 s. 2757 , the america competes reauthorization act of 2014 , was introduced on july 31 , 2014 , and referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

the national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2014 is included as subtitle b of title vi of the bill .

among the provisions of the bill's nanotechnology subtitle: the national science and technology council would be directed to establish nanotechnology signature initiatives in focused areas of national importance .

the nstc would be required to produce a strategic plan at least once every four years .

the strategic plan would specify the overarching goals for the program ; near - term and long - term objectives ; and the metrics to be used for assessing progress toward such objectives .

in addition , the strategic plan would describe how the program intends to allocate funding for interagency nanotechnology projects ; encourage and support interdisciplinary research and development in nanotechnology ; and support the engineering , scale - up , and commercialization of nanotechnology necessary to move results out of the laboratory and into applications .

the federal multi - agency nanotechnology effort would be officially designated as the "national nanotechnology initiative. .

the director of ostp would be required to appoint the nnco director to serve as a co - chair of the nset subcommittee of the nstc .

the national nanotechnology advisory panel ( currently pcast , as designated by the president ) would be required to conduct reviews at least once every four years .

the nnco would be required to engage the national academy of sciences in a review of the program every four years .

the review is to include a review of the research priorities of the program , including whether the amount and allocation of funding among program component areas and nanotechnology signature initiatives is appropriate to accomplish the program's goals and objectives ; an evaluation of the program's management and coordination across agencies and disciplines , including the effectiveness of the nnco in providing technical and administrative support to the program ; and an assessment of the program's success in transferring technology to the private sector and recommendations for improving technology demonstration , transfer , and commercialization .

with respect to technology transfer , the nnco director and nni agencies would be encouraged to inform the public about the science , technology , and benefits of nanotechnology ; and the commercial products enabled by nanotechnology .

nni agencies would be encouraged to provide access to federally owned or operated nanotechnology research centers or designated user facilities to a representative of industry , academia , or other potential user for the purpose of transferring research results ; demonstrating models of nanoscale - or nanotechnology - enabled products or devices ; or demonstrative processes for determining proof of concept .

agency heads would be authorized to reimburse the travel expenses of an employee of the agency who participates in the development of domestic and international standards for nanotechnology .

the nnco would serve as a central repository to collect , track , analyze , and report data regarding the impact of nanotechnology on the u.s. economy ; publications concerning nanotechnology ; patents relating to nanotechnology ; educational activities relating to nanotechnology ; and matters concerning the u.s. workforce and nanotechnology .

the nsf in cooperation with the secretary of education and secretary of labor , working with the nnco , would be required to evaluate the investments of the nni in education and workforce training in a report to congress .

the council , working with the nnco director , would be required to periodically convene meetings for nanotechnology related centers , networks , and user facilities to share best practices regarding strategic planning , intellectual property management , outreach to industry ; and technology demonstration , transfer , and commercialization .

congress also would express its sense that the nstc should coordinate development by the nni agencies of performance measures , targets , timeframes , cost estimates and available resources for nanotechnology environment , health , and safety research that align with the research needs of the nni , consistent with the agencies' respective statutory authorities , and to provide the information in publicly available reports .

h.r .

4159 ( 113 th congress ) — america competes reauthorization act of 2014 ( including subtitle b , the national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2014 ) h.r .

4159 ( 113 th congress ) , the america competes reauthorization act of 2014 , was introduced on march 6 , 2014 , and referred to the committee on science , space , and technology and the committee on higher education and the workforce .

the national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2014 is included as subtitle b of title i of the bill .

among the provisions of the bill's nanotechnology subtitle: the national science and technology council would be required to publish a strategic plan every three years to guide the activities of the nni .

the strategic plan is required to include near - term and long - term objectives for the nni , the anticipated timeframe for achieving the near - term objectives , and the metrics to be used for assessing progress toward the objectives .

federal agencies would be directed to support nanotechnology standards development efforts .

funding for the national nanotechnology coordination office would be provided by each nni agency in proportion to its share of total nni funding for the previous fiscal year ; the director of the nnco would be authorized to establish a minimum contribution level or other exception for agencies whose share of total funding is below a threshold level .

the nnco would be required to maintain ( 1 ) a publicly accessible database of nni - funded environmental , health , and safety ( ehs ) activities ( 2 ) links to agency information on nanotechnology facilities that are accessible to individuals from academic institutions and industry .

the national nanotechnology advisory panel would be required to produce triennial reviews of the nni , and to do so , to the extent practicable , in the year following each review by the national research council .

the director of the nnco would be required to enter into an arrangement with the national research council of the national academies of sciences to produce a triennial report on the nni , including an evaluation of research priorities , technical content , scientific and technological accomplishments , success in technology transfer , and adequacy of the nni's activities addressing ethical , legal , environmental , and other appropriate societal concerns , including human health .

the director of the president's office of science and technology policy would be required to designate a coordinator for environmental , health , and safety research to provide oversight of coordination , planning , and budget prioritization of research and other activities related to nanotechnology ehs research .

the coordinator would be required to develop and update a research plan triennially .

nset agencies would be encouraged to introduce nanoscale science , engineering , and technology into undergraduate science and engineering education by supporting the development of courses of instruction or modules to existing courses , faculty professional development , and acquisition of equipment and instrumentation suitable for undergraduate education and research in nanotechnology .

these educational efforts would be coordinated by the nset subcommittee and the nstc committee on science , technology , engineering , and math education ( costem ) .

any nanotechnology educational activity supported under the nni's education and societal dimensions program component area would be required to include an educational component on the ehs aspects of nanotechnology .

agencies supporting nanotechnology research would be required to provide remote access to their facilities via the internet by secondary school students and teachers .

agencies supporting nanotechnology research would be required to provide access to their nanotechnology research facilities to companies for the purpose of assisting the companies in the development of prototypes of nanoscale products , devices , or processes for determining proof - of - concept .

the nni would be directed to support signature initiatives — nanotechnology research and development activities directed toward application areas that have the potential for significant contributions to national economic competitiveness and for other significant societal benefits .

the nni would be directed to support nanomanufacturing research , including the development of instrumentation and tools required for the rapid characterization of nanoscale materials and for monitoring of nanoscale manufacturing processes , and approaches and techniques for scaling the synthesis of new nanoscale materials to achieve industrial - level production rates .

certain nni centers would be directed to support "green manufacturing" activities , including research on methods and approaches to develop environmentally benign nanoscale products and nanoscale manufacturing processes , fostering the transfer of research results to industry , and providing for the education of scientists and engineers through interdisciplinary studies in the principles and techniques for the design and development of environmentally benign nanoscale products and processes .

h.r .

2996 ( 113 th congress ) — revitalize american manufacturing and innovation act of 2014 h.r .

2996 , the revitalize american manufacturing and innovation act of 2014 , was introduced on august 2 , 2014 , reported by the house committee on science , space , and technology on september 15 , 2014 , and passed by the house by voice vote on september 15 , 2014 .

the primary purpose of the bill is to establish a network for manufacturing innovation program .

centers with a nanotechnology focus would qualify under the bill as a "center for manufacturing innovation. .

h.r .

1385 ( 113 th congress ) — safe cosmetics and personal care products act of 2013 h.r .

1385 , the safe cosmetics and personal care products act of 2013 , was introduced on march 21 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on energy and commerce and the committee on education and the workforce .

the nanotechnology - related provisions of this bill are essentially identical to those included in both h.r .

2359 ( 112 th congress ) and h.r .

5786 ( 111 th congress ) .

among its provisions are several related to nanotechnology .

under the bill , the secretary of hhs would be authorized to require that minerals and other particulate ingredients be labeled as "nano - scale" on a cosmetic ingredient label or list if not less than 1% of the ingredient particles in the cosmetic are 100 nanometers or smaller in not less than 1 dimension , and that other ingredients in a cosmetic be designated with scale - specific information on a cosmetic ingredient label or list if such ingredients possess scale - specific hazard properties .

the bill would also require the secretary of hhs to monitor developments in the scientific understanding of any adverse health effects related to the use of nanotechnology in the formulation of cosmetics and to consider scale specific hazard properties of ingredients when reviewing or evaluating the safety of cosmetics and ingredients .

in addition , the bill would require manufacturers to submit to the secretary a statement for each cosmetic that includes an ingredient list , including the particle size range of any nanoscale cosmetic ingredients .

h.r .

394 ( 113 th congress ) — nanotechnology advancement and new opportunities act h.r .

394 , the nanotechnology advancement and new opportunities act , was introduced on january 23 , 2013 , and subsequently referred to the house committee on science , space , and technology , and to the committees on energy and commerce , ways and means , and homeland security .

the purpose of the bill is to ensure the development and responsible stewardship of nanotechnology .

the provisions of this bill are essentially identical to those in both h.r .

2749 ( 112 th congress ) and h.r .

820 ( 111 th congress ) .

the bill would establish a $100 million nanomanufacturing investment partnership at the department of commerce to work with private investors to advance the commercialization of nanomanufacturing technologies and to increase the commercial application of federally supported research results ; establish a 15% tax credit , taken over five years , for the purchase of up to $10 million of stock in qualified nanotechnology companies ; establish a grant program within the doc to support the establishment and development of nanotechnology incubators by non - profit entities and degree - granting institutions ; require the nnco director to prepare a report to congress on a nanotechnology research strategy for government and industry that will ensure the development and responsible stewardship of nanotechnology ; provide a tax credit of 50% for nanotechnology education and training expenses for businesses and individuals ; authorize an annual appropriation of $15 million for fy2012 through fy2015 for the nsf to conduct a grant program for the development of curriculum materials for interdisciplinary nanotechnology courses at institutions of higher education ; direct the nsf to establish , through its advanced technological education program , a program to encourage manufacturing companies to enter into partnerships with occupational training centers for the development of training to support nanomanufacturing ; and direct the secretary of energy to submit a report to congress containing a strategy for increasing interaction among scientists and engineers at doe national laboratories and the informal science education community to prepare appropriate exhibits for school age children and the general public .

in addition , the bill would have amended the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act of 2003 to authorize $10 million for nsf to establish a center for the development of computer - aided design tools for nanotechnology applications ; authorize an annual appropriation of $30 million for the department of energy to conduct a grant program for nanotechnology research to address the need for "clean , cheap , renewable energy" ; authorize an annual appropriation of $30 million for the environmental protection agency for a grant program for nanotechnology research to address technologies for the remediation of pollution and other environmental protection technologies ; authorize an annual appropriation of $30 million for the department of homeland security to conduct a grant program for nanotechnology research to address the need for sensors and materials related to homeland security needs ; and authorize an annual appropriation of $30 million for the department of health and human services to conduct a grant program for nanotechnology research to address health - related applications .

s. 3187 / p.l .

112-144 ( 112 th congress ) — food and drug administration safety and innovation act s. 3187 , the food and drug administration safety and innovation act , was introduced may 15 , 2012 , and became law ( p.l .

112-144 ) on july 9 , 2012 .

among its provisions , p.l .

112-144 directs the secretary of health and human services to intensify and expand activities related to enhancing scientific knowledge regarding nanomaterials included or intended for inclusion in products regulated under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act or other statutes administered by the food and drug administration , to address issues relevant to the regulation of those products , including the potential toxicology of such nanomaterials , the potential benefit of new therapies derived from nanotechnology , the effects of such nanomaterials on biological systems , and the interaction of such nanomaterials with biological systems .

in this regard , the hhs secretary is authorized to ( 1 ) assess scientific literature and data on general nanomaterials interactions with biological systems and on specific nanomaterials of concern to the food and drug administration ; ( 2 ) in cooperation with other federal agencies , develop and organize information using databases and models that will facilitate the identification of generalized principles characteristics regarding the behavior of classes of nanomaterials with biological systems ; ( 3 ) promote food and drug administration programs and participate in collaborative efforts , to further the understanding of the science of novel properties of nanomaterials that might contribute to toxicity ; ( 4 ) promote and participate in collaborative efforts to further the understanding of measurement and detection methods for nanomaterials ; ( 5 ) collect , synthesize , interpret , and disseminate scientific information and data related to the interactions of nanomaterials with biological systems ; ( 6 ) build scientific expertise on nanomaterials within the food and drug administration , including field and laboratory expertise , for monitoring the production and presence of nanomaterials in domestic and imported products regulated under this act ; ( 7 ) ensure ongoing training , as well as dissemination of new information within the centers of the food and drug administration , and more broadly across the food and drug administration , to ensure timely , informed consideration of the most current science pertaining to nanomaterials ; ( 8 ) encourage the food and drug administration to participate in international and national consensus standards activities pertaining to nanomaterials ; and ( 9 ) carry out other activities that the secretary determines are necessary and consistent with the purposes described in paragraphs ( 1 ) through ( 8 ) .

s. 1662 ( 112 th congress ) — nanotechnology regulatory science act of 2011 s. 1662 , the nanotechnology regulatory science act of 2011 , was introduced on october 6 , 2011 , and referred to the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

the bill would have amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) to require the secretary of health and human services to establish within the food and drug administration a program for the scientific investigation of nanomaterials included or intended for inclusion in products regulated under the ffdca to address the potential toxicology of such materials ; the effects of such materials on biological systems ; and the interaction of such materials with biological systems .

h.r .

2749 ( 112 th congress ) — nanotechnology advancement and new opportunities act h.r .

820 ( 111 th congress ) , the nanotechnology advancement and new opportunities act , was introduced on february 3 , 2009 , and referred to four house committees: the committee on science and technology , the committee on energy and commerce , the committee on ways and means , and the committee on homeland security .

the purpose of the bill was to ensure the development and responsible stewardship of nanotechnology .

the provisions of this bill are essentially identical to those of h.r .

394 , introduced in the 113 th congress ( described above ) .

h.r .

2359 ( 112 th congress ) — safe cosmetics act of 2011 h.r .

2359 , the safe cosmetics act of 2011 , was introduced on june 24 , 2011 , and referred to two house committees: the committee on energy and commerce and the committee on education and the workforce .

the nanotechnology - related provisions of this bill are essentially identical to those of h.r .

1385 , introduced in the 113 th congress ( described above ) .

s. 1867 ( 112 th congress ) — national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 s. 1867 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 , was introduced on november 11 , 2011 , and passed by the senate on december 1 , 2011 .

section 5501 of the bill would have expanded the research topics given special consideration under the sbir and sttr programs to include rare diseases , security , energy , transportation , or improving the security and quality of the water supply of the united states , and the efficiency of water delivery systems and usage patterns in the united states ( including the territories of the united states ) through the use of technology ( to the extent that the projects relate to the mission of the federal agency ) , broad research topics , and topics that further one or more critical technologies or research priorities ; research topics identified in the nni's strategic plan ( required under section 2 ( c ) ( 4 ) of the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act ) ; and in any report of the national science and technology committee's committee on technology focused on areas of nanotechnology identified in the strategic plan .

s. 493 ( 112 th congress ) — sbir / s ttr reauthorization act of 2011 s. 493 , the sbir / sttr reauthorization act of 2011 , was introduced in the senate on march 4 , 2011 , and referred to the committee on small business and entrepreneurship .

the bill was reported with amendments but without a written report on march 9 , 2011 .

on may 4 , 2011 , a cloture motion on the bill failed .

as part of the larger purpose of reauthorizing the sbir and sttr programs , s. 493 would have required agencies with sbir and sttr programs to give consideration to research topics identified in the nset subcommittee's national nanotechnology strategic plan mandated by p.l .

108-153 and related documents , and to give special priority to applications for the support of projects related to nanotechnology and other specified fields of application .

section 501 ( research topics and program diversification ) of s. 493 , which contained the nanotechnology related provisions , was incorporated in its entirety in s. 1867 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 .

this bill was passed by the senate , but the provision was not included in the final enacted version of the house bill ( p.l .

112-81 ) .

title i , subtitle a , h.r .

5116 ( 111 th congress ) — national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 20 10 the provisions of title i , subtitle a of h.r .

5116 ( 111 th congress ) , the national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2010 , were nearly identical to h.r .

554 ( 111 th congress ) ( see " h.r .

554 ( 111 th congress ) — national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2009 " below ) .

h.r .

5116 changed the name of the act from the "national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2009," to "national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2010," and removed the term "interdisciplinary" from a provision establishing "green nanotechnology" research centers .

the senate removed this title before the bill was enacted .

h.r .

554 ( 111 th congress ) — national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2009 h.r .

554 ( 111 th congress ) , the national nanotechnology initiative amendments act of 2009 , was introduced on january 15 , 2009 , and passed by the house of representatives on february 11 , 2009 .

the bill was referred to the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee on february 12 , 2009 .

the purpose of the bill was to authorize activities for support of nanotechnology r&d and for other purposes .

among its provisions , the bill would have amended the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act of 2003 to require the nstc triennial strategic plan to include near - term and long - term objectives , the anticipated timeframe for achieving near - term objectives , and metrics for assessing progress ; cooperative and collaborative activities in r&d and technology transition supported by the states ; and proposed research in areas of national priority ; require the nstc annual nanotechnology report supplementing the president's budget request to include a breakout of spending for the development and acquisition of research facilities and instrumentation for each program component area , and a breakout of spending on all activities related to ethical , legal , environmental , and societal implications ; direct nnp agencies to support the activities of committees involved in the development of standards for nanotechnology and allow agencies to reimburse the travel costs of scientists and engineers who participate in activities of such committees ; direct the agencies to fund the national nanotechnology coordination office , and to do so in proportion to each agency's share of the previous year's nnp budget ; require the nnco to develop and maintain a publicly accessible database of projects funded under the environmental , health , and safety , the education and societal dimensions , and the nanomanufacturing program component areas ; require the nnco to develop , maintain , and publicize information on nanotechnology facilities supported by the nnp , including at a minimum the terms and conditions for the use of each facility , a description of the capabilities of the instruments and equipment available for use at the facility , and a description of the technical support available to assist users of the facility ; require the establishment of a national nanotechnology advisory panel ( nnap ) "as a distinct entity. .

currently , under the provisions of presidential executive order 13349 , the president's council of advisors on science and technology serves as the nnap ; direct the nnco to enter into an arrangement with the national research council to conduct a triennial review of the nnp , and authorizes funds for fy2010 , fy2011 , and fy2012 ; and define nanotechnology as "the science and technology that will enable one to understand , measure , manipulate , and manufacture at the nanoscale , aimed at creating materials , devices , and systems with fundamentally new properties or functions," and define nanoscale as "one or more dimensions of between approximately 1 and 100 nanometers. .

in addition , the bill would have required the designation of a white house office of science and technology policy associate director to serve as the "coordinator for societal dimensions of nanotechnology" and would charge the coordinator with convening and chairing a panel of federal agency representatives and others to develop , maintain , implement , and monitor an annual ehs research plan that includes , among other things , standards related to nanotechnology nomenclature ; standards for methods and procedures for detecting , measuring , monitoring , sampling , and testing engineered nanoscale materials for environmental , health , and safety impacts ; and standard reference materials for ehs testing ; required the national science foundation to provide grants to establish nanotechnology education partnerships to recruit and help prepare secondary school students to pursue postsecondary level courses of instruction in nanotechnology ; directed the nstc to establish an education working group under the nset subcommittee to coordinate , prioritize , and plan nnp educational activities ; directed certain nnp agencies to provide companies access to their supported facilities to assist in the development of prototypes of nanoscale products , devices , or processes for determining proof of concept ; directed nnp agencies to encourage nanotechnology - related submissions to their small business innovation research ( sbir ) and small business technology transfer ( sttr ) programs ; directed nist to encourage nanotechnology - related submissions to its technology innovation program ( tip ) , and directs the tip advisory board to provide advice to nist to accomplish this , and to provide an assessment of the adequacy of tip resources allocated to nanotechnology related projects ; directed the nstc to actively pursue industry liaison groups for all industries ; directed the nnp to coordinate and leverage federal investments with nanotechnology research , development , and technology transition initiatives supported by the states ; directed the nnp to support nanotechnology r&d activities directed toward application areas that have the potential for significant contributions to national economic competitiveness and for other significant societal benefits , such as nano - electronics , energy efficiency , health care , and water remediation and purification ; directed the nnp to support research on the development of instrumentation and tools required for the rapid characterization of nanoscale materials and for monitoring of nanoscale manufacturing processes , and to support approaches and techniques for scaling the synthesis of new nanoscale materials to achieve industrial - level production rates ; and directed certain nnp - supported interdisciplinary research centers to support research on methods and approaches to environmentally benign nanoscale products and nanoscale manufacturing processes , as well as related technology transfer and education activities .

s. 1482 ( 111 th congress ) — national nanotechnology amendments act of 2009 s. 1482 ( 111 th congress ) , the national nanotechnology amendments act of 2009 , was introduced on july 21 , 2009 , and referred to the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee .

the purpose of the bill was to reauthorize the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act and to expand the scope of the n ational nanotechnology program ( nnp ) .

among its provisions , the bill would have required the nnp to solicit and draw upon the perspectives of the industrial community to promote the rapid commercial development of nanoscale - enabled devices , systems , and technologies and to coordinate research in determining the key physical and chemical characteristics of nanoparticles and nanomaterials that may pose environm ental , health , and safety risks ; r equire d the nnco and other appropriate agencies and councils to issue guidance to agencies that describes a strategy for transitioning research into commercial products and technologies and how the program will coordinate or conduct research on the environmental , health , and safety issues related to nanotechnology ; required the nstc triennial strategic plan to include near - term and long - term objectives , the anticipated timeframe for achieving near - term objectives , and metrics for assessing progress ; cooperative and collaborative activities in r&d and technology transition supported by the states ; how the nnp intends to encourage and support interdisciplinary research ; and proposed research in areas of national priority ; encouraged joint interagency solicitation of grant applications in high priority , multi - disciplinary research areas ; r equire d participating agencies to support the activities of the committees of standards setting bodies involved in the development of standards for nanotechnology ; require d each participating agency to provide funds to support the work of the nnco .

authorizes appropriations to ( 1 ) nist for the development of nanotechnology standards ; and ( 2 ) nsf , for use by the nnco , to develop and maintain a public information database of nnp projects in ehs ; education ; public outreach ; ethical , legal , and other societal issues ; and of nanotechnology facilities accessible for use by individuals from academia and industry ; ma de the national nanotechnology advisory panel ( nnap ) a distinct entity , and requires the nnap to establish a subpanel to enable it to assess whether societal , ethical , legal , environmental , and workforce concerns are adequately addressed by the nnp ; r evise d provisions for triennial external review of the nnp ; required the designation of a "coordinator for societal dimensions of nanotechnology," within ostp , to convene a panel to develop a research plan , and requires the coordinator to enter into an arrangement with the national science board to create a report that identifies the broad goals and needs of ehs researchers ; d irected the nstc to establish an interagency education working group to coordinate , prioritize , and plan formal and informal educational activities supported under the nnp , including activities to help participants understand the ehs implications of nanotechnology ; provide d for one or more grants to establish nanotechnology education partnerships to recruit and help prepare secondary school students to pursue postsecondary l evel courses in nanotechnology ; r equire d agencies supporting nanotechnology research facilities to provide access to representatives from industry and other stakeholders for the transfer of research results or assist in developing proof - of - concept prototypes of nanoscale p roducts , devices , or processes ; directed nist , in its technology innovation program , and all agencies with small business innovation research ( sbir ) and small business technology transfer ( sttr ) programs , to encourage the submission of nanotechnology related grant proposals ; set , for the nnp , the objective of establishing industry liaison group s for all industry sectors that would benefit from nanotechnology applications ; r equire d coordination and leveraging of federal investments with nanotechnology research , development , and tec hnology transition initiatives supported by state governments ; required the nnp to support nanotechnology r&d in areas of national importance ( eg , economic competitiveness , energy production , water purification , agriculture , and health care ; in environment al , health , and safety research on the risks of nanoparticles ) and in ethical , legal , and societal is sues related to nanotechnology ; required the nnp to support a wide array of research in support of nanomanufacturing ; required the director of the nnco to review and report on nanomanufacturing research and research facilities ; required an nnap review of the nanomanufacturing program com ponent area and the capabilities of nanotechnology research facilities supported by the nnp ; set forth provisions regarding nnp nanoscale characterization and metrology research ; andr equire d deliberative public input in the decision making processes affecting policies for the research , develop ment , and use of nanotechnology , and authorizes $2.0 million for the nnco to carry out this responsibility .

s. 596 ( 111 th congress ) — nanotechnology innovation and prize competition act of 2009 s. 596 ( 111 th congress ) , the nanotechnology innovation and prize competition act of 2009 , was introduced on march 16 , 2009 , and referred to the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee .

the purpose of the bill was to establish an award program to honor achievements in nanotechnology .

under the bill , the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology is directed to award prizes to individuals and companies for achievement in one or more of the following areas: improvement of the environment , consistent with epa's twelve principles of green chemistry ; development of alternative energy that has the potential to lessen the dependence of the united states on fossil fuels ; and / or improvement of human health , consistent with regulations promulgated by the fda .

the bill would have authorized financial prizes for being the first to achieve a specific criteria , as well as recognition prizes , made as part of the previously established national technology and innovation medal award program .

the bill would have authorized $2 million annually for the financial prizes as well as $750,000 annually for administration of the prize competitions .

h.r .

820 ( 111 th congress ) — nanotechnology advancement and new opportunities act h.r .

820 ( 111 th congress ) , the nanotechnology advancement and new opportunities act , was introduced on february 3 , 2009 , and referred to four house committees: the committee on science and technology , the committee on energy and commerce , the committee on ways and means , and the committee on homeland security .

the purpose of the bill was to ensure the development and responsible stewardship of nanotechnology .

the provisions of this bill are essentially identical to those of h.r .

394 , introduced in the 113 th congress ( described above ) .

h.r .

2647 ( 111 th congress ) — national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 section 242 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 ( h.r .

2647 , p.l .

111-84 ) amends the department of defense's nanotechnology reporting responsibilities to align with those required of other agencies under the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act ( p.l .

108-153 ) .

h.r .

2647 was signed into law on october 28 , 2009 .

s. 3117 ( 111 th congress ) — promote nanotechnology in schools act s. 3117 ( 111 th congress ) , the promote nanotechnology in schools act , was introduced on march 15 , 2010 , and referred to the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

the purpose of the bill was to strengthen the capacity of eligible institutions ( i.e. , secondary schools , community colleges , two - year and four - year institutions of higher education , and informal learning science centers ) to provide instruction in nanotechnology .

the bill would have authorized a program at the national science foundation for this purpose that would offer eligible institutions grants of up to $400,000 ( subject to a 25% match from non - federal sources ) to assist in the purchase and maintenance of nanotechnology equipment and software , to develop and provide educational services , and to support teacher education and certification .

the bill would have authorized $15 million for fy2010 and "such sums as may be necessary" for fy2011 through fy2013 .

h.r .

4502 ( 111 th congress ) — nanotechnology education act h.r .

4502 ( 111 th congress ) , the nanotechnology education act , was introduced on february 19 , 2010 , and referred to the house committee on science and technology's subcommittee on research and science education .

the purpose of the bill was to strengthen the capacity of eligible institutions ( i.e. , secondary schools , community colleges , four - year institutions of higher education , and informal learning science centers ) to provide instruction in nanotechnology .

the bill would have authorized a program for this purpose at the national science foundation that would offer eligible institutions grants of up to $400,000 ( subject to a 25% match from non - federal sources ) to assist in the purchase and maintenance of nanotechnology equipment and software , to develop and provide educational services , and to support teacher education and certification .

the bill would have authorized $40 million for fy2011 and "such sums as may be necessary" for fy2012 through fy2014 .

s. 2942 ( 111 th congress ) — nanotechnology safety act of 2010 s. 2942 ( 111 th congress ) , the nanotechnology safety act of 2010 , was introduced on january 21 , 2010 , and referred to the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

the bill would have required the secretary of health and human services to establish within 180 days a program for the scientific investigation of nanoscale materials included or intended for inclusion in fda - regulated products , to address the potential toxicology of such materials , the effects of such materials on biological systems , and interaction of such materials with biological systems .

the bill would have authorized $25 million per year for fiscal years 2011 to 2015 .

h.r .

5786 ( 111 th congress ) — safe cosmetics act of 2010 h.r .

5786 ( 111 th congress ) , the safe cosmetics act of 2010 , was introduced on july 20 , 2010 , and referred to the house committee on energy and commerce and the house committee on education and labor .

the nanotechnology - related provisions of this bill are essentially identical to those of h.r .

1385 , introduced in the 113 th congress ( described above ) .

description of program component areas in use from fy2006 to fy2013 fundamental phenomena and processes fundamental phenomena and processes includes investments in the discovery and development of fundamental knowledge pertaining to the new phenomena in the physical , biological , and engineering sciences that occur at the nanoscale , as well as in understanding and articulation of scientific and engineering principles related to nanoscale structures , processes , and mechanisms .

nanomaterials nanomaterials includes research investments to discover novel nanoscale and nanostructured materials .

this pca also attempts to understand the properties of nanomaterials , and supports r&d to enable the design and synthesis , in a controlled manner , of nanoscale materials with targeted properties .

nanoscale devices and systems nanoscale devices and systems includes r&d investments that apply nanoscale science and engineering principles to create novel devices and systems or to improve existing ones .

it also includes the use of nanoscale or nanostructured materials to achieve improved performance or new functionality .

to meet this definition , the enabling science and technology must be at the nanoscale , but the systems and devices are not restricted to that size .

instrumentation research , metrology , and standards instrumentation research , metrology , and standards includes r&d investments for development of tools needed to advance nanotechnology research and commercialization .

instrumentation for characterization , measurement , synthesis , and design of nanotechnology materials , structures , devices , and systems is funded through this pca .

r&d and other activities related to development of standards , including standards for nomenclature , materials , characterization , testing , and manufacture , are also in this pca .

nanomanufacturing nanomanufacturing r&d supports the development of scalable , reliable , cost - effective manufacturing of nanoscale materials , structures , devices , and systems .

it also includes r&d and integration of ultra - miniaturized top - down processes and complex bottom - up processes .

major research facilities and instrumentation acquisition major research facilities and instrumentation acquisition includes investments in the establishment and ongoing operations of user facilities and networks , the acquisition of major instrumentation , and other activities related to infrastructure for the conduct of nanoscale science , engineering , and technology r&d .

societal dimensions under the 2007 nni strategic plan , the societal dimensions pca was divided into two separate pcas: environment , health , and safety , and education and societal dimensions .

environment , health , and safety environment , health , and safety addresses research primarily directed at understanding the environmental , health , and safety impacts of nanotechnology development and corresponding risk assessment , risk management , and methods for risk mitigation .

education and societal dimensions education and societal dimensions addresses education - related activities such as development of materials for schools , undergraduate programs , technical training , and public communication , including outreach and engagement .

such activities include research directed at identifying and quantifying the broad implications of nanotechnology for society , including social , economic , workforce , educational , ethical , and legal implications .

selected reports on the national nanotechnology initiative reports of the nanoscale science , engineering , and technology subcommittee of the national science and technology council a progress review of the nni nanotechnology signature initiatives: executive summary , november 2015 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 20151110_nsi_status_report_executive_summary_final_v2_mm.pdf workshop report: sensor fabrication , integration , and commercialization , june 19 , 2015 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nnisensorsworkshopreport.pdf workshop report: stakeholder perspectives on perception , assessment , and management of the potential risks of nanotechnology , march 20 , 2015 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2013_nni_r3_workshop_report.pdf technical interchange proceedings: realizing the promise of carbon nanotubes: challenges , opportunities , and the pathway to commercialization , march 12 , 2015 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2014_nni_cnt_tech_meeting_report.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: supplement to the president's fy201 6 budget , march 2015 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_fy16_budget_supplement.pdf workshop proceedings — u.s. - eu: bridging nanoehs research efforts joint workshop , february 6 , 2015 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2013_us - eunanoehsworkshopsummaryfinal.pdf workshop report: cellulose nanomaterials: a path towards commercialization , august 1 , 2014 , http: / / www.fpl.fs.fed.us / documnts / pdf2014 / usforestservice_nih_2014_cellulose_nano_workshop_report.pdf progress review on the coordinated implementation of the 2011 nni environmental , health , and safety research strategy , june 25 , 2014. http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2014_nni_ehs_progress_review.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: supplement to the president's fy201 5 budget , march 2014. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_fy15_budget_supplement.pdf national nanotechnology initiative strategic plan , february 2014. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2014_nni_strategic_plan.pdf regional , state , and local initiatives in nanotechnology: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , may 17 , 2013. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_rsl_2012_rpt_0.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2014 budget , may 14 , 2013. http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_fy14_budget_supplement.pdf nanotechnology knowledge infrastructure ( nki ) : enabling national leadership in sustainable design , white paper , discussion draft , may 9 , 2013. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nki_data_readiness_levels_draft_discussion_doc_for_web.pdf bridging nanoehs research efforts: a joint u.s. – eu workshop , workshop proceedings , october 2012. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2011_us - eu_workshop_proceedings_ - _final_locked.pdf nanotechnology for sensors and sensors for nanotechnology: improving and protecting health , safety , and the environment , white paper , july 2012. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / sensors_nsi_2012_07_09_final_for_web.pdf nanotechnology knowledge infrastructure ( nki ) :enabling national leadership in sustainable design , white paper , may 14 , 2012. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nki_nsi_white_paper_ - _final_for_web.pdf public participation in nanotechnology , report of the national nanote chnology initiative workshop , april 17 , 2012. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_public_participation_ws_report.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2013 budget , february 2012. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_2013_budget_supplement.pdf environmental , health , and safety research strategy , october 2011. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_2011_ehs_research_strategy.pdf policy principles for the u.s .

decision - making concerning regulation and oversight of applications of nanotechnology and nanomaterials , june 2011. http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / omb / inforeg / for - agencies / nanotechnology - regulation - and - oversight - principles.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2012 budget , march 2011. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_2012_budget_supplement.pdf regional , state , and local initiatives in nanotechnology: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , february 2011. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_2012_budget_supplement.pdf national nanotechnology initiative strategic plan , february 2011. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / 2011_strategic_plan.pdf national nanotechnology initiative signature initiative: nanotechnology for solar energy collection and conversion , july 2010. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nnisiginitsolarenergyfinaljuly2010.pdf national nanotechnology initiative signature initiative: sustainable nanomanufacturing – creating the industries of the future , july 2010. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_siginit_sustainable_mfr_revised_nov_2011.pdf national nanotechnology initiative signature initiative: nanoelectronics for 2020 and beyond , july 2010. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_siginit_nanoelectronics_jul_2010.pdf nanoehs series: risk management methods & ethical , legal , and societal implications of nanotechnology: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , march 2010 .

communicating risk in the 21 st century: the case of nanotechnology , february 2010. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / berube_risk_white_paper_feb_2010.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2011 budget , february 2010. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_2011_budget_supplement.pdf nanoehs series: nanomaterials and human health & instrumentation , metrology , and analytical methods: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , november 2009. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nanoandhumanhealthandinstrumentation.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2010 budget , may 2009. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_2010_budget_supplement.pdf nanotechnology - enabled sensing , report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , may 2009. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / nni - nanosensors - stdres.pdf nanoehs series: human and environmental exposure assessment workshop materials , february 2009. http: / / nano.gov / node / 122 the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2009 budget , september 2008. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_09budget.pdf strategy for nanotechnology - related environmental , health , and safety research , february 2008. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_ehs_research_strategy.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative strategic plan , december 2007. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_strategic_plan_2007.pdf prioritization of environmental , health , and safety research needs for engineered nanoscale materials , august 2007. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / prioritization_ehs_research_needs_engineered_nanoscale_materials.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2008 budget , july 2007. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_08budget.pdf manufacturing at the nanoscale: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , january 2007. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / manufacturing_at_the_nanoscale.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: environmental , health , and safety research needs for engineered nanoscale materials , september 2006. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_ehs_research_needs.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2007 budget , july 2006. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_07budget.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: research and development leading to a revolution in technology and industry , supplement to the president's fy2006 budget , march 2005. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_06budget.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative strategic plan , december 2004 .

research directions ii: long - term research and development opportunities in nanotechnology , report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , september 2004. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / research_directionsii.pdf nanotechnology in space exploration , august 2004. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / space_exploration_rpt_0.pdf nanoscience research for energy needs: report of the national nanotechnology initiative grand challenge workshop , march 2004. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / nni_energy_rpt.pdf nanoelectronics , nanophotonics , & nanomagnetics: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , february 2004. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_electronic_photonics_m.pdf instrumentation and metrology for nanotechnology: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , january 2004. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_instrumentation_metrology_rpt.pdf nanotechnology: societal implications - maximizing benefits for humanity: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , december 2003. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / nni_societal_implications.pdf nanobiotechnology: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , october 2003 .

http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_nanobiotechnology_rpt.pdf regional , state , and local initiatives in nanotechnolog y , september - october 2003 .

[no url available. .

national nanotechnology initiative: research and development supporting the next industrial revolution , supplement to the president's fy2004 budget .

august 2003. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni04_budget_supplement.pdf materials by design: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , june 2003. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_materials_by_design.pdf nanotechnology and the environment: report of the national nanotechnology initiative workshop , may 2003. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nanotechnology_and_the_environment_app_imp.pdf national nanotechnology initiative: the initiative and its implementation plan , detailed technical report associated with the supplemental report to the president's fy2003 budget , june 2002 .

societal implications of nanoscience and nanotechnology , march 2001. http: / / www.wtec.org / loyola / nano / nset.societal.implications / report - grayscale.pdf national nanotechnology initiative: the initiative and its implementation plan , detailed technical report associated with the supplemental report to the president's fy2001 budget , july 2000. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_implementation_plan_2000.pdf report of the interagency working group on nanoscience , technology , and engineering ( nset subcommittee predecessor ) nanotechnology research directions , iwgn workshop report , september 1999. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / research_directions_1999.pdf nanotechnology: shaping the world atom by atom , 1999. http: / / www.wtec.org / loyola / nano / iwgn.public.brochure / iwgn.nanotechnology.brochure.pdf agency reports defense nanotechnology research and development program , office of the director of defense research and engineering , department of defense , december 2009. http: / / nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / dod - report_to_congress_final_1mar10.pdf current intelligence bulletin 60: interim guidance for medical screening and hazard surveillance for workers potentially exposed to engineered nanoparticles , national institute for occupational safety and health , centers for disease control and prevention , department of health and human services .

february 2009. http: / / www.cdc.gov / niosh / docs / 2009-116 / pdfs / 2009-116.pdf progress toward safe nanotechnology in the workplace : a report from the niosh nan o technology research center , national institute for occupational safety and health , centers for disease control and prevention , department of health and human services , june 2007. http: / / www.cdc.gov / niosh / docs / 2010-104 / pdfs / 2010-104.pdf approaches to safe nanotechnology in the workplace : managing the health and safety concerns associated with engineering nanomaterials , national institute for occupational safety and health , centers for disease control and prevention , department of health and human services , march 2009 .

external reviews report to the president and congress on the fifth assessment of the national nanotechnology initiative , pcast ( acting as the nnap ) , october 2014. http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / microsites / ostp / pcast / pcast_fifth_nni_review_oct2014_final.pdf gao nanomanufacturing: emergence and implications for u.s. competitiveness , the environment , and human health , january 2014. http: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 670 / 660591.pdf triennial review of the national nanotechnology initiative , nrc , september 2013. http: / / www.nap.edu / catalog / 18271 / triennial - review - of - the - national - nanotechnology - initiative a research strategy for environmental , health , and safety aspects of engineered nanomaterials , nrc , 2012 , http: / / www.nap.edu / catalog.php ? record_id=13347 report to the president and congress on the fourth assessment of the national nanotechnology initiative , pcast ( acting as the nnap ) , april 2012. http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / microsites / ostp / pcast_2012_nanotechnology_final.pdf review of federal strategy for nanotechnology - related environmental , health , and safety research , committee for review of the federal strategy to address environmental , health , and safety research needs for engineered nanoscale materials , committee on toxicology , nrc , 2009. http: / / www.nap.edu / catalog.php ? record_id=12559#toc report to the president and congress on the third assessment of the national nanotechnology initiative , pcast ( acting as the nnap ) , march 2010. http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / microsites / ostp / pcast - nni - report.pdf the national nanotechnology initiative: second assessment and recommendations of the national nanotechnology advisory panel , pcast ( acting as the nnap ) , april 2008. http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / microsites / ostp / pcast - nnap - nni - assessment - 2008.pdf a matter of size: triennial review of the national nanotechnology initiative , nrc , 2006. http: / / www.nap.edu / catalog.php ? record_id=11752 the national nanotechnology initiative at five years: assessment and recommendations of the national nanotechnology advisory panel , pcast ( acting as the nnap ) , may 2005. http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / microsites / ostp / pcast - nni - five - years.pdf small wonders , endless frontiers: a review of the national nanotechnology initiative , nrc , june 2002. http: / / www.nap.edu / openbook.php ? isbn=0309084547 list of nni and nanotechnology - related acronym .

