on september 30 , 2008 , the president signed h.r .

2638 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , into law as p.l .

110-329 .

this act included the military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act , 2009 ( milcon - va appropriations act of 2009 ) , as its division e. the house passed h.r .

2638 on september 24 and the senate passed it on september 27 .

the milcon - va appropriations act of 2009 provides a total of $40.9 billion for the veterans health administration ( vha ) for fy2009 ( see table 1 ) , a $1.7 billion increase over the administrations request and a $3.7 billion over the fy2008 enacted amount .

p.l .

110-329 did not include any bill language authorizing fee increases as requested by the administration's budget proposal for the vha for fy2009 .

this report provides a brief background on the veterans health care system , followed by a discussion of the fy2009 vha budget request , house and senate appropriations committee action , and the final enacted appropriations for vha .

the report concludes with a discussion of major vha budget proposals included in the president's budget request for fy2009 .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules , including disability compensation and pensions , education , training and rehabilitation services , hospital and medical care , assistance to homeless veterans , home loan guarantees , and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

the va carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical research programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for , among other things , providing compensations , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries ; providing grants to states for establishing , expanding , or improving state veterans cemeteries ; and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

the va's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatory funding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , vocational rehabilitation , and life insurance , among other benefits and services .

discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services including medical care .

in fy2008 discretionary budget authority accounted for about 49% of the total va budget authority of approximately $88 billion with about 86% of this discretionary funding going toward supporting va health care programs .

the vha operates the nation's largest integrated direct health care delivery system .

the va's health care system is organized into 21 geographically defined veterans integrated service networks ( visns ) .

although policies and guidelines are developed at va headquarters to be applied throughout the va health care system , management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to the visns .

recently , va's inspector general ( ig ) for health care inspections has stated that the current visn management structure is ineffective .

according to the ig's statement "vha has an organizational bias in favor of local decision makers over national leaders which impedes the provision of one standard of excellent medical care for all eligible veterans .

the lack of a standard organizational structure leads to differences in financial systems , medical data systems , and management and committee structures from visn to visn. .

congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to the visns based on the veterans equitable resource allocation ( vera ) system , which generally bases funding on patient workload .

prior to the implementation of the vera system , resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures .

unlike other federally funded health insurance programs , such as medicare and medicaid , which finance medical care provided through the private sector , the vha provides care directly to veterans .

in fy2008 , vha operated 153 medical centers , 135 nursing homes , 795 ambulatory care and community - based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) , 6 independent outpatient clinics , and 232 readjustment counseling centers ( vet centers ) .

the vha also pays for care provided to veterans by private - sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances .

inpatient and outpatient care are also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the civilian health and medical program of the department of veterans affairs ( champva ) .

the vha also provides grants for construction of state - owned nursing homes and domiciliary facilities and collaborates with the department of defense ( dod ) in sharing health care resources and services .

each year , vha reviews the demand for health care services from veterans and projects an estimate of the cost to deliver care against that demand .

it utilizes the va enrollee health care demand model ( demand model ) to develop estimates of veteran enrollment , expected utilization of 55 health care services by those enrollees , and the costs associated with that utilization .

the 55 health care services include such services as inpatient medical , surgical , and psychiatric care ; ambulatory care ; pharmacy , including over the counter medications ; and hearing aids and prosthetics .

the demand model does not include projected expenditures for long - term care services , champva , readjustment counseling provided primarily through vet centers , the spina bifida program , or care for non - veterans .

because of the unique characteristics of these programs , the budget estimates for these programs are developed by the respective program offices .

the demand model also makes risk adjustments to reflect veteran enrollee's mortality , morbidity , and changing health care needs .

it also takes into account the veterans' reliance on va health care ( that is , how much care veteran enrolles receive from va versus other sources such as medicare and private health insurance ) .

based on private sector health care utilization benchmarks , the demand model projects future use of health care services by veteran enrollees .

these benchmarks are adjusted for unique demographics of veterans enrolles , and health care characteristics of the va health care system .

according to the va , the model also generates future trend data for health care utilization , cost , and intensity of medical services .

these trend data reflect historical and future changes in the entire health care industry and are adjusted to reflect the unique attributes of the va health care system .

figure 1 provides a conceptual overview of the demand model .

while the vha actuarial model works well in a steady state environment , it does not perform as well in a dynamic environment , such as when veterans are returning from combat theaters and enrolling in the va health care system .

according to vha officials , vha has added higher enrollee estimates to the demand model to ensure it has enough resources .

however , in the long term , the demand model still has limitations , because the changes in the nation's economy and future military conflicts could have a profound impact on predicting future veterans enrollments and expenditures .

the vha is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

although the appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year , the appropriation accounts used to support the vha traditionally include medical care , medical and prosthetic research , and medical administration .

in addition , congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all va facilities .

in fy2004 , "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," congress changed the vha's appropriations structure .

the department of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 , h.rept .

108-401 ) , funded vha through four accounts: ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

provided below are brief descriptions of these accounts .

on february 5 , 2007 , the president submitted his fy2008 budget proposal to congress .

the total amount requested by the administration for the vha for fy2008 was $34.6 billion , a 1.93% increase in funding compared with the fy2007 enacted amount .

the total amount of funding that would have been available for the vha under the president's budget proposal for fy2008 , including collections , was approximately $37.0 billion ( see table 7 and appendix e ) .

for fy2008 , the administration requested $27.2 billion for medical services , a $1.2 billion , or 4.8% , increase in funding over the fy2007 enacted amount .

the administration's budget proposal also requested $3.4 billion for medical administration , $3.6 billion for medical facilities , and $411 million for medical and prosthetic research ( see table 7 and appendix e ) .

as in fy2003 , fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 , and fy2007 , the administration' fy2008 budget request included several cost - sharing proposals .

on february 4 , 2008 , the president submitted his fy2009 budget proposal to congress .

the administration requested a total of $39.2 billion ( excluding collections ) for vha .

this is a 5.3% increase , or a $2.0 billion increase , over the fy2008 enacted level .

including total available resources ( including medical collections ) the administration's budget would have provided $41.1 billion for vha .

the president's fy2009 budget submission also proposed to abolish the medical administration account and consolidate these activities in the medical services account .

under this account structure the administration requested $34.1 billion for the medical services account which is approximately $5 billion above the fy2008 enacted amount ( table 7 ) .

the vha estimated an overall medical inflation rate of 4.63% for fy2009 .

the major cost drivers for vha medical care are increases in costs of goods and services beyond the control of the vha , as well as increases in utilization of services by existing patients , and increases in intensity of care ( more complex care ) .

the president's budget proposal also requested $4.7 billion for the medical facilities account , an increase of $561 million over the fy2008 enacted level .

the administration's budget proposal for fy2009 requested $442 million for the medical and prosthetic research account , a 7.9% decrease ( $38 million ) below the fy2008 enacted level .

according to the senate committee on veterans' affairs , the president's proposal would have resulted in the loss of 49 full time positions and 294 research projects .

as in fy2003 , fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 , fy2007 , and fy2008 .

the administration included several cost - sharing proposals .

these legislative proposals are discussed in detail in the key budget issues section at the end of this report .

in its fy2009 budget request , the administration has put forward several legislative proposals .

these proposals are similar to previous ones included in the administration's budget requests for fy2003 , fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 , fy2007 , and fy2008 and rejected by congress each year .

similar to the fy2008 budget proposals , revenue from the proposals in the fy2009 budget request would not be deposited in the medical care collections fund ( mccf ) , but would be classified as mandatory receipts to the treasury .

none of these proposals have received any consideration by the house and senate appropriation committees .

the president's fy2009 budget request includes three major policy proposals: assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all priority 7 and 8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran .

increase pharmaceutical copayments from $8 to $15 ( for each 30-day prescription ) for all enrolled veterans in priority groups 7 and 8 .

bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice - connected conditions for the entire copayment amount .

a detailed description of these budget proposals follows .

the administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee , which is structured to charge $250 for priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999 ; $500 for those with family incomes from $75,000 to $99,999 ; and $750 for those with family incomes equal to or greater than $100,000 .

the va has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $129 million to the treasury annually , beginning in fy2010 , and will increase revenue by $1.1 billion over 10 years .

the administration proposes increasing the pharmacy copayments from $8 to $15 for all enrolled priority group 7 and priority group 8 veterans whenever they obtain medication from the va on an outpatient basis for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

the administration put forward this proposal in its fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 , fy2007 , and fy2008 budget requests as well , but did not receive any approval from congress .

at present , veterans in priority groups 2-8 pay $8 for a 30-day supply of medication , including over - the - counter medications .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) authorized the va to charge most veterans $2 for each 30-day supply of medication furnished on an outpatient basis for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

the veterans millennium health care and benefits act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-117 ) authorized the va to increase the medication copayment amount and establish annual caps on the total amount paid , to eliminate financial hardship for veterans enrolled in priority groups 2-6 .

when veterans reach the annual cap , they continue to receive medications without making a copayment .

on november 15 , 2005 , the vha issued a directive stating that effective january 1 , 2006 , the medication co - payment will be increased to $8 for each 30-day supply of medication furnished on an outpatient basis for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition , and that the annual cap for veterans enrolled in priority groups 2-6 will be $960 .

there is no cap for veterans in priority groups 7 and 8 ( see appendixes b and c ) .

the va estimates that if the current proposal to raise the copayment were enacted , it would contribute $355 million to the treasury in fy2009 and will increase revenue by $3.7 billion over 10 years .

according to the va , in fy2009 , as many as 444,000 veterans would choose not to enroll in the va health care system and 146,000 unique veteran patients would not seek va health care if enrollment fees are imposed and pharmacy copays are increased .

the administration is requesting that congress amend the va's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first - party copayment debts with third - party health insurance collections .

the va asserts that this proposal would align the va with the dod health care system for military retirees and with the private sector .

with the enactment of p.l .

99-272 in 1986 , congress authorized the va to collect payments from third - party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice - connected disabilities ; it also established copayments from veterans for this care .

under current law , the va is authorized to collect from third - party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

if the va treats an insured veteran for a nonservice - connected disability , and the veteran is also determined by the va to have copayment responsibilities , the va will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's copayment debt related to that treatment .

under the current copayment billing process , in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice - connected condition appears to qualify for billing under reimbursable insurance and copayment , the va medical facilities sends the bill to the insurance provider .

the veteran's copayment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third - party payer .

if no payment is received from the third - party payer within 90 days , a bill is sent to the veteran for the full copayment amount .

however , when insurers reimburse the va after the 90-day period , the va must absorb the cost of additional staff time for processing a refund if the veteran has already paid the bill .

on all insurance policies , the entire amount of the claim payment is applied first to the copayment .

the veteran is then billed only for the portion of the copayment not covered by the insurance reimbursement and the portion of the copayment for services not covered by the veteran's insurance plan ( see figure 2 ) .

under the administration's proposal , veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of nonservice - connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire copayment , and the copayment will not be reduced by collection recoveries from third - party health plans .

this proposal would apply to all veterans who make copayments .

according to va estimates , this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in fy2009 and $415 million over 10 years .

the house and senate appropriations committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees .

appendix a .

priority groups and their eligibility criteria appendix b. copayments for health care services: 2008 oef / oif combat veterans enhanced eligibility for health care benefits : combat veterans discharged from active duty on or after january 28 , 2003 , are eligible for enrollment in priority group 6 for five years following discharge unless eligible for a higher enrollment priority .

combat veterans discharged from active duty before january 28 , 2003 , who apply for enrollment on or after january 28 , 2008 , are eligible for enrollment in priority group 6 until january 27 , 2011 .

after the special eligibility period ends , these veterans will be reassigned to the appropriate priority group and will be subject to copayments if applicable .

copayments are applicable for priority group 6 combat veteran enrollees for care related to a condition that is congenital or developmental ( eg , scoliosis ) that existed before military service ( unless aggravated by combat service ) or has a specific etiology that began after military service , such as a common cold , etc .

appendix c. financial income thresholds for va health care benefits , calendar year 2008 appendix d. vha appropriations for fy2005 and fy2006 appendix e. vha appropriations for fy2007 and fy200 .

