the united states and the 27-member european union ( eu ) share a huge , dynamic , and mutually beneficial economic partnership .

not only is the u.s. - eu commercial relationship , what many call the transatlantic economy , the largest in the world , it is also arguably the most important .

while the transatlantic market is today highly integrated due in large part to a massive amount of foreign direct investment by both u.s. and european companies in each other's markets , differences in regulatory approaches , standards , and philosophies militate against the development of an even tighter and more integrated marketplace .

regulatory differences are also behind some of the most politically sensitive bilateral trade disputes .

to deal with this situation , a variety of government - to - government efforts and transatlantic dialogues have been created to increase understanding between policymakers and regulators on both sides of the atlantic , to minimize existing regulatory barriers , and to prevent the emergence of new regulatory barriers .

these efforts , falling under the rubric of transatlantic regulatory cooperation ( trc ) , are seen as being important to today's u.s. - eu economic relationship .

proponents maintain that trc undertakings can not only prevent disruptive and costly trade disputes from occurring , but also spur trade and investment flows by reducing costs for producers and consumers on both sides of the atlantic .

since the establishment of the new transatlantic agenda ( nta ) in 1995 , there have been a number of new trc initiatives , all aimed at removing or reducing regulatory barriers to trade .

while each of these initiatives has made some progress toward reducing regulatory burdens , many u.s. and european companies heavily engaged in the transatlantic marketplace maintain that the results have not been materially significant .

at the 2007 u.s. - eu summit , leaders of the eu and united states committed their governments to increasing the efficiency and transparency of transatlantic economic cooperation and to accelerating the reduction and elimination of barriers to international trade and investment with the ultimate objective of achieving a barrier free transatlantic market .

they also agreed on a framework for advancing transatlantic economic integration ( the framework ) and created a new institutional structure , the transatlantic economic council ( tec ) , to advance the process of regulatory cooperation and barrier reduction .

headed on both sides by ministerial - level appointees , the tec is designed to oversee the efforts outlined in the framework , with the goal of accelerating progress and guiding work between the summits .

whether the tec will herald a new era of more effective cooperation remains to be seen .

much could depend upon whether the tec can exert enough political leverage to convince regulators to make reforms that will result in reduction of regulatory barriers between the eu and the united states , as well as increase the role that legislators on both sides of the atlantic play in the process .

six tec meetings have been held since it was established in 2007 , the most recent in november 2011 in washington , dc .

this report is intended to serve as an introduction and primer on a complicated , broad , and often highly technical set of issues .

it is presented in seven parts: the first section describes the nature and scope of u.s. - eu regulatory barriers ; the second section explains the rationale for regulatory cooperation ; the third section highlights the differences in u.s. - eu regulatory approaches ; the fourth section examines the various forms of regulatory cooperation ; the fifth section evaluates the results of past initiatives at regulatory cooperation ; the sixth section analyzes the creation and operation of the transatlantic economic council ; and the last section highlights the role of congress in transatlantic regulatory cooperation .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

since the mid - 1990s , both u.s. and european multinational companies ( mncs ) have viewed divergent ways of regulating markets for both goods and services as the most serious barriers to transatlantic commerce .

redundant standards , testing , and certification procedures are seen by these companies as far more costly and harmful than any trade barriers imposed at the border , such as tariffs or quotas .

while the purpose of many regulations is to protect consumers and the environment , divergent domestic regulations and standards can affect the competitive position of firms , helping some and disadvantaging others by affecting the importation of products not produced or grown according to those requirements .

to the extent that product standards differ , exporters may find their goods prohibited from certain markets or subject to expensive re - labeling , re - packaging , or re - testing .

for example , european winemakers intending to sell in the u.s. market must label their bottles according to u.s. requirements , which are different than eu requirements .

similarly , u.s. exports to the eu of poultry washed with anti - microbial treatments have been blocked for years by different health and safety standards .

different regulations add to the cost of doing business on both sides of the atlantic and serve as non - tariff barriers to trade in many different economic activities and sectors .

these include but certainly are not limited to differences in accounting and financial reporting requirements , antitrust or competition procedures , consumer protection ( safety and health ) standards , environmental regulations , and personal data transmission .

each of these divergences can materialize into politically charged disputes and threaten the functioning of the transatlantic market .

in no area has this been a greater problem than in chemicals .

in this sector , the united states and eu have fundamentally different regulations on issues such as genetically modified organisms ( gmos ) , hormones , and the registration and restriction of chemical substances .

in the case of gmos , these differences have translated into longer authorization times and stricter standards for approval , release , and marketing of gmos in the eu than in the united states moreover , gmos have been the subject of a long and bitter trade dispute brought before the world trade organization .

pharmaceuticals is another sector where regulatory differences have been described as not only significant , but also bewildering .

just in the area of drug approvals , primary regulatory elements governing testing protocols , submission of clinical data , and certification of good manufacturing practices vary considerably between the united states and eu .

moreover , within the eu , where public health policy is still a national prerogative , rules and protocols can vary greatly from member state to member state .

because each member state has its own rules and protocols , it can be quite expensive for pharmaceutical companies to achieve marketing authorization throughout the eu or even a subset of countries .

another example comes from the automotive sector , where american and european car makers sell similar products in the united states and europe .

but there are different standards and testing requirements for all kinds of parts , ranging from headlights , wiper blades , light beams , and seat belts to crash standards — which critics maintain are without measurable differences in safety benefits .

there are even multiple crash test dummies of the same or similar size and purpose — a clear example of where regulatory requirements diverge .

despite the salience of regulatory barriers in transatlantic commerce , a comprehensive , sector - by - sector study or inventory of regulatory barriers has not been undertaken .

proponents argue that such a report could identify regulatory differences that impose substantial burdens on transatlantic commerce and possibilities for their reduction or convergence without compromising either u.s. or eu health and safety priorities .

in 2003 , the european commission ( ec ) proposed that such a study be undertaken and jointly funded , but the u.s. government did not back the initiative .

both sides , however , note the major regulatory divergences that are considered trade barriers in their respective annual trade barrier reports .

in the 2008 u.s. trade barriers report , for example , 12 pages are devoted specifically to eu regulatory barriers .

efforts to enhance trc draw on both economic and political justifications and are strongly supported by business interests and governments on both sides of the atlantic .

at the same time , within the united states , some interests , mostly academics , see greater benefits derived from regulatory competition and independence , whereby each side is free to maintain its own approach to regulating consumer , health , and environmental issues .

the case for non - cooperation or at least caution is also based on concerns that domestic health and safety standards may be compromised by a process that is driven substantially by business interests and stakeholders and could be affected by a "race to the bottom" regarding u.s. and eu standards .

transatlantic regulatory cooperation must deal with a number of key differences between the united states and eu concerning approaches to regulation .

key differences bear on political cycles affecting regulation , public preferences and tolerance for risk , attitudes towards transparency , and institutional capacities to undertake regulatory reforms .

these key differences — whether they pertain to product safety , environmental protection , securities trading , or customs procedures — in how regulations are developed and applied , in turn , raise challenges about whether and how to merge , harmonize , or converge the varied approaches .

until the regulatory structures themselves become more convergent or aligned , the major divergences in regulatory policies are unlikely to disappear .

regulatory cooperation is an elastic concept that subsumes a broad range of activities .

at one end of the spectrum , these activities may include simple discussions and sharing of information between regulators — most often on prospective regulations .

at the other end of the spectrum , these activities may involve attempts at harmonizing regulatory approaches through acceptance of common principles and standards .

in between are activities that involve varying degrees of intrusion into the autonomy of regulators .

one such category is agreements that recognize each other's standards or certification procedures .

these agreements are known as mras or mutual recognition agreements .

the line between each category can be arbitrary and vague , and there are other activities associated with regulatory cooperation that may not fall neatly into one of the above categories .

to date , most efforts at transatlantic regulatory cooperation have been associated with information exchanges and dialogues .

considerable efforts have also been made at negotiating mras for a range of goods , as well as other attempts to recognize the adequacy of each others standards in specific areas such as data privacy and accounting .

little has been undertaken in regard to harmonization of standards .

what follows is a short elaboration of activities that apply to each of these regulatory activities .

the united states and eu have pursued a variety of policy initiatives and new mechanisms over the past 15 years to reduce or eliminate regulatory barriers .

the results have been mixed .

a number of these initiatives have been successful in some regulatory areas , while transatlantic regulatory cooperation has not made material differences for businesses or consumers in some other sectors .

assuming it is concluded that stronger regulatory cooperation is desirable , an assessment of past efforts could be useful .

predicated on the notion that past initiatives failed to make significant progress in enhancing regulatory progress , the transatlantic economic council ( tec ) was established in april 2007 at the u.s. - eu summit as a key component of the framework for advancing transatlantic economic integration .

created as a new entity by german chancellor angela merkel ( then eu council president ) , european commission president barroso , and president bush , the tec is designed to provide minister - level political guidance for implementation of a work program as outlined by the framework to foster regulatory cooperation and to reduce or eliminate regulatory burdens to trade .

the summit leaders also created an advisory group to the tec and invited the u.s. congress , along with the european parliament , to accept a new , more substantive role in transatlantic regulatory cooperation by becoming part of an advisory group .

in short , the tec and the framework are designed to deal with some of the suggested shortcomings ( described above ) of previous transatlantic regulatory initiatives: lack of high level political leadership and not enough involvement of legislators and other stakeholders in the regulatory process .

the tec consists of two co - chairs ( ministerial - level appointees with cabinet rank ) from each side , as well as a number of eu commissioners and u.s .

cabinet members for the broad - ranging policy areas covered in the framework .

permanent members of the tec include the secretaries of the treasury and commerce and the u.s. trade representative and the european commissioners for external relations , for trade and internal market and services .

in addition , other u.s .

cabinet members and european commissioners may participate when the agenda covers issues falling under their jurisdiction .

given that the two tec leaders are cabinet - level appointees , the tec was expected to have the kind of high - level political support that previous efforts at economic integration may have lacked .

such clout , it is argued , may be needed to persuade domestic regulators to yield some of their authorities or to better cooperate with their counterparts across the atlantic in harmonizing regulatory approaches .

tec efforts to foster cooperation and reduce regulatory barriers focus on two main types of issues: ( 1 ) differences in regulatory processes and approaches ; and ( 2 ) sectoral or bilateral barriers and disputes .

the goal in the first issue area is to find ways to reduce barriers to transatlantic economic integration posed by new regulations and or prevent them from happening .

the primary avenue for accomplishing this objective entails efforts to reform , harmonize or converge regulatory processes , both through the development of comparable methodologies to assess risk and do cost - benefit analysis and intensified interactions among regulators .

how regulations are developed and applied can have a large impact on the how companies do business not only in the transatlantic marketplace , but in third markets as well .

the goal in the second issue area is to reduce barriers to transatlantic integration caused by regulations in specific sectors .

this is to be accomplished by intensified sector - by - sector cooperation , including the promotion of the 2002 u.s. - eu guidelines for regulatory cooperation and case - by - case examination of specific projects called for by the roadmap for regulatory cooperation .

in the first three years ( 2007-2009 ) of its five - year history , the tec was used primarily as a mechanism to try to resolve a number of longstanding bilateral trade disputes , most notably the eu's ban on imports of chlorine - washed poultry .

efforts to harmonize regulations on a sector - by - sector basis also proved difficult due to political and bureaucratic resistance on both sides to revise existing laws and regulations .

in late 2010 , the two sides agreed to focus future efforts on aligning regulations and standards in emerging or new technologies , ( such as nanotechnology or electric cars ) well before laws or regulations have been promulgated .

accordingly , at their fifth recent meeting , held in washington on december 17 , 2010 , the tec agreed to a work program focusing on sectors where regulatory cooperation can help preclude unintended trade barriers .

among the highlights of this tec meeting , the two sides agreed to develop a process to implement compatible approaches for the regulation of new and innovative sectors , with the hope of avoiding trade disputes due to different regulations .

the meeting also provided new impetus for regulatory cooperation in specific sectors such as electronic health records , energy - saving products , and electric vehicles , as a way of reducing costs and preempting unnecessary obstacles to exports .

finally , the tec meeting launched an innovation action plan designed to strengthen joint efforts to promote innovation and the commercialization of emerging technologies .

at its sixth meeting held in november 2011 , tec leaders reviewed accomplishments in 2011 and established priorities for 2012 .

among the accomplishments , the tec noted a number of steps taken to develop a transatlantic market for electric vehicles and endorsed a work plan for e - mobility , electric vehicles , and related infrastructure .

as in many other areas supported by the tec , it remains to be seen whether the results will prove tangible and commercially significant .

this is due , in part , to the fact that regulatory cooperation is difficult and technically demanding work , with wide differences between the two sides concerning approaches to regulation .

since it began nearly two decades ago , transatlantic regulatory cooperation has been for the most part a wholly run undertaking between the executive branches and independent regulatory agencies on both sides of the atlantic .

by and large , trc exchanges and dialogues have been confined to regulators and officials of the executive branches on both sides of the atlantic .

the guidelines on regulatory cooperation and transparency , in fact , do not apply to congress or the european parliament .

the role of congress in transatlantic regulatory cooperation in the past has been limited mostly to oversight hearings ( see appendix a for a listing ) and the introduction of a few resolutions .

but congress has on occasion taken actions that have both thwarted and facilitated regulatory cooperation .

for example , on the one hand , some members of congress became concerned in the late 1990s that the mras the administration was negotiating could harm consumers and undermine health and safety standards .

as representative henry waxman ( d - ca ) put it , "there is no question that international agreements of this kind can enhance the efficiency of commerce , but it is equally clear that they can potentially depress american health and safety standards. .

according to one observer , such concerns made some u.s. regulators reluctant to participate in the mra negotiations .

on the other hand , congress also passed legislation directing the fda to support efforts of the department of commerce and ustr to implement mras .

in the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-115 ) , a bill to speed the fda approval process for new drugs and medical devices , a provision directed the fda to support the efforts of commerce and the office of the u.s. trade representative to implement mras .

according to the same observer , inclusion of the mra language in the legislation was an important step toward finishing the agreement .

these examples highlight a larger and more pivotal role congress could play in regulatory cooperation if it chose to become more involved .

to the extent that an overwhelming domestic orientation of regulatory agencies is a problem in moving trc initiatives forward , congress has the power through both the authorization and appropriations process to mandate that u.s. regulators cooperate .

congress can also ensure that the u.s. agencies involved in regulatory cooperation have the necessary budgetary and organizational resources to get the job done .

conversely , if congress views transatlantic initiatives as moving too far in the direction of trade expansion at the expense of safety and health concerns or other priorities , congress can make it difficult for u.s. agencies to continue on that course of action .

beyond providing guidance to u.s. regulatory agencies on trc initiatives , congress also could play a bigger role in preventing new legislation from causing new transatlantic regulatory barriers .

currently , taking the transatlantic impact ( trade and investment effects ) into account is not considered in any structured or formal fashion during the legislative process .

yet , political declarations from past u.s. - eu summits backed by the transatlantic business community , have urged a more institutionalized process for making congress more aware of the potential impact of new legislation on transatlantic trade .

how this could be done is the subject of considerable speculation .

one of the factors that has to be considered is the wide range of congressional committees that have primary jurisdiction over issues that are high on the agenda of trc .

as shown in appendix b , many different authorizing committees have primary jurisdiction over some of the main regulatory agencies involved in trc activities .

on the house side , the energy and commerce , transportation , judiciary , and agriculture committees all have important oversight roles .

counterpart committees on the senate side include commerce , science , and transportation , health education , labor , and pensions , energy and natural resources , environment and public works , and agriculture .

notably absent from this list are the committees charged with overall responsibility for oversight of transatlantic relations , the senate foreign relations and the house foreign affairs committees , and the committees that have primary jurisdiction over trade and investment issues , senate finance and the house ways and means .

currently , the only formal institutional link between congress and transatlantic regulatory cooperation is through the transatlantic legislators dialogue ( tld ) , an inter - parliamentary exchange between selected members of the house of representatives and the european parliament .

the tld serves as an advisor to the tec , but its membership and function have raised questions concerning how well it can carry out its role as an advisor to the tec .

much of this begs the question whether congress should be an advisor or a participant in the trc process , including the annual u.s. - eu summits .

while a more proactive role for congress would likely enhance the political basis of support for transatlantic regulatory cooperation , it is by no means certain that there is a consensus in favor of developing the necessary mechanisms and mandate to move in this direction .

appendix a .

congressional hearings on transatlantic regulatory cooperation house committee on commerce .

imported drugs: u.s. - eu mutual recognition agreement on drug prescriptions .

october 2 , 1998 , 32p .

house committee on commerce .

the eu data protection directive: implications for the u.s. privacy debate .

march 8 , 2001 , 48p .

house committee on financial services .

the eu ' s financial services action plan and its implications for the american financial services industry .

may 22 , 2002 , 122p .

house committee on financial services .

u.s. - eu regulatory dialogue and its future .

may 13 , 2004 , 106p .

house committee on financial services .

u.s. - eu regulatory dialogue: the private sector perspective .

june 17 , 2004 , 79p .

house committee on financial services .

u.s. - eu economic relationship: what comes next ? .

june 16 , 2005 , 86p .

house committee on international relations .

transatlantic trade agenda: conflict or cooperation ? .

september 29 , 1999 .

house committee on international relations .

recognizing the continued importance of the transatlantic relationship and promoting stronger relations with europe by reaffirming the need for a continued and meaningful dialogue between the u.s. and europe .

october 29 , 2003 , 16p .

senate committee on foreign relations .

u.s. - eu cooperation on regulatory affairs .

october 16 , 2003 , 55p .

senate committee on foreign relations .

u.s. - eu regulatory cooperation on emerging technologies , may 11 , 2005 , 62p .

appendix b. u.s. - eu regulatory cooperation by sector , u.s. regulatory agency , and committee oversigh .

