transnational organized crime groups flourish in burma , trafficking contraband that includes drugs , humans , guns , wildlife , gems , and timber .

transnational crime is highly profitable , reportedly generating roughly several billion dollars each year .

the country's extra - legal economy , both black market and illicit border trade , is reportedly so large that an accurate assessment of the size and structure of the country's economy is unavailable .

contraband trafficking also remains a low - risk enterprise , as corruption among officials in burma's ruling military junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) , appears to facilitate trafficking and effectively provide the criminal underground immunity from law enforcement and judicial action .

synergistic links connect various forms of contraband trafficking ; smugglers use the same routes for many forms of trafficking , following paths of least resistance , where corruption and lax law enforcement prevail .

the continued presence of transnational crime in burma and the illicit trafficking routes across burma's borders share many features of so - called "ungoverned spaces" — regions of the world where governments have difficulty establishing control or are complicit in the corruption of the rule of law .

among the commonalities that burma's border regions share with other ungoverned spaces is physical terrain that is difficult to control .

burma's long borders , through which much smuggled contraband passes , stretch across vast trackless hills and mountains that are poorly patrolled .

in addition , continuing ethnic tensions with some ethnic armed rebel groups hamper government control in some regions of the country , which is another common feature of ungoverned spaces .

recent cease - fire agreements in other border regions have not markedly improved the situation ; instead , these cease - fires have provided groups known for their activity in transnational crime with near autonomy , essentially placing these areas beyond the reach of burmese law .

congress has long been active in u.s. policy toward burma for a variety of reasons , including on issues related to transnational crime .

because the state department lists burma as a major drug - producing state , the country is barred access from u.s. foreign assistance under several long - standing legislative provisions .

congress also authorizes sanctions against countries that the state department deems in non - compliance with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking in persons , which includes burma .

the 110 th congress sought to strengthen unilateral sanctions against burma .

in response to the burmese government's forced suppression of anti - regime protests in august and september of 2007 , as well as its internationally criticized humanitarian response to destruction resulting from tropical cyclone nargis in may 2008 , congress passed p.l .

110-286 , the tom lantos block burmese jade act of 2008 ( signed by the president on july 29 , 2008 ) .

this law imposes further sanctions on spdc officials and prohibits the indirect import of burmese gems , among other actions .

h.rept .

110-418 , which accompanies h.r .

3890 , also cites "burma's rampant drug trade" and "its role as a source for international trafficking in persons and illicit goods" as additional reasons for these new sanctions .

the 111 th congress may choose to continue its interest in oversight of u.s. policy toward burma , including the country's role in criminal activity .

secretary of state hillary clinton announced in february 2009 the beginning of a review of u.s. - burma relations .

in september 2009 , the conclusions of this policy review were released , noting in particular the beginning of direct dialogue with burmese authorities on international crime - related issues , including compliance with u.n. arms sanctions and counternarcotics .

already in the first session of the 111 th congress , both the senate and the house have held hearings in which crime issues related to burma have been addressed .

burma is subject to a broad sanctions regime that addresses issues of u.s. interest , which include democracy , human rights , and international crime .

specifically in response to the extent of transnational crime occurring in burma , the president has taken additional actions against the country under several different legislative authorities .

burma is listed as a major drug - producing state , and because of its insufficient effort to combat the narcotics trade , the country is barred access to some u.s. foreign assistance .

as an uncooperative , major drug - producing state , burma is also subject to trade sanctions .

in 2005 , the department of justice indicted eight burmese individuals identified in 2003 by the u.s. treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) for their alleged role in drug trafficking and money laundering .

on november 13 , 2008 , ofac named 26 individuals and 17 companies tied to burma's wei hsueh kang and the uwsa as specially designated narcotics traffickers pursuant to the foreign narcotics kingpin designation act ( 21 u.s.c .

1901-1908 ) .

burma is characterized by the state department's 2009 trafficking in persons report as a tier 3 state engaged in the most severe forms of trafficking in persons ; as such , burma is subject to sanctions , barring the country from non - humanitarian , non - trade - related u.s. assistance and loss of u.s. support for loans from international financial institutions .

as a major money laundering country — defined by section 481 ( e ) ( 7 ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , as one "whose financial institutions engage in currency transactions including significant amounts of proceeds from international narcotics trafficking" — burma is subject to several "special measures" to regulate and monitor financial flows .

these include department of treasury advisories for enhanced scrutiny over financial transactions , as well as five special measures listed under 31 u.s.c .

5318a .

the united states does not apply sanctions against burma in specific response to its activity in other illicit trades , including wildlife .

the block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2007 ( h.r .

3890 ) , however , would prohibit the importation of gems and hardwoods from burma , among other restrictions .

after more than a decade of applying sanctions against burma , however , many analysts have concluded that the sanctions have done little to change the situation .

the effectiveness of u.s. sanctions is limited by several factors .

these include ( 1 ) unevenly applied sanctions against burma by other countries and international organizations , including the european union and japan ; ( 2 ) a booming natural gas production and export industry that provides the spdc with significant revenue ; ( 3 ) continued unwillingness of burma's fellow members in the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) to impose economic sanctions against burma ; ( 4 ) burma's historical isolation from the global economy ; and ( 5 ) china's continued economic and military assistance to burma .

in addition , some analysts suggest that sanctions are , in part , culpable for the flourishing black markets in burma , including trafficking in humans , gems , and drugs , because legal exports are barred .

several analysts indicate that many burmese women who lost their jobs in the textile industry as a result of western sanctions are among the victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation .

the united states is assisting neighboring countries with stemming the flow of trafficked contraband from burma into their territories .

although most u.s. assistance to combat transnational crime in burma remains in suspension , the united states is working to train law enforcement and border control officials in neighboring countries through anti - crime assistance programs .

currently , the bulk of funding to burma's neighbors remains concentrated in counter - narcotics and anti - human trafficking projects ; no funding is allocated to the state department for combating "organized and gang - related crime" in the region .

overall funding to combat trafficking has been in decline for several years ; the administration's fy2008 appropriations request for foreign operations in the region represents a 24.2% decrease from fy2006 actual funding .

despite burma's recent progress in reducing opium poppy cultivation , most experts believe u.s. policies have not yielded substantial leverage in combating transnational crime emanating from burma .

in light of the most recent displays of junta violence against political demonstrators in september 2007 , however , there are indications of increasing political interest in re - evaluating u.s. policy toward burma .

among the considerations that policy makers have recently raised are ( 1 ) whether the united states should increase the amount of humanitarian aid sent to burma ; ( 2 ) what role asean and other multilateral vehicles for dialogue could play in increasing political pressure on the junta regime ; ( 3 ) what role the united states sees india , as the world's largest democracy and burma's neighbor , playing in ensuring that burma does not become a source of regional instability ; and ( 4 ) how the united states can further work with china and thailand , as the largest destinations of trafficked goods from burma , to address transnational crime along burma's borders .

