the united states congress conducts several types of activities for which it employs staff .

congressional employees are retained to perform public duties that include assisting members in official responsibilities in personal , committee , leadership , or administrative office settings .

organized to support members of congress in their various duties and functions in washington , dc , and constituency offices around the united states , staff are involved in virtually all elements of the work of congress .

individuals in congressional staff positions may come from a wide range of training or professional backgrounds .

these might include the law , business , medicine , political campaigns , engineering , the social sciences , or fine arts .

nevertheless , congressional staff are seen by some as a professional cohort .

congressional career tracks generally mirror common stages of other professional careers , but with adaptations to the congressional workplace .

these adaptations include relatively short career ladders on which staff may acquire substantial responsibilities in a relatively short period of time , and close support of a member's legislative and representational responsibilities .

this report focuses on positions in house and senate personal offices , and provides sample position descriptions for 14 positions with similar job titles in each chamber .

identifying congressional staff duties and job descriptions is complicated by the highly decentralized nature of congressional employment practices .

the house of representatives is composed of as many as 500 entities that set job criteria and employ staff ; in the senate , there are about 135 such entities .

congressional staff may work in a member , committee , or leadership office ; in positions under the authority of chamber officers ; or in chamber support entities with specialized duties .

additional challenges of the congressional personnel environment may include different approaches to some practices common in many professional environments .

some congressional employing entities may not use formal position descriptions ; others may not implement formal personnel practices and guidelines , or clearly establish lines of authority for personnel issues in their offices .

in offices where personnel practices and guidelines are developed , practices could vary from office to office .

all decisions regarding activities and operations in a member's office are within the discretion of the member , subject to chamber rules and relevant statute .

as with all congressional entities with employing authority , individual members of congress have wide discretion in setting many workplace policies , including procedures for establishing the duties and functions of staff positions .

staffing decisions may be determined by the priorities and goals of a congressional office , and the preferences and needs of a member's constituents .

an incumbent in this position typically acts as the member's chief policy advisor , and may also undertake political advising .

an incumbent may also develop and implement all policy objectives , strategies , and operating plans for a member's office ; manage and direct all activities and staff of the member's washington , dc , and field offices ; coordinate the activities of the member with the leadership of the appropriate chamber and committees ; and oversee the member's office budget .

house: legislative director , and administrative assistant .

senate: counsel , district scheduler , district director , executive assistant , field representative , grants and projects coordinator , legislative director , office manager , press secretary / communications director , scheduler ( washington , dc ) , systems administrator , legislative aide , senior legislative aide .

an incumbent in this position typically acts as a liaison with federal , state , and / or local agencies on behalf of constituents .

in the course of employment , an incumbent may respond to casework inquiries from constituents , act as the grassroots representative for the member within assigned areas of responsibility , and monitor and update the member and district director on district and local issues .

house: casework manager , constituent advocate , district aide , district representative .

senate: district scheduler , field representative , grants and projects coordinator , legislative correspondent , office manager , systems administrator , senior legislative aide , staff assistant ( district ) , staff assistant ( washington , dc ) .

an incumbent in this position is typically an attorney who advises the member on legal issues and ensures compliance with the law and chamber rules , including ethics guidelines .

house: legislative counsel , legislative counsel & director .

senate: legislative director , legislative aide , senior legislative aide .

a district director typically oversees all district office operations for a member of the house ; represents the member , or assigns appropriate staff to do so , in the district ; and travels within the district to keep abreast of local concerns .

a state director typically manages the principal state office and / or other state offices of a senator , and oversees all state office operations .

house: community services director , deputy district director , district chief of staff , district representative , district supervisor .

senate: chief of staff , constituent services representative / caseworker , counsel , district scheduler , field representative , grants and projects coordinator .

a district scheduler typically maintains a house member's district schedule , travel plans , and related records ; briefs the member on all scheduling activities of the district office ; and makes recommendations on proposed scheduled activities .

a state scheduler typically manages a senator's schedule in the state .

house: office manager , district office coordinator , district representative / scheduler .

senate: constituent services representative / caseworker , executive assistant , field representative , grants and projects coordinator , office manager , systems administrator .

an incumbent in this position typically acts as liaison for the member with the member's personal office staff , committee staff , other members and their staffs , and the public .

an incumbent may also serve as the member's confidential assistant with respect to all matters affecting the member's performance of his or her official responsibilities .

position duties may also include maintaining the member's files , including notes , correspondence , and all information related to travel ; logging and monitoring the member's incoming telephone calls , taking messages , and placing outgoing calls for the member ; and ensuring that the member is provided with briefing materials for various activities in which the member participates .

house: scheduler , administrative assistant , administrative secretary , congressional aide , executive / legislative assistant .

senate: executive assistant , legislative correspondent , office manager , scheduler ( washington , dc ) , systems administrator , district scheduler , legislative aide , staff assistant ( washington , dc ) .

an incumbent in this position typically acts as a liaison with federal , state , and local agencies for the member and the member's constituents .

a field representative may also assess casework for matters that might require legislative action and make recommendations to the district or state director , or chief of staff .

house: community representative , congressional liaison , constituent liaison , director of public liaison , district liaison , district assistant , district coordinator , district representative , military liaison , policy advisor , senior staff assistant , senior community representative , senior field representative for labor relations , special assistant .

senate: constituent services representative / caseworker , district scheduler , grants and projects coordinator , legislative director , press secretary / communications director , legislative aide , staff assistant ( district ) .

an incumbent in one of these positions typically has primary responsibilities for special projects or grant procurement .

house: community development coordinator , congressional liaison and grants coordinator , director of economic development , director of special projects , district projects manager , field representative — grants , grants coordinator and suburban director , outreach director , projects director , senior field representative for special projects .

senate: legislative assistant , appropriations director , community outreach representative , constituent service coordinator , director of state communications and special projects , director of research and legislative correspondence , field representative for grants , grants administrator and deputy scheduler , grants coordinator , project manager , projects director , projects coordinator , resource specialist , special assistant , special project coordinator , special projects manager , staff assistant , state projects director .

a legislative correspondent typically provides research for and responds to constituents' correspondence .

these duties might include drafting , proofreading , and printing letters , and providing administrative support to legislative aides or legislative assistants as needed .

house: legislative aide and legislative correspondent , legislative correspondent / legislative assistant .

senate: constituent services representative / caseworker , counsel , grants and projects coordinator , office manager , scheduler ( washington , dc ) , legislative aide , staff assistant ( washington , dc ) .

an incumbent in this position typically manages office legislative activities , and may supervise a member's legislative staff .

a legislative director might assist in the development of policy positions and legislative initiatives , or monitor and report to the chief of staff or member on floor activity .

house: administrative assistant , deputy chief of staff , legislative counsel , policy director .

senate: chief of staff , constituent services representative / caseworker counsel , legislative correspondent , office manager , systems administrator , legislative aide , senior legislative aide .

an incumbent in one of these positions typically supervises washington , dc , office staff , including monitoring personnel matters and ensuring that office policies and procedures are followed .

duties may include directing the administrative support staff of the office ; maintenance of office accounts in accordance with law , chamber rules , and the regulations of the appropriate chamber administrative committee ; and procuring and maintaining equipment for washington , dc , and field offices .

house: assistant office manager ( district ) , deputy chief of staff , director of operations , finance administrator , financial manager , office manager / executive assistant / scheduler , office manager / scheduler , projects director / office manager .

senate: constituent services representative / caseworker , district scheduler , executive assistant , field representative , grants and projects coordinator , scheduler ( washington , dc ) , systems administrator , legislative aide , staff assistant ( washington , dc ) .

incumbents in either position typically manage and coordinate all communication activities , including media contacts , for the member and the office .

other duties may include developing and implementing media and communications strategies for the member , acting as the formal spokesperson and media liaison for the member , and writing speeches for the member .

house: administrative assistant / press secretary , assistant press secretary ( district ) , deputy chief of staff , press assistant , press secretary .

senate: counsel , district director , district scheduler , executive assistant , field representative , office manager , scheduler ( washington , dc ) , systems administrator , legislative aide , senior legislative aide .

a washington , dc - based house scheduler typically maintains a member's official schedule , travel plans , and related records .

in addition an incumbent may also brief the member on all scheduling activities of the washington , dc , office ; make recommendations on proposed meetings ; schedule staff meetings and briefings ; and coordinate the scheduling of member press and media interactions with the press secretary or communications director .

a washington , dc - based senate scheduler typically maintains a senator's daily , weekly , and monthly schedules .

house: administrative assistant , executive assistant / scheduler .

senate: district scheduler , executive assistant , legislative correspondent , office manager , systems administrator , legislative aide , staff assistant ( washington , dc ) .

an incumbent in this position typically updates and maintains all office computers and the office computer network .

other duties of the position may include development and maintenance of an information management strategy for the office ; coordination of the filing and indexing of all correspondence and mass mailings ; consulting with users to determine hardware , software , and / or system specifications ; and serving as the liaison between the office and chamber technical support entities .

house: director of technology and community outreach , system administrator / legislative correspondent , technology director .

senate: office manager , legislative correspondent , legislative aide .

