natural gas markets in north america remained relatively stable compared to oil markets in 2007 .

the situation has tightened and prices have regained some upward momentum in 2008 .

this report examines current conditions and trends in the u.s. natural gas markets .

key market elements examined include prices , consumption , production , imports , and infrastructure .

expectations about the future , as reflected in recent official forecasts , are also incorporated here .

natural gas remains an important and environmentally attractive energy source for the united states .

its share of the power generation market has grown .

domestic supply has remained stable and even increased in recent months .

new developments in alaska increase the likelihood that a pipeline from the north slope will proceed .

the natural gas industry continues to attract capital for new pipeline and storage infrastructure .

liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports hit a record level in 2007 , even as import facilities continue to have low utilization rates .

weather and the economy remain important factors in natural gas prices , as well .

given the generally adequate functioning of natural gas markets , congressional interest in the near term is likely to focus on unexpected price volatility or importation ( or other supply ) issues .

in the longer term , industry pressure for increased access to public lands for exploration and production is expected to continue receiving congressional attention .

this report reviews key factors likely to affect market outcomes .

these factors include weather , the economy , oil prices , and infrastructure development .

tables a1 to a4 ( in the appendix ) present selected highlight statistics that illustrate current market status .

briefly , important developments in natural gas markets include the following: the growth in natural gas for power generation has contributed to increased consumption and reduced seasonal variation in use because gas - for - power peaks in summer , versus the total natural gas use winter peak .

in 2007 , for the first time , the power generation sector used more natural gas than any other sector .

the first quarter 2008 average spot price at henry hub increased 20% from the first quarter 2007 to $8.92 per thousand cubic feet ( mcf ) , versus a 6% year - to - year increase from 2006 to 2007 .

during the 2007-2008 heating season ( october to march ) , average wellhead prices increased more than 30% , according to eia estimates .

storage levels towards the end of the heating season dropped below five year averages .

in the first storage report after the 2007-2008 heating season , working gas storage was at 1,234 billion cubic feet — the lowest level since april 30 , 2004 .

this may indicate that slack in the supply side is decreasing .

the united states had record lng imports in 2007 , and increased lng imports appear likely .

natural gas infrastructure development continued to advance , with many pipeline and storage projects successfully completed in 2007 and more underway in 2008 ( including lng import facilities ) .

industrial natural gas use had a small rebound in 2007 .

unlike the global oil market , natural gas markets remain generally regional , with global trade in lng growing .

for the most part , north america has a continent - wide market that is integrated through a pipeline network that connects the lower - 48 states , the most populous provinces of canada , and parts of mexico .

prices throughout this integrated market are influenced by demand ( which may be influenced by weather , economic conditions , alternative fuel prices , and other factors ) , supply , and the capacity available to link supply sources and demand loads ( transmission and distribution systems ) .

the u.s. natural gas market is the major component of the north american natural gas market .

it accounts for about 81% of north american consumption and about 69% of north american supply .

the key price point in north america is henry hub .

henry hub is a major pipeline hub in erath , louisiana , that is used as the designated pricing and delivery point for the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) gas futures contract and other transactions .

the price difference between other locations and henry hub is called the "basis differential. .

when there is spare capacity available to move natural gas from henry hub , or the gulf of mexico region in general , to the relevant price point area , the basis differential tends to be low , approximating the costs of fuel used to move the gas to the location .

when capacity availability is tight , basis differentials can grow because the driving force can become the value of the natural gas at the delivery point , rather than the cost of getting the natural gas to that point .

natural gas prices also incorporate costs for distributing the gas from the wholesale marketplace to retail customers .

these rates are generally determined by state regulators and involve both ( 1 ) the approval of costs and rates of return and ( 2 ) the allocation of costs among customer classes ( eg , residential , commercial , industrial ) .

although the north american natural gas market remains a distinct regional market , it is increasingly connecting to a global gas marketplace through international lng trade .

oil prices still affect u.s. natural gas prices and this relationship is changing .

the key elements of the market are prices , consumption , and supply .

this section provides highlights from recent market developments relating to these factors .

there are several trends under way in natural gas markets of interest to policy makers .

they include: a decrease in seasonal demand swings a growth in gas - for - power use a small rebound in industrial use of natural gas a growing international trade in lng continuing progress in natural gas infrastructure development .

there are a few noteworthy elements of recent eia forecasts for the natural gas markets .

in its short term energy outlook , eia forecasts a 1% increase in natural gas use for 2008 , relative to 2007 .

weather changes and economic conditions are the reasons eia mentioned for the slowed growth .

prices are also likely to reinforce a short term slowdown in use .

eia forecasts record u.s. consumption of 23.4 trillion cf in 2009 .

eia forecasts increased u.s. production in 2008 of almost 3% , primarily from growth in deepwater gulf of mexico and unconventional gas production .

lng imports are expected to decline about 14% from 2007 .

eia forecasts supply area natural gas prices ( henry hub ) to increase almost 20% in 2008 to $8.34 per million btu .

in eia's long term forecast ( through 2030 ) , the reference case forecasts natural gas prices at the wellhead gradually decreasing to $5.27 per mcf during the 2015 to 2020 period before gradually increasing to $6.42 per mcf ( 2006 dollars ) in 2030 .

eia forecasts natural gas consumption growth to 24.4 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) in 2015 , declining to 23.4 tcf by 2030 .

most of this increased use and the drop come from growth , then decline , in natural gas for power generation .

eia forecasts the arrival of alaska natural gas to the lower - 48 via pipeline in 2020 , with deliveries reaching 2.4 tcf per year by 2030 .

this is a two year delay from eia's 2007 forecast .

eia's forecast of gradual reductions in natural gas prices depends on certain assumptions embedded in the forecast .

these factors have uncertainty associated with them , as discussed next .

since the end of 2007 , several noteworthy developments have occurred in the natural gas markets: eia reports natural gas price increases in 2008 .

for the 2007-2008 heating season ( november - march ) , the average spot price at the wellhead increased more than 30% from the beginning to the end of heating season , to $8.06 per million btu .

storage levels towards the end of the heating season dropped below five year averages .

in the first storage report after the 2007-2008 heating season , working gas storage was at 1,234 billion cubic feet , the lowest level since april 30 , 2004 .

this may indicate that slack in the supply side is decreasing .

the opening of the rockies express natural gas pipeline out of the rocky mountain production region appears to have relieved transmission congestion there .

this improved the net back price within the production area .

the wellhead price in the rockies area increased from $4.82 per million btu in november 2007 to $8.41 in march 2008 .

this improves the incentives for producers to find and develop new supplies in this area .

the natural gas pipeline from the north slope of alaska has made progress .

in january 2008 , the governor of alaska announced that one of the pipeline project applications under the state alaska gasline inducement act ( agia ) was judged complete .

in april 2008 , two of the north slope gas producers , bp and conocophillips , announced that they had joined together to start a potentially competing effort , the denali alaska gas pipeline , which has an open season target date ( date when capacity will be offered to potential shippers ) of 2010 and an in - service target of 2018 ( stated by the producers as a 10-year target ) .

in early april , the independence trail pipeline that serves the independence hub platform in the gulf of mexico was taken out of service for pipeline repairs that could take until mid - year to complete .

independence hub produces almost 1 billion cubic feet per day , roughly 10% of u.s. gulf of mexico production .

in may , the north american electric reliability corporation concluded the natural gas supply outlook for the summer of 2008 is "healthy. .

generally , these developments indicate that the nation's natural gas market is functioning in tune with fundamental supply and demand conditions .

despite the problems arising in some parts of the energy system , natural gas fuel markets in north america have operated relatively well .

the smooth natural gas market situation of 2007 appears to have evolved into different , tighter circumstances for 2008 .

if gas - on - gas competition declines and natural gas prices shift back into a competitive range with petroleum products , this will intensify the adverse effects of high oil prices .

the decline in seasonal consumption swings , primarily due to the increased use of gas - for - power , can improve the efficiency with which the nation's natural gas pipeline and storage infrastructure is used .

construction of new pipeline and storage infrastructure has continued to progress in a way apparently consistent with supply and demand fundamentals .

finally , lng infrastructure development also continues .

the low current capacity factors at the capital - intensive existing lng import facilities may indicate that the u.s. lng purchasing power is not proving as competitive in the international lng market as project developers or those reviewing the projects had anticipated .

the location of lng facilities has an important effect on this potential competitiveness , and this factor may require greater consideration for future projects .

how weather and the economy perform will play an important role in whether prices continue to increase or downward pressure develops for natural gas as a commodity .

