transfer of supreme political power in russia can be a dicey business .

under the tsars , succession to the throne often was accompanied by intrigue and bloodshed .

this held true during the communist period as well , although it became less deadly after stalin .

in december 1991 , yeltsin effectively overthrew gorbachev and dissolved the soviet union in a bloodless coup .

eight years later , a politically moribund yeltsin resigned as president of russia three months before the end of his term and named putin acting president , circumventing the normal electoral process .

with this "leg - up," putin easily won election in march 2000 and was reelected with no real opposition four years later .

putin's presidency was a period of relative political stability , but as the end of his second term drew near , the succession question reemerged as a burning issue .

putin is a very popular leader , enjoying nation - wide public approval ratings in the 70% - 80% range during most of his presidency .

pro - kremlin political parties in the duma ( the lower and by far more powerful chamber of russia's bicameral legislature ) have long held more than the two - thirds majority required to amend the constitution .

the question on everyone's mind was , would putin step down at the end of his second term ? .

in 2007 , many russian officials and politicians publically urged putin to stay on as president .

numerous scenarios appeared in the russian press , suggesting that putin might override , amend , or do an end - run around the constitution in order to retain power .

on september 10 , 2007 , putin made a surprise announcement dismissing prime minister mikhail fradkov — whom he had plucked from obscurity to take that post in 2005 — and nominated in his place the even more obscure victor zubkov , who had previously headed the financial monitoring service , an arm of the finance ministry that investigates money - laundering .

zubkov is 65 years old and has no political power base or constituency of his own — other than putin's backing .

putin explained this move as necessary to "prepare the country" for forthcoming elections , which immediately triggered speculation that zubkov might be putin's choice for president in 2008 , perhaps as a "place holder," a mechanism that would allow putin to retain control and / or return to the presidency after a brief interregnum .

this brought the issue of the "putin succession," which had been heating up since 2006 , to a full boil .

but in russia's election cycle , the vote for president ( march 2 , 2008 ) was preceded the parliamentary election ( december 2 , 2007 ) , which was seen as a harbinger of the presidential contest .

the kremlin decided to make the 2007 parliamentary election a referendum on putin and putinism .

and despite putin's apparent genuine popularity , they were determined to take no chances on the outcome .

in the run - up to the duma election , the authorities used myriad official and unofficial levers of power and influence to assure an overwhelming victory for united russia , the main kremlin party .

on october 1 , 2007 , putin announced that he would run for parliament at the head of the united russia ticket , making the outcome doubly certain .

the state - controlled media heavily favored united russia and largely ignored or disparaged the opposition .

opposition party literature was seized and their rallies often shut down or harassed .

potentially popular opposition candidates were bought off , intimidated , or barred from running on "legal technicalities. .

in march 2007 , for example , the supreme court ruled that vladimir ryzhkov's republican party — one of the few remaining liberal democratic parties — must be disbanded because it violated the 2004 law requiring parties to have at least 50,000 members and 45 regional offices .

russian authorities effectively prevented the main election observing body of the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) from sending an observer team , first by limiting their number to 70 ( compared to 450 osce observers for the previous duma election ) and then delaying issuance of visas until the last minute , thus blocking normal monitoring of the election campaign .

the preordained result of the december 2 , 2007 balloting for the duma was a sweep by united russia , which reportedly won 64.3% of the popular vote and 315 of the 450 seats — more than the two - thirds majority required to amend the constitution .

a second pro - kremlin party , a just russia — widely believed to have been created by kremlin "political technologists" in 2007 to draw leftist votes away from the communists — won 7.74 percent of the vote and 38 seats .

the platforms of united russia and a just russia consisted of little more than their slogan,"for putin ! .

vladimir zhirinovsky's misnamed liberal democratic party of russia ( ldpr ) , with 8.14% of the vote , won 40 seats .

despite zhirinovsky's buffoonery and reputation for right - wing extremism , the ldpr is also a reliable supporter of putin in the duma .

thus , the kremlin can count on the votes of 393 of the 450 duma deputies .

the only opposition party in the duma is the communist party , which , according to the official vote count , won 11.57% of the vote and 57 seats .

the remaining parties failed to cross the 7% threshold required to win seats in the legislature .

the traditional liberal democratic parties , yabloko and the union of rightist forces , reportedly received 1.59% and 0.96% of the vote , respectively .

the official voter turnout was total 63% .

 ( see crs report rs22770 , russia ' s december 2007 legislative election: outcome and implications , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

despite some allegations of ballot - box stuffing , voter intimidation , and other "irregularities," there is little doubt that by dint of putin's widespread popularity , an honest vote count would still have given united russia a resounding victory .

the main problem with the election was not the vote count , but the entire process leading up to the balloting .

in the words of the deputy head of the osce's parliamentary assembly , "the executive branch acted as though it practically elected the parliament itself. .

on december 10 , barely a week after the duma election , putin announced his choice for president: dmitri medvedev .

the 42-year - old medvedev , a long - time putin protégé , had headed the presidential administration before putin made him first deputy prime minister in 2005 .

like putin and many of the kremlin inner circle , medvedev is a native of st. petersburg ( formerly leningrad ) .

but unlike so many of the inner circle , he does not have a background in the security services .

his academic training is as a lawyer .

he is viewed by many in russia and the west as one of the most liberal of the generally illiberal cadre surrounding putin .

one day after his anointment , medvedev announced that , if elected , he would ask putin to serve as prime minister .

one week later , putin formally accepted this offer .

this carefully choreographed arrangement presumably was meant to assure political continuity for putin and to dampen political in - fighting among the rival clans within the putin camp .

but it does not clearly define the forthcoming political constellation , nor does it assure political stability .

competing scenarios and rumors abound .

one thing that all observers agreed on , however , was that putin's selection of medvedev made the later's victory in the march 2 presidential election a certainty .

immediately after putin announced his support for medvedev as his successor , russia's bureaucratic and political elites raced to affirm their loyalty to the chosen one .

the leaders of united russia , a just russia , civic force , and the agrarian party all agreed to support medvedev .

"each of the parties , in its own way , is realizing its political program by supporting a single candidate.... [t]his shows how the political system in russia is maturing , and we now have the chance to make consolidated decisions , despite our differences," enthused aleksandr babkin of a just russia .

pavel astakhov , head of the for putin ! .

movement , called medvedev "a multifaceted person who suits the interests of completely different political forces and segments of society. .

federation council member yury sharandin observed , more pragmatically , that medvedev would win the march 2 election in the first round because "the popularity of vladimir putin will be transferred this time not to an entire party with an enormous number of people , but to one concrete person. .

putin , apparently concerned that lack of credible opposition might lead to low voter participation , approved a law eliminating the requirement for a minimum 20% voter turnout for an election to the duma and a 50% turnout for a presidential vote for an election to be valid .

in march 2007 , putin removed aleksandr veshnyakov as head of the central election commission ( cec ) .

veshnyakov , who had served on the commission since 1994 and been its chairman since 1999 , criticized legislation that expands "pretexts for [the authorities] to disqualify candidates they find inconvenient..." and warned that russia was in danger of becoming a one - party state .

the new chairmen , vladimir churov , said that "the principal difference between me and...veshnyakov is that i am less likely to comment on election legislation and more inclined to get things done. .

one of medvedev's few credible rivals was mikhail kasyanov , putin's relatively liberal prime minister from 2000-2005 .

in 2006 , a year after his dismissal , kasyanov declared that he would form a new political party and run for president in 2008 .

the federal registration service soon declared that it would not register kasyanov's russian popular democratic union party because its registration documents "did not meet technical requirements. .

kasyanov's party was barred from taking part in the duma election .

russia's election law stipulates that parties not represented in the duma may not nominate presidential candidates .

independent candidates must in a few weeks time collect the signatures of 2,000,000 supporters to be listed on the ballot – a daunting requirement .

after kasyanov's petitions were submitted , the central election commission ruled that 13% of his 2.4 million signatures were invalid .

kasyanov was barred from participating in the election .

besides the two pro - kremlin parties that backed mevedev , only zhironovsly's ldpr and the communist party are represented in the duma and thus had the automatic right to nominate presidential candidates .

the ldpr nominated zhironovsky and the communist party nominated its long - time leader , gennady zyuganov .

one other name appeared on the ballot , andrei bogdanov , leader of the democratic party .

bogdanov , a former united russia official , won control of the tiny democratic party with kremlin backing after a leadership struggle with kasyanov .

although the democratic party , usually seen as a kremlin - backed pseudo - opposition group , won fewer than 90,000 votes nation - wide in the december 2007 duma election , bogdanov supporters apparently had little difficulty getting 2 million signatures and their man was certified as a candidate .

this guaranteed that if zyuganov dropped out of the race , as he had threatened , there would be at least the appearance of a contested election .

russian and foreign observers of the election campaign virtually all noted that news coverage was skewed overwhelmingly in medvedev's favor .

this was especially true of tv news , the principal source of political news for most russians .

all the nation - wide tv networks are owned or controlled by the state .

the previous format of "all - putin , all the time" was shifted to medvedev .

not surprisingly , medvedev refused to participate in public debates with any of his rivals .

moscow also imposed the same restrictions on the osce's election observers as during the duma election , with the same result .

the osce refused to send election observers under the conditions imposed by moscow .

election commissions in the united states , the united kingdom , spain , france , and germany all officially informed moscow that they would not observe the presidential ballot .

according to the final report of the cec , medvedev won 70.28% of the popular vote , slightly less than putin's margin in 2004 ( 71.31% ) .

communist party leader zyuganov came in second with 17.2% of the vote .

zhirinovskiy polled 9.34% and bogdanov garnered 1.29% .

zhirinovskiy's representative on the cec stated that the results reflected the will of the people and zhirinovskiy pledged to support the new president .

zyuganov claimed that election rigging had denied him an extra 5% - 10% of the vote .

while russian and western observers understood that the outcome of this election was not really in doubt , there were major questions about what a medvedev presidency might mean .

some speculate that putin's obedient duma majority may amend the constitution , shifting some power from the president to the prime minister .

under the present super - presidential constitution , the prime minister serves at the pleasure of the president and may be dismissed by the president at any time .

according to "unnamed kremlin sources," the presidential administration was ordered to prepare a draft constitutional law that would require the president to secure approval of four - fifths of the duma and two - thirds of the federation council ( the upper chamber of parliament ) in order to dismiss the prime minister .

this is only one of many changes that would have to be made in order to shift power decisively from the president to the prime minister .

it would require a major re - write of the constitution – a move that putin has specifically said he does not contemplate .

others suggest that president medvedev may voluntarily cede substantial power to prime minister putin , allowing the mentor to continue wielding real power .

proponents of this view note that medvedev's entire political career has been under the direct tutelage of putin and that the younger man is a totally loyal protégé .

but such a "dual power" arrangement is viewed by some observers as inherently unstable .

as former russian presidential spokesman vyacheslav kostikov put it , "the problem is who will be number one. .

another insider wrote that "the key problem will not be relations between putin and medvedev per se , but how this diarchy is able to handle the kremlin inner circle , which is split up into competing factions.... [t]he regime will have another center of influence no less legitimate than putin , to whom it will be possible to appeal .

and for the first time there will be a situation in which putin's decision may not be the final or decisive one. .

another scenario envisions medvedev resigning after a "decent interval," necessitating a new presidential election in which putin would be eligible to run , since he would not have served more than two consecutive terms .

this hinges on medvedev's total loyalty to putin .

but could putin count on that with complete certainty ? .

the age - old lesson illustrated in tolkein's lord of the rings is that power is seductively delicious and difficult to relinquish .

still others suggest that because russian political institutions , per se , are weak , putin would be able to retain the status of de facto national leader based on his popularity , prestige , and powerful connections with the security services , whose personnel he has placed in key positions throughout the government ministries and bureaucracy , the media , and leading economic enterprises .

alternatively , putin might plan on remaining as a powerful prime minister for a year or two while making sure that medvedev is an able and loyal successor — and be prepared to push medvedev aside if the younger man proved unsatisfactory .

but in this view , if medvedev proved himself to be a worthy successor in putin's eyes , putin would gradually relinquish command of the ship of state , leaving the helm in medvedev's hands .

russia is not as central to u.s. interests or the u.s. role in the world as was the soviet union in the cold war era .

but developments in russia are still quite important to the united states .

russia remains a nuclear superpower and will play a major role in determining the national security environment in europe , the middle east , and asia .

russia is also a major economic power with vast oil and gas reserves .

the war on terrorism , arms control , efforts to contain wmd proliferation , the future of nato , and energy security , inter alia , may all be affected by developments in russia .

important specific , immediate issues on the u.s. - russian agenda include missile defense in europe , kosovo , and iran's nuclear activities .

some observers believe that the identity of the individual who wields power in the kremlin after 2008 is not particularly important , because putin has already succeeded in reestablishing traditional russian authoritarianism and statism , i.e .

: putinism will prevail with or without putin .

others argue that russia's post - soviet political evolution is still a work in progress , that the policies and preferences of russia's paramount leader can be decisive in setting the nations' course – and its relations with the united states – as was the case when mikhail gorbachev ascended to the kremlin and adopted policies that wrought profound , albeit sometimes unintended , consequences .

the question of whether medvedev's election victory results in an actual transfer of power is in itself an important issue .

if medvedev replaces putin as "the decider," the act of honoring the two - consecutive - term constitutional limit itself will strengthen the rule of law in russia .

if , on the other hand , it turns out that putin succeeds himself in one way or another , that will reinforce the tradition that russia is ruled not by laws , but by men .

it may not necessarily be true that a more democratic russia will be a more friendly and accommodating partner for the united states .

but there is a widespread belief that the more russia adopts the values of democracy and free markets , the more likely is it to co - exist harmoniously with the industrial democracies of the west – whereas authoritarianism and statism are believed more likely to lead toward militarism and neo - imperialism in what many russians still think of as the "former soviet space. .

there is a broad consensus in the west that putin , the career kgb / fsb professional , purposefully undermined nascent democratic trends that had arisen under gorbachev and yeltsin , in favor of statism and centralized authoritarianism .

one of the hallmarks of putin's administration is that he surrounded himself with current and former members of the security services , the so - called siloviki .

medvedev is one of the few in putin's inner circle who does not share that background , having initially attained prominence as an outstanding young attorney and law professor .

some russian and western observers view medvedev as relatively liberal , compared to most other senior kremlin insiders .

others dispute this view , arguing that medvedev could not have attained his current position if he were significantly out of step with putin's authoritarian tendencies .

as first deputy prime minister , medvedev was in charge of the putin administration's four major "national projects," high - profile government initiatives aimed at improving housing , health care , agriculture , and education .

in his 2008 presidential campaign , medvedev has focused on socioeconomic issues such as these , with the positive spin that "this is what i can / will do for you. .

he notably does not repeat putin's tactic in the recent duma election campaign , of shrilly denouncing opponents as "jackals" and agents of sinister outside forces , conspiring to foist some sort of "orange revolution" on russia .

nor has medvedev been in the chorus of top russian officials sharply and ostentatiously criticizing the bush administration , u.s. policies , nato , and the west .

it is an open question whether medvedev , as president , would seek to , or be able to , moderate the tough anti - u.s. rhetoric and , more importantly , the policies behind that rhetoric .

the answer to this question has potentially far - reaching implications for the united states .

