congress is considering several legislative strategies that would reduce u.s. emissions of greenhouse gases — primarily carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) — and / or increase uptake and storage of co 2 from the atmosphere .

both approaches are viewed by many observers as critical to forestalling global climate change caused , in part , by the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere from human activities .

others point out that the human contribution of carbon to the atmosphere is a small fraction of the total quantity of carbon that cycles naturally back and forth each year between the atmosphere and two huge carbon reservoirs: the global oceans and the planet's land surface .

a key question is how co 2 emissions from human activities are changing the global carbon cycle — the exchange , or flux , of carbon between the atmosphere , oceans , and land surface — and how the changes affect the rate of co 2 buildup in the atmosphere .

most climate scientists agree that human perturbations to the carbon cycle are a main factor driving climate change over the past 50 years .

for most of human history , the global carbon cycle has been roughly in balance , and the concentration of co 2 in the atmosphere has been fairly constant at approximately 280 parts per million ( ppm ) .

human activities , namely the burning of fossil fuels , deforestation , and other land use activities , have significantly altered the carbon cycle .

as a result , atmospheric concentrations of co 2 have risen by over 35% since the industrial revolution , and are now greater than 380 ppm .

an understanding of the global carbon cycle has shifted from being of mainly academic interest to being also of policy interest .

policy makers are grappling with , for example , how to design a cap - and - trade system that accurately accounts for carbon sequestration by components of the land surface sink , such as forests or farmland .

a cap - and - trade system that limits emissions , and is designed to keep atmospheric co 2 below a specific concentration , would depend inherently on continued uptake of carbon by the oceans and land surface .

yet how much co 2 forests or farmland are capable of taking up in the future , and for how long , is not clear .

how the ocean and the land surface carbon reservoirs will behave in the future — how much co 2 they will take up or release and at what rate — are topics of active scientific inquiry .

thus the scientific understanding of the carbon cycle is integral to many aspects of the current congressional debate over how to mitigate climate change .

this report puts the human contribution of carbon to the atmosphere into the larger context of the global carbon cycle .

the report focuses almost entirely on co 2 , which alone is responsible for over half of the change in earth's radiation balance .

according to the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) , co 2 is the most important greenhouse gas released to the atmosphere from human activities .

the atmosphere , oceans , vegetation , and soils on the land surface all store carbon .

 ( see figure 1 a . ) .

geological reservoirs also store carbon in the form of fossil fuels , such as oil , gas , and coal .

of these reservoirs ( or pools ) , dissolved inorganic carbon in the ocean is the largest , followed in size by fossil carbon in geological reservoirs , and by the total amount of carbon contained in soils .

 ( see figure 1 a and table 1 . ) .

the atmosphere itself contains nearly 800 billion metric tons of carbon ( 800 gtc ) , which is more carbon than all of the earth's living vegetation contains .

carbon contained in the oceans , vegetation , and soils on the land surface is linked to the atmosphere through natural processes such as photosynthesis and respiration .

in contrast , carbon in fossil fuels is linked to the atmosphere through the extraction and combustion of fossil fuels .

the atmosphere has a fairly uniform concentration of co 2 , although it shows minor variations by season ( about 1% ) — due to photosynthesis and respiration — and by latitude .

carbon dioxide released from fossil fuel combustion mixes into the atmospheric carbon pool , where it undergoes exchanges with the ocean and land surface carbon pools .

thus , where fossil fuels are burned makes relatively little difference to the average concentration of co 2 in the global atmosphere ; emissions in any one region affect the concentration of co 2 globally .

the oceans , vegetation , and soils exchange carbon with the atmosphere constantly on daily and seasonal time cycles .

 ( see figure 1 b . ) .

in contrast , carbon from fossil fuels is not exchanged with the atmosphere , but is transferred in a one - way direction from geologic storage , at least within the time scale of human history .

how much of the fossil fuel carbon ends up in the atmosphere , instead of the oceans , vegetation , and soils , and over what time scale , is driving much of the debate over what type of action to take to ameliorate global warming .

how much carbon is stored in the atmospheric pool is important because as more co 2 is added to the atmosphere , its heat - trapping capacity becomes greater .

each storage pool — oceans , soils , and vegetation — is considered a sink for carbon because each pool takes up carbon from the atmosphere .

conversely , each storage pool is also a source of carbon for the atmosphere , because of the constant exchange or flux between the atmosphere and the storage pools .

for example , vegetation in the northern hemisphere is a sink for atmospheric carbon during the spring and summer months due to the process of photosynthesis .

in the fall and winter it is a source for atmospheric carbon because the process of respiration returns carbon to the atmosphere from the vegetation pool .

in contrast to the oceans , soils , and vegetation , the pool of fossil carbon is only a source , not a sink , except over geologic time scales .

congress is exploring legislative strategies that would alter the human component of the global carbon cycle .

of possible concern is how the ocean and land surface sinks will behave over the coming decades and longer , and whether they will continue to take up more carbon than they release .

this is an area of considerable scientific uncertainty .

whether the oceans and land surface will continue to be net sinks for carbon if atmospheric co 2 concentrations continue to rise is unclear .

alternatively , they may continue to be net sinks , but their capacity for taking up carbon may weaken or slow down .

very little carbon is sequestered by deliberate action .

most of the north american terrestrial carbon sink , such as the forest regrowth component , is sometimes referred to as the unmanaged , or background , carbon cycle .

the future behavior of the unmanaged terrestrial carbon sink is another consideration for lawmakers .

whether the united states will continue its trajectory as a major terrestrial carbon sink is highly uncertain , and little evidence suggests that the terrestrial ecosystem sinks will increase in the future ; some current terrestrial sinks may even become sources for carbon .

sinks may convert to sources , for example , if melting permafrost under warming conditions releases large amounts of methane currently trapped in frozen tundra , or if severe and extended droughts cause more frequent and severe wildfires that release large amounts of co 2 .

policy makers may also need to evaluate and quantify how management practices , such as afforestation , conservation tillage , and other techniques , would increase the net flux of carbon from the atmosphere to the land surface .

for example , some land management practices may be eligible to receive carbon offsets in cap - and - trade legislation that is under consideration .

a cap - and - trade system designed to include carbon offsets would likely need an accurate and precise accounting for the tons of carbon sequestered deliberately by land management practices .

another consideration for policy makers is the future behavior of the ocean sink , particularly the southern ocean , given its importance to the net ocean - atmosphere co 2 flux .

in contrast to the terrestrial carbon sink , where management practices such as afforestation and conservation tillage may increase the amount of carbon uptake , it is unclear how the ocean carbon sink can be managed in a similar fashion .

some techniques proposed for increasing ocean sequestration of carbon , such as iron fertilization and deep ocean injection of co 2 , are in an experimental phase and have unknown long - term environmental consequences .

the uncertainty in the future behavior of carbon sinks implies that accurately calculating the concentration of atmospheric co 2 in the future is also uncertain , even if the amount of co 2 emitted to the atmosphere could be controlled precisely .

for example , if global carbon emissions are capped at some agreed - upon level by 2050 , such as 80% of the current amount , it would still be difficult to accurately predict atmospheric co 2 concentrations by that date .

a change in the rate of uptake , or release , of carbon from the oceans , soils , or vegetation between now and 2050 would affect any such predictions .

consequently , if congress seeks policies aimed at keeping atmospheric co 2 concentrations below a specific threshold , such as 450 or 550 ppm , then congress may also wish to understand if , how , and why the oceans and land surface are speeding up or slowing down the rate at which they take up or release carbon .

