beginning in 1986 , congress passed several pieces of legislation that placed individual limits on members' mail costs and required public disclosure of each member's overall franking expenditures .

these changes helped reduce overall congressional mail postage costs to $23.8 million during the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , down from a high of $177.4 million during the 100 th congress ( 1987-1988 ) .

despite the significant reduction in costs , critics continue to raise concerns about the franking privilege .

in particular , mass mailings — franked mailings of 500 or more substantially similar pieces of unsolicited mail sent by individual members during the same session of congress — have come under increased scrutiny as critics argue that the vast majority of franked mail is unsolicited and , in effect , publicly funded campaign literature .

between 1997 and 2008 , the house publicly reported the volume and cost of individual member mass mailings .

at the direction of the committee on house administration , in january 2009 the house began reporting the volume and cost of individual mass communications instead of mass mailings .

mass communications include all unsolicited mailings or communications of substantially identical content distributed to 500 or more persons , regardless of media .

in april 2011 , the house began separately reporting mass mailing and mass communications volumes and costs .

this report provides an analysis of member mass mailings during the period 1997-2008 ; mass communications during the period 2009-2011 ; and both mass mailings and mass communications during the period 2011-2015 .

first , it examines aggregate member mass mailing and mass communication data to ascertain how many pieces of mass mail or communication were sent by representatives annually , the total cost of those communications , and the annual percentage of members who sent at least one mass mailing or mass communication .

second , quarterly member mass mailing and mass communication data are evaluated to determine whether there was quarterly variation in member mass mailing and mass communication volume and whether the variation reflected cyclical trends .

finally , the question of whether mass mailing and mass communication volume was higher in election years than in non - election years is considered .

critics of the franking privilege have often cited increased election - year mail costs as evidence of political use of the frank prior to elections .

although mass mail costs do rise in the quarters prior to the pre - election prohibited period ( as shown in figure 1 ) , the structure of the fiscal calendar is also important in creating large disparities between election - year and non - election - year mail costs .

as shown in table 3 , between 1997-2008 , when mass mailings are compared by fiscal year , both the december spike and the pre - election increase are in the same year , so the data show inflated election - year numbers and suppressed non - election - year numbers .

when annual data are compared by calendar year , the december spike and the pre - election increase balance out , and the totals are relatively similar .

thus comparisons of fiscal year mass mail data tend to overstate the effect of pre - election increases in mail costs , since they also capture the effect of the december spike in mail costs .

because fiscal years run from october 1 to september 30 , both the spike in mass mailings in the fourth quarter of the first session and the pre - election rise in mass mailings occur in the same fiscal year , despite taking place in different calendar years and different sessions of congress .

a similar result is obtained when examining mass communications during 2009 and 2010 .

a fiscal year comparison results in a large difference , while a calendar year comparison results in virtually no difference .

in 2011 and 2012 , however , there is a substantial difference .

this is due to a large increase in the amount of mass communications sent in the third and fourth quarters of 2011 .

in 2013 , fiscal year and calendar year totals are once again similar , and in 2014 and 2015 totals return to the traditional odd / even - numbered year pattern .

critics of the franking privilege have generally articulated two concerns .

first , the franking privilege is financially wasteful and , second , the franking privilege gives unfair advantages to incumbents in congressional elections .

in particular , mass mailings have come under increased scrutiny during the past 20 years as critics argue that the vast majority of franked mail is unsolicited and , in effect , publicly funded campaign literature .

critics assert that incumbent house members may spend as much on franked mail in a year as a challenger spends on his or her entire campaign .

proponents of the franking privilege argue that the frank allows members to fulfill their representational duties by providing for greater communication between the member and individual constituents .

proponents of the franking privilege also argue that representative accountability is enhanced by use of the frank .

by regularly maintaining direct communication with their constituents , members provide citizens with information by which they can consider current public policy issues , as well as information on policy positions by which voters can judge a member in future elections .

it is maintained that if legislative matters could not be easily transmitted to constituents free of charge to members , most members could not afford to pay for direct communications with their constituents .

the analysis presented here offers three contributions to this debate .

first , the analysis finds that most representatives make use of mass communications , mass mailings , or both to communicate with their constituents , with an annual average of 84% of members sending at least one mass mailing during the period 1997-2008 , and an annual average of 94% of members sending at least one mass communication between 2009 and 2015 .

second , the analysis confirms that the cost per piece of mass communication is indeed less than the cost per piece of mass mailing .

although this is not an unexpected finding , it implies that new communications technology may lower the overall cost to congress for constituent communication , or allow for a greater amount of communication at the same cost .

finally , the analysis finds significant and regular quarterly variation in member mass mailing through 2008 , with the total number of pieces sent by members following an eight - quarter pattern that corresponds to the two - year cycle of each congress .

the analysis shows two peaks in mailings , the first during the last quarter of the first session of congress and the second during the two quarters prior to the pre - election prohibition on member mass mailings .

while there is currently not enough data on mass communications to conclude that similar patterns exist beyond 2008 , the observed variation implies that mass communications are probably not evenly distributed throughout a congress .

these findings provide insight regarding concerns about election - year mass mailing expenditures .

although they confirm that members send more pieces of mass mail or communications in the quarters just prior to the biennial elections , the findings also show that mass mailing peaks twice , and the larger peak takes place not prior to the election , but at the end of the first session .

these findings also suggest that previous comparisons of election - year and non - election - year franked mail data may need to be considered .

when mass mailings are compared by fiscal year , both the first session spike and the pre - election increase are in the same year , so the data show inflated election - year numbers and suppressed non - election - year numbers .

thus comparisons of fiscal year official mail costs tend to overstate the effect of pre - election increases in mail costs , since they also capture the effect of the december spike in mail costs .

