the rising cost of attending u.s. colleges and universities is a growing concern , as three out of five americans believe many qualified people will not have the opportunity to pursue a college education , and a large majority of americans believe that the students who do make it to college have to borrow too much to go .

for students and their families , these concerns raise questions as to whether they will be able to afford a college education and whether their choice of postsecondary institutions is limited by price .

for federal policymakers , concerns focus on issues of affordability , access for low - income students , and whether federal student financial aid is keeping pace with rising prices .

the public , lawmakers , researchers , and the higher education community offer numerous theories as to why the costs of providing a college education continue to rise , but there is little consensus as to either root causes or ways of mitigating the problem .

this report presents the current status and historical trends of college costs , with an emphasis on the prices students are ultimately charged at the varying types of institutions of higher education ( ihes ) and how they pay for postsecondary education using student financial aid .

although prices are certainly an issue for graduate and professional education , the focus of this report is on undergraduates , particularly full - time undergraduates .

college tuition and fees have been rising more rapidly than household income over the past three decades .

in the 1976-1977 school year , the average price charged to students for tuition , fees , room , and board at four - year public and private institutions was $2,577 ; in 2005-2006 , it was $17,447 — a 577% increase .

looking at family resources to pay for college , from the mid - 1980s to the mid - 1990s , tuition and fee levels averaged across public and private four - year institutions and public 2-year institutions increased by 41% .

during the following decade , they increased by 36% .

mean household income , on the other hand , increased by 9% and 10% respectively .

the divergence is particularly pronounced for low - income households .

for households in the bottom fifth of the population , their mean household income increased 5% from the mid - 1980s to the mid - 1990s and declined by 0.4% during the following decade .

in general , a complex set of factors affects college prices directly and indirectly , making it hard to say definitively what are the underlying causes of price increases .

this complexity , coupled with the tremendous diversity of institutions that constitute postsecondary schools , makes it difficult to determine what can or should be done about the issue of rising college prices .

historically , congressional involvement with issues of college costs and prices has focused on issues related to student access to postsecondary education .

however , as congress has considered the reauthorization of the hea , attention has been given to additional actions that could be taken at the federal level to address college costs and prices .

actions considered have included creating price indices , providing incentives for controlling costs , making it easier for students to earn college credits , reducing regulatory burden , and increasing the availability of relevant public information .

it is not clear which of these strategies would be most effective at addressing the issue of college costs or prices or whether some of these strategies would be more effective if implemented at the state or institutional level .

as congress continues to debate the reauthorization of the hea , an expanded federal role regarding college costs and prices may be considered .

this report begins by exploring three core concepts: college cost ( what institutions spend ) , sticker price ( what students are charged ) , and net price ( what students actually pay ) — defining each and presenting current and historical data .

this exploration is followed by a discussion of various influences on costs and prices .

the report concludes with an overview of relevant issues for reauthorization of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea , p.l .

89-329 as amended by p.l .

105-244 ) .

where data are available , this report considers all types of postsecondary education institutions: public , private not - for - profit , and private for - profit .

few students in american higher education are asked to pay the full cost of their education .

although tuition and fees are an important source of revenue at all types of institutions , other sources of revenue help defray the total costs , and students are then asked to pay significantly less .

as shown in table 1 , for public institutions , the primary source of subsidy revenue is state appropriations ( and local appropriations for some community colleges ) , and public institutions are increasingly relying on private philanthropic support and endowment income as well .

private non - profit institutions rely heavily on donations , income earned from endowments , supplements from affiliated religious organizations , and other sources of support .

private for - profit institutions , by contrast , are most likely to be tuition dependent and to have few other sources of revenue .

two approaches to cost — revenues and expenditures — are discussed below , because both are used in discussions of college costs ; however , references to college costs in the remainder of this report refer to expenditures .

the price of higher education has increasingly become a topic of both public and congressional debate .

it should be noted , however , that during the 2007-2008 academic year , over half of full - time undergraduates at all four - year institutions attended institutions charging less than $9,000 in tuition and fees .

at four - year public institutions , 45% of full - time undergraduates attended institutions charging less than $6,000 .

while $6,000 or $9,000 may still be more than most students can afford to pay , the issue of price may be more productively viewed through this lens rather than one colored by the relatively high prices of the most selective institutions in the country .

only 9% of undergraduates attended institutions charging more than $30,000 for tuition ( all of which are private institutions ) .

there are also public misconceptions about the price of college .

for example , a study conducted for the american council on education found that the general public substantially overestimates the price of tuition at public institutions .

in answering questions about the price of tuition , the average respondent estimate put the price of tuition more than three times higher than the average actual price .

increases and decreases in tuition , fees , and financial aid may affect student access to college , choice of schools , affordability , and , ultimately , the completion of a degree or certificate program .

this section focuses on sticker price .

data on net price are discussed in a subsequent section .

after considering the cost of a college and the price students are initially asked to pay , a third measure of college expenses is net price .

net price is a measure of price that takes into account financial aid provided to students .

it is the actual price students and their families need to pay out of their own pockets to attend college .

student aid for postsecondary education may be need - based aid or merit - based aid .

need - based aid addresses concerns of access and affordability through grants and loans , while merit - based aid programs are designed to recognize student achievement through tuition waivers and scholarships .

numerous entities provide student aid , including states , local governments , institutions , foundations , and the federal government .

in 2006-2007 , over $149.0 billion was awarded in student aid from all sources .

about 58% of this amount was generated by the federal government through appropriations , loan guarantees , and tax credits .

for the federal government , providing access to postsecondary education for low - income students has been the focus of student aid programs .

federal grant aid from all programs totaled $19.6 billion in the last academic year , while federally backed loan disbursements totaled $59.6 billion .

from federal , state , institutional , and private sources , grant aid to students — which does not have to be repaid and therefore lowers out - of - pocket payments — totaled $63.9 billion .

total federal aid has grown 128% over the past ten years ( starting from $37.9 billion ) .

however , its overall proportion of student aid is falling: in 1996-1997 , federal aid represented 66% of all aid , compared with about 58% in 2006-2007 .

state , institutional , and private aid have been outpacing federal aid growth over the past decade , with private grants growing by 206% and private loans growing by 989% .

although student financial aid from non - federal sources contributes substantially to lowering net price , the focus of this section is on federal student aid programs and their role in lowering out - of - pocket expenses for students .

the two largest federal aid programs , pell grants and federal student loans , are authorized under title iv of the hea .

the third largest ( measured in terms of aid provided ) source of financial assistance is federal income tax - related credits , deductions , and benefits .

researchers have been studying the issue of tuition increases for many years .

on the basis of their work , it has been determined that the price of postsecondary education is established in multiple ways and differs for public and private institutions .

because of limitations in the data , however , it has been difficult to determine specific internal and external factors that have a strong relationship with price increases .

work on the reauthorization of the hea began during the 108 th congress and has continued through the 110 th congress .

during this time , congress has held numerous hearings on and introduced and passed bills addressing affordability and accessibility issues .

clearly there are concerns about students' and their families' ability to afford college and , consequently , their ability to access postsecondary education opportunities .

congressional involvement with the issue of college price has historically been limited , focusing on issues of access .

this raises the question of what the appropriate federal role is , if any , in relation to college prices .

concomitantly , a second question of whether congress has tools at its disposal that will effectively address issues of college price and cost can be asked .

a key issue is how to develop and implement effectively a federal policy related to college price given the diversity of institutions , policies , and price drivers affecting those institutions nationwide .

regardless of the approach ultimately selected , congress faces the need to balance concerns about affordability and access with the goal of maintaining a high quality system of postsecondary education .

traditionally , congress has not embraced a policy role with respect to the prices charged by public and private institutions , choosing instead to address issues of access and affordability from the student financial aid perspective .

however , proposals for indexing increases in college price to some measure have been introduced in the 108 th , 109 th , and 110 th congresses .

for example , proposals have been introduced that would compare an institution's percentage increase in tuition and fees against two times the increase in the consumer price index - all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) , and require institutions whose percentage increase in tuition and fees exceeded two times the increase in the cpi - u to submit to additional reporting requirements or other penalties .

congressional debate may continue to focus on the use of price indices as a means to temper anticipated increases in tuition .

when considering the implementation of a price index requirement , perhaps the most obvious issue is what to select as the measure to which tuition and fees will be indexed .

three options have been considered in recent years .

the first is the cpi - u , produced by the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

the cpi - u is a measure of changes in the price of a market basket of goods and services purchased for consumption by all urban consumers .

bls also produces indices that make it possible to examine changes in the price of college textbooks and college tuition and fees , although these items have not been included in a single index .

a second measure that has been discussed is the higher education price index ( hepi ) .

the hepi was created in 1961 by dr. kent halstead and was first published by the u.s. department of education in 1975 .

since 2005 , the hepi has been managed by the commonfund institute .

according to the commonfund , the "hepi measures the average relative level in the prices of a fixed market basket of goods and services purchased by colleges and universities through current fund educational and general expenditures excluding expenditures for research. .

the hepi is calculated using a regression formula that includes professional salaries ( eg , faculty and administrative salaries ) , nonprofessional wages and salaries ( eg , clerical salaries ) , fringe benefits , contracted services , supplies and materials , and utilities .

it functions as a tool to examine the purchasing power of colleges and universities .

that is , by reporting only price changes , without quality or quantity changes , the index essentially tells institutions how much it will cost to maintain the status quo .

although there are several differences between the cpi - u and the hepi , two in particular are worth considering .

first , as previously discussed , most spending by colleges and universities is for personnel , primarily faculty .

salary increases for postsecondary education personnel are different from those included in the cpi - u , which includes urban wage earners and salaried clerical workers .

in addition , the hepi focuses specifically on goods and services purchased by colleges and universities , while the cpi - u also includes housing , transportation , medical care , and other items .

while the cpi - u does have a separate index for tuition and fees , for example , this index has not been considered for use in hea reauthorization bills that have been reported out of committee in recent years .

finally , the third index option that has been considered is to create indices using a market basket of higher education goods and services , possibly having a different index for different types of institution on the basis of level and control .

it is unclear exactly how this type of index would be different from the hepi , for example , except that the indices may be designed to further account for distinctions among different types of institutions .

a second difficulty associated with using price indices is related to differences between ( 1 ) percentage increases in price and ( 2 ) dollar increases in price .

if a certain percentage increase is set as a limit in price increases , institutions with relatively low tuition may be penalized for making small changes in the actual dollar amount being charged to students , while institutions with already high tuition levels may be able to make relatively small percentage increases resulting in relatively large dollar increases without penalty .

similar problems could arise from establishing a specific dollar increase as a price increase limit .

one possible way to address these problems , in part , would be to establish an index by which to evaluate percentage increases in tuition and fees , while including an exception for institutions for whom violation of the established requirement is associated with a relatively small dollar increase in tuition and fees .

another issue to consider is that , depending on the implementation timeline of such a policy , in the years just prior to the policy taking place , institutions nationwide may seize on their last opportunities to have relatively large tuition and fee increases ( in dollars , percentages , or both ) without being subject to penalties .

college costs , as previously discussed , refer to what institutions actually expend to educate students .

in examining ways to reduce price increases experienced by students , some attention has been given to reducing college costs as a means to reduce the need for institutions to increase their prices .

one problem with this approach is the subsidy that students at public and non - profit institutions receive — even students paying the sticker price to attend college are not paying what it actually costs institutions to educate them .

therefore , it is possible that institutions may raise their prices to reduce the subsidy provided to students rather than to address an actual increase in costs .

congress has proposed addressing college prices via college costs through incentive programs .

for example , a demonstration program could provide grants to consortia of institutions working together to reduce costs ( eg , by sharing administrative functions or purchasing health care collectively ) .

as previously discussed , institutions are already forming these consortia on their own , but it is possible that more consortia would be formed if incentives to do so existed .

it might also be useful to examine the levels of costs savings and areas in which cost savings have been achieved by existing consortia to help determine how to structure an effective incentive .

encouraging institutions to control costs might be more appealing and more feasible than other routes for controlling price increases , but these strategies may not have as large an impact on prices as desired , as productivity gains in labor - intensive enterprises are difficult to obtain .

in addition , efforts to control costs could inadvertently result in diminished quality and quantity of courses , programs , and services .

finally , providing funding directly to institutions as incentives to increase college affordability rather than to students through the federal student aid system has not been the primary traditional role of the federal government in higher education .

in general , however , congress has not focused as intensively on college costs as it has on college prices , but it could be argued that college costs could be addressed indirectly by legislation focused on college prices .

that is , by encouraging institutions to reduce their price increases , institutions may find it necessary to also reduce their cost increases .

another approach to making college more affordable for students focuses on the development of articulation agreements , the transfer of credits , dual enrollment , and programs to help students finish their coursework .

although many of these proposals also represent actions that could be taken by states and institutions , congress may continue to examine ways to encourage these practices .

these types of measures may result in cost savings to institutions and reduce the overall price students pay for higher education .

for example , articulation agreements ( also known as cooperative agreements ) , transfer agreements , and transfer of credit agreements , are generally established to facilitate students' transfer of credit from one postsecondary institution to another .

they are intended to help students understand which of their credits may be accepted at another institution ; reduce the time , effort , and money required to review transcripts and determine compatibility between courses ; reduce the number of courses that a student may need to repeat , thereby saving the student time and money ; and potentially reduce the amount of federal aid needed by a student to complete an education .

congress could also consider addressing the transfer of credit issue more specifically by requiring institutions to make public their transfer of credit policies or place restrictions on these policies , such as prohibiting institutions from denying the transfer of credit on the basis of the accreditation held by the sending institution .

while transfer of credit requirements may be helpful to students in many of the same ways that articulation agreements are beneficial , they may also result in increased costs at ihes that had previously made decisions about the transfer of credit on the basis of the accreditation held by the sending institution .

that is , if ihes were required to examine every transfer applicant's transcripts on an individual basis , it could increase the amount of time and effort needed to make a determination about the transfer of credit .

these costs could potentially be passed on to students , resulting in increased tuition and fees .

the use of articulation agreements , however , could help to reduce these potential burdens , and widely publishing institutions' transfer of credit policies may help students make more informed decisions about their postsecondary education .

regulations encompass requirements that function as control strategies ( eg , accountability measures ) , but these regulations often add to the costs institutions shoulder in providing higher education to students .

postsecondary institutions and some researchers have agreed that institutions may already be overburdened by regulation .

most agree that public accountability is essential , but there are questions about whether public accountability could be maintained through less costly and cumbersome measures and whether the related savings would be passed on to students .

for example , performance - based models and requirements could be implemented , allowing institutions to determine how to meet specific requirements , rather than specifying both standards and procedures for meeting standards .

congress has previously considered implementing a demonstration program that would have supported innovative approaches in the delivery of higher education and student financial aid at reduced costs for students and institutions .

a specific goal of the program would have been to identify specific statutory and regulatory requirements that should be modified to allow for the more efficient and effective delivery of federal student aid , as well as to provide access to distance education , to enable students to complete their postsecondary education more efficiently .

it is possible that continued consideration may be given to relieving regulatory burden as congress continues work on hea reauthorization .

another possible approach to the issues of price and cost is to provide potential and current students with more and better information about these issues , enabling them to make more informed decisions about their postsecondary education ; that is , providing information to enable the higher education market to operate more efficiently without controls or incentives .

some information is available to the general public through various college guides and websites , but concerns have been raised by researchers that there is not enough information available .

it has also been suggested that data related to college costs and price should be designed to be useful , accurate , timely , and understandable .

on the basis of the bills already introduced by congress related to these issues , congress may continue to consider how to make better information more readily available to current and prospective students .

while congress may consider addressing the need for more useful information to be made available to the public ( eg , additional data on instructional expenditures , completion and graduation rates , or faculty information ) , it might do so by building on existing data collection strategies .

current legislation mandates that the national center for education statistics ( nces ) collect data from postsecondary institutions and that institutions respond to the integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) surveys in a timely manner .

there are some concerns , however , that institutions do not respond appropriately to ipeds .

in addition , there are time lags between when the data are collected and released to the public .

this could be a problem , however , with any data collection designed to include the universe of institutions .

in addition , existing hea legislation requires institutions to provide current and prospective students and their families with a variety of institutional information .

while institutions are required to tell enrolled students what information is available , congress could consider strengthening existing requirements by specifying how data must be presented in terms of user - friendly formats and how individuals must be notified about the existence of the data and how to easily obtain it .

there also is discussion of adding additional accountability measures for institutions .

if these measures are added , provisions could be made to ensure that this information is made available to students and their families .

the u.s. department of education currently maintains an online database of information about postsecondary institutions known as the college navigator .

congress could use the college navigator as one venue for making any additional information about postsecondary institutions available to the public and could consider whether changes are needed in the design of the website or in the information presented on the current site to improve the usefulness of the data .

