the energy independence and security act ( p.l .

110-140 , h.r .

6 ) is an omnibus energy policy law that consists mainly of provisions designed to increase energy efficiency and the availability of renewable energy .

this report describes the key provisions of the enacted law , summarizes the legislative action on h.r .

6 , and provides a summary of the provisions under each of the titles in the law .

many analysts in the crs resources , science , and industry division contributed to this report ; their names and contact information are located on the back of the summary page .

this title authorizes assistance to promote clean and efficient energy technologies in foreign countries , and it establishes an international clean energy foundation .

this title authorizes up to $125 million in funding to establish national and state job training programs , administered by the department of labor , to help address job shortages that are impairing growth in green industries , such as energy efficient buildings and construction , renewable electric power , energy efficient vehicles , and biofuels development .

loans , grants , and debentures are established to help small businesses develop , invest in , and purchase energy efficient buildings , fixtures , equipment , and technology .

section 1201 empowers the small business administration ( sba ) to make "express" loans for certain energy efficiency and renewable energy projects .

section 1202 creates a two - year pilot loan program for purchasing energy efficient technologies under section 7 ( a ) of the small business act at half the cost that would have otherwise been required .

after the pilot program terminates , gao is required to prepare a report to congress that describes its energy - saving impact .

section 1203 creates small business energy efficiency , sustainability , and telecommuting programs .

reports to congress are required for each of those programs .

section 1204 raises the small business investment act ( sbia ) loan ceilings for certain energy efficiency and renewable energy projects undertaken by small businesses .

section 1205 enables qualified small business investment companies to issue energy - saving debentures .

section 1206 expands certain sbia provisions to include investments in energy - saving small businesses .

section 1207 creates a renewable fuel capital investment ( rfci ) pilot program that taps into venture capital to help small firms develop renewable energy sources and new technologies .

a funding authorization of $30 million is provided for rfci over two years .

section 1208 requires sba to study the rfci program and issue a report to congress on its findings .

section 1301 establishes a federal policy to modernize the electric utility transmission and distribution system to maintain reliability and infrastructure protection .

the term "smart grid" refers to a distribution system that allows for flow of information from a customer's meter in two directions: both inside the house to thermostats , appliances , and other devices , and from the house back to the utility .

smart grid is defined to include a variety of operational and energy measures — including smart meters , smart appliances , renewable energy resources , and energy efficiency resources .

section 1302 calls for doe to report to congress on the deployment of smart grid technologies and any barriers to deployment .

section 1303 directs doe to establish a smart grid advisory committee and a smart grid task force to assist with implementation .

section 1304 directs doe to conduct smart grid rd&d and to develop measurement strategies to assess energy savings and other aspects of implementation .

section 1305 directs the national institute of standards and technology to establish protocols and standards to increase the flexibility of use for smart grid equipment and systems .

section 1306 directs doe to create a program that reimburses 20% of qualifying smart grid investments .

section 1307 directs states to encourage utilities to employ smart grid technology and allows utilities to recover smart grid investments through rates .

section 1308 requires doe to prepare a report to congress on the effect of private wire laws on the development of combined heat and power facilities .

section 1309 directs doe to report to congress on the potential impacts of smart grid deployment on the security of electricity infrastructure and operating capability .

 ( for additional information , see crs report rl34288 , smart grid provisions in h.r .

6 , 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

section 1401 identifies this title as the "virginia graeme baker pool and spa safety act. .

section 1402 finds that proper use of barriers or fencing could substantially reduce the number of childhood residential swimming and pool drownings .

section 1403 provides several definitions employed throughout this subtitle .

section 1404 sets an industry standard ( asme / ansi a112.19.8 ) as a national performance standard for swimming pool and spa drain cover equipment .

section 1405 establishes a grant program and requires that at least 50% of the funding be used to assist states in hiring and training enforcement personnel to implement and enforce standards .

the remaining funds must be used to educate pool construction and installation companies , pool owners and operators , and pool service companies , about the standard .

also , funding of $2 million per year over two years is authorized for the federal consumer product safety commission to implement the grant program .

section 1406 specifies minimum state law requirements to qualify for a grant under section 1405 .

the requirement includes the enclosure of all outdoor residential pools and spas , installation of devices to prevent entrapment by pool or spa drains , and notification to pool owners about entrapment protection standards .

also , in setting minimum state law requirements , the commission is directed to consider current or revised national standards for barrier and entrapment equipment , and to ensure that the requirements are consistent with the commission's existing publications on pool safety guidelines .

section 1407 directs the commission to conduct a public education program on methods to prevent drowning and entrapment in swimming pools .

a funding authorization of $5 million per year is provided over five years .

section 1408 directs the commission to submit a report to congress that evaluates the implementation of the state grant program .

section 1500 specifies that , unless expressed otherwise , all tax provisions in this act refer to provisions of the internal revenue code of 1986 .

section 1501 extends federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) taxes for one year .

futa imposes a 6.2% gross tax rate on the first $7,000 paid annually by covered employers to each employee .

in 1976 , congress passed a temporary surtax of 0.2% of taxable wages to be added to the permanent futa tax rate .

the temporary surtax was subsequently extended through 2007 .

the president's fy2008 budget had proposed extending the futa surtax .

the treasury department stated that "extending the surtax will support the continued solvency of the federal unemployment trust funds and maintain the ability of the unemployment system to adjust to any economic downturns. .

this section enacts the president's proposal for one year , 2008 .

this provision is estimated to raise $1.446 billion over 10 calendar years .

under section 1502 , the geological and geophysical costs of a major integrated oil company will be amortized ( deducted proportionally ) over a seven - year period instead of the current five - year period .

 ( a major integrated oil company is defined as one with an average world production of at least 500,000 barrels per day , with 2005 gross receipts exceeding $1 billion , and which has at least a 15% interest in refinery operations. ) .

section 1601 specifies that this act and the amendments it makes will take effect one day after enactment .

