at its heart , a presidential transition is the transfer of executive power from the incumbent president to his or her successor .

a single step — taking the oath of the office of president — accomplishes this transfer .

however , a successful transition between the incumbent administration and the incoming administration begins with pre - election planning and continues through inauguration day .

it involves key personnel from the outgoing and incoming presidents' staffs , requires resources , and includes a host of activities , such as vetting candidates for positions in the new administration , helping to familiarize the incoming administration with the operations of the executive branch , and developing a comprehensive policy platform .

the importance of a well - organized , coherent transition has been underscored by the ongoing security concerns following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

in 2015 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ( hsgac ) acknowledged the importance of presidential transition planning in "prevent[ing] disruptions that can create vulnerabilities to the nation's security," adding that "[t]he challenges and risks identified by the committee have only increased since 2010. .

over the years , presidential administrations' commitment to and involvement in transition activities have varied .

as the partnership for public service has noted for much of american history , presidential transitions were carried out without very much advance planning or even cooperation from the sitting chief executive .

a president - elect was not expected to come to the nation's capital until the inauguration and had few if any substantial policy or procedural discussions with the outgoing administration .

additionally , presidential candidates generally have eschewed pre - election planning .

their reluctance to begin transition activities prior the general election appears to stem from , at least in part , a concern that the appearance of presuming victory could lead to criticism or possibly even a backlash at the polls .

other possible reasons why they might defer transition activities until after the election include concerns that such activities "could tax limited resources , [or] distract or conflict key campaign staff.... " growing recognition of the necessity of a well - planned , organized , and coordinated transition to a new administration's ability to assume responsibility on inauguration day for governing has shifted stakeholders' perspectives .

contributing to the impetus for a more robust transition with a longer lead time ( i.e. , pre - election planning ) was the realization that the period of time between the date of the general election and inauguration day is insufficient for accomplishing necessary tasks and activities given the complexity of a presidential transition and the federal government .

in its report on legislation that subsequently was enacted as p.l .

111-283 , pre - election presidential transition act of 2010 , hsgac wrote: "by codifying congress's view that candidates should start transition planning before the election , this legislation seeks to remove the stigma related to it and make pre - election transition planning an accepted part of a successful transition process. .

some individuals , who are serving in appointed ( noncareer ) positions in the executive branch , convert to career positions in the competitive service , the senior executive service ( ses ) , or the excepted service .

this practice , commonly referred to as "burrowing in," is permissible when laws and regulations governing career appointments are followed .

while such conversions may occur at any time , frequently they do so during the transition period when one administration is preparing to leave office and another administration is preparing to assume office .

generally , these appointees were selected noncompetitively and are serving in such positions as schedule c , noncareer ses , or limited tenure ses that involve policy determinations or require a close and confidential relationship with the department or agency head and other top officials .

many of the schedule c appointees receive salaries at the gs - 12 through gs - 15 pay levels .

the noncareer and limited tenure members of the ses receive salaries under the pay schedule for senior executives that also covers the career ses .

career employees , on the other hand , are to be selected on the basis of merit and without political influence following a process that is to be fair and open in evaluating their knowledge , skills , and experience against that of other applicants .

the tenure of noncareer and career employees also differs .

the former are generally limited to the term of the administration in which they are appointed or serve at the pleasure of the person who appointed them .

the latter constitute a workforce that continues the operations of government without regard to the change of administrations .

in 2007 , paul light , a professor of government at new york university who studied appointees over several administrations , indicated that the pay , benefits , and job security of career positions underlie the desire of individuals in noncareer positions to "burrow in. .

beyond the fundamental concern that the conversion of an individual from an appointed ( noncareer ) position to a career position may not have followed applicable legal and regulatory requirements , "burrowing in" raises other concerns .

when the practice occurs , the following perceptions ( whether valid or not ) may result: that an appointee converting to a career position may limit the opportunity for other employees ( who were competitively selected for their career positions , following examination of their knowledge , skills , and experience ) to be promoted into another career position with greater responsibility and pay ; or that the individual who is converted to a career position may seek to undermine the work of the new administration whose policies may be at odds with those that he or she espoused when serving in the appointed capacity .

both perceptions may increase the tension between noncareer and career staff and hinder the effective operation of government which relies on career staff to provide the continuity and expertise that underpins it .

public administration literature emphasizes the importance of effective working relationships between noncareer and career staff .

in august 2016 , for example , the senior executives association ( sea ) published a handbook for federal career executives which underscored that members of the ses "are the interface or link between policy and implementation" and stressed that , "an effective working relationship between political appointees and career executives is key to carrying out new initiatives , reforms and improvements of existing programs , and ensuring increased attention to priority services. .

in addition , sea's distinguished executives advisory network developed a series of webinars entitled "strategies and best practices for managing the transition to a new administration , a webinar series of guidance for career senior executives. .

when a president leaves office , he and his administration have likely generated millions of government records — some of which may be of long - term interest to congress , federal agencies , incoming presidents , researchers , and members of the general public .

this section provides information on the laws and policies that govern these records .

the section is divided into two topics — agency federal records and presidential records — because both types of records are generated during a presidential administration and federal law places unique requirements on each .

the increasing importance of maintaining u.s. cybersecurity has made it a critical element of the nation's broader national security apparatus .

the 2015 national security strategy highlights "cyber" as a "shared space" ( akin to oceans , air , and space ) and an element of national security .

additionally , the director of national intelligence ( dni ) included an assessment of cyberspace - based threats in the 2016 worldwide threat assessment of the us intelligence community .

although cybersecurity is an ongoing concern , the presidential transition period may present its own set of challenges in this area .

cybersecurity concerns may be heightened if a cybersecurity incident occurs during the transition , or positions ( including pas and non - pas ) with cybersecurity responsibilities are not filled in a timely manner .

a presidential transition period is a unique time in america and holds the promise of opportunity , as well as a possible risk to the nation's security interests .

while changes in administration during u.s. involvement in national security - related activities are not unique to the 2016-2017 election period , many observers suggest that the current security environment may portend a time of increased risk .

whether the enemies of the united states choose to undertake action that may harm the nation's security interests during the 2016-2017 election transition period , or the new president experiences a relatively peaceful period during the transition , many foreign policy and security challenges will await the new administration .

collaboration and coordination during the presidential election period between the current administration and the new one may have a long - lasting effect on the new president's ability to effectively safeguard u.s. interests and may affect the legacy of the outgoing president .

on a given day the outgoing administration has the ability to change the policies of a nation and possibly affect the international security environment , yet the following day the president and the national security leadership team may be replaced by a new set of leaders who could have different strategy and policy goals .

this political dynamic , coupled with the inherent uncertainty accompanying a presidential transfer of power , may provide an opportunity for those who wish to harm u.s. security interests .

unlike other man - made incidents that may occur with little warning , the presidential transition period offers a broadly defined time frame in which an enemy of the united states may decide to undertake an incident of national security significance in an attempt to manipulate the nation's foreign and domestic policies .

when congress enacts a statute , it often delegates rulemaking authority to one or more federal agencies to implement the statute .

agencies are required to follow certain procedures when they issue those rules .

for example , under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , agencies are generally required to publish a notice of rulemaking in the federal register , take comments on the proposed rule , and publish a final rule in the federal register .

because regulations carry the force of law and may have significant policy effects , they are an important policymaking tool for the federal government and for a presidential administration .

the installation of executive branch political appointees is another area of presidential activity that may be of concern to congress in the last months of an administration .

under certain circumstances , outgoing presidents have used the constitutional authority of the office to make recess appointments that extended into the succeeding presidency .

as with executive branch political appointees , the procedure for appointing federal judges is provided for by the constitution in a few words .

the appointments clause ( article ii , section 2 , clause 2 ) states that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint .. .

judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states," including lower federal court judges ( i.e. , u.s. circuit and district court judges ) .

the appointment process for federal judges is similar to that of executive branch appointees in that the president is responsible for submitting a nomination to the senate ( which , in turn , may or may not act on the nomination ) .

while the process of appointing federal judges has undergone some changes over two centuries , its most essential feature — the sharing of power between the president and the senate — has remained unchanged: to receive appointment as a federal judge , one must first be formally selected ( "nominated" ) by the president and then approved ( "confirmed" ) by the senate .

concerns about the volume , timing , and content of executive orders may be heightened during presidential transitions .

the perception , if not necessarily the reality , exists that an outgoing president's inclination to act unilaterally increases during the transition period .

executive orders are a significant vehicle for unilateral action by the president: they have the force and effect of law — unless voided or revoked by congressional , presidential , or judicial action — and they combine "the highest levels of substance , discretion , and direct presidential involvement. .

being able to act unilaterally enables a president to establish control over policymaking .

presidents are sometimes aided in this endeavor by the proliferation and ambiguity of statutes , which increase their opportunities for justifying presidential action .

another appealing feature of executive orders is that they allow presidents to act "quickly , forcefully , and ( if they like ) with no advance notice. .

capitalizing on these features enables presidents to seize the initiative on an issue , shape the national agenda , and force others to respond .

for practical or political reasons , presidents may choose to use executive orders to circumvent a congress that they perceive as hostile to their policies , after considering whether the congress is likely to overturn a particular executive order , or as moving too slowly .

executive orders suit the needs of an outgoing president who wants to establish or change policy , or is striving to secure his legacy .

howell and mayer have noted that when a president's successor belongs to the opposition political party , "he has every reason to hurry through last - minute public policies , doing whatever possible to tie his successor's hands. .

an outgoing president's use of unilateral directives , such as executive orders , might be greeted with criticism from some quarters .

some scholars note that the "directives lack the sort of legitimacy that pre - election activity has , because by definition they are issued after a president ( and , in many cases , his party ) has been repudiated at the polls .

moreover , there are no opportunities for democratic accountability , because , again , voters do not have a subsequent chance to express their approval or disapproval. .

an incoming president , who is eager to act quickly on his policy agenda , seeking to modify or overturn certain of his predecessor's actions , or distinguish himself from his predecessor , particularly when they are from different parties , would find executive orders an effective way to accomplish these objectives .

he might be stymied , though , in his efforts to amend his predecessor's actions: "occasionally , presidents cannot alter orders set by their predecessors without paying a considerable political price , undermining the nation's credibility , or confronting serious legal obstacles. .

when a new congress convenes in january , one of its first orders of business is to receive the annual budget submission of the president .

following receipt of the president's budget submission , congress begins the consideration of the budget resolution and other budgetary legislation for the upcoming fiscal year , which starts on october 1 .

the transition from one presidential administration to another raises special issues regarding the annual budget submission .

which president — the outgoing president or the incoming one — is required to submit the budget , and how will the transition affect the timing and form of the submission ? .

this section provides background information that addresses these questions .

the budget and accounting act of 1921 , as amended , requires the president to submit a budget annually to congress toward the beginning of each regular session .

this requirement first applied to president warren harding , for fy1923 .

the deadline for submission of the budget , first set in 1921 as "on the first day of each regular session," has changed several times over the years: in 1950 , to "during the first 15 days of each regular session" ; in 1985 , to "on or before the first monday after january 3 of each year ( or on or before february 5 in 1986 ) " ; and in 1990 , to "on or after the first monday in january but not later than the first monday in february of each year. .

the 20 th amendment to the constitution , ratified in 1933 , requires each new congress to convene on january 3 ( unless the date is changed by the enactment of a law ) and provides a january 20 beginning date for a president's four - year term of office .

therefore , under the legal framework for the beginning of a new congress , the beginning of a new president's term , and the deadline for the submission of the budget , all outgoing presidents prior to the 1990 change were obligated to submit a budget .

the 1990 change in the deadline made it possible for an outgoing president to leave the annual budget submission to his successor , an option which the three outgoing presidents since then ( g.h.w .

bush , clinton , and g.w .

bush ) have chosen .

the most recent budget , for fy2017 , was submitted by president obama .

if outgoing president obama chooses the same option as his three predecessors , the submission of the fy2018 budget would be the responsibility of his successor .

because president g.h.w .

bush chose not to submit a budget for fy1994 ( and was not obligated to do so ) , president clinton submitted the original budget for fy1994 rather than budget revisions .

similarly , the budget for fy2002 was submitted by the incoming president g.w .

bush , rather than by outgoing president clinton , and the budget for fy2010 was submitted by incoming president obama , rather than outgoing president g.w .

bush .

during the period beginning with the full implementation of the congressional budget process ( in fy1977 ) , six presidential transitions of administration have occurred .

during this time , the three outgoing presidents required to submit a budget ( ford , carter , and reagan ) did so on or before the statutory deadline .

as mentioned above , the three presidents who were not required to submit an outgoing budget ( george h.w .

bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush ) chose to leave the budget submission to their respective successors .

in past years , congress authorized the submission of a budget for a fiscal year after the statutory deadline by enacting a deadline extension in law .

for example , the deadlines for submission of the budgets for fy1981 , fy1984 , and fy1986 were extended from mid - january to late - january or early - february by p.l .

96-186 , p.l .

97-469 , and p.l .

99-1 , respectively .

beginning in the late 1980s , however , several original budgets were submitted late without authorization .

for fy1991 , the budget was submitted a week after a deadline that already had been extended by law ( p.l .

101-228 ) .

for fy1989 , the budget was submitted 45 days after the deadline without the consideration of any measure granting a deadline extension .

the three most recent transition - year budgets ( fy1994 , fy2002 , and fy2010 ) , were submitted 66 , 63 , and 98 days after the deadline , respectively , without consideration of a measure granting a deadline extension .

presidents clinton and g.w .

bush submitted the original budgets for fy1994 and fy2002 ( on april 8 , 1993 , and april 9 , 2001 , respectively ) .

president obama submitted an overview of his budget , "a new era of responsibility: renewing america's promise" on february 26 , 2009 , two days after delivering an address on his economic and budget plan to a joint session of congress .

he submitted his appendix , which contained detailed budget information on may 7 , 2009 , and additional supplemental volumes , including the analytical perspectives and the terminations , reductions , and savings volume , on may 11 , 2009 .

although presidents reagan , clinton , g.w .

bush , and obama did not submit detailed budget proposals until april or may of their first year in office , each of them advised congress regarding the general contours of their economic and budgetary policies in special messages transmitted to congress in february .

in addition , each incoming president since reagan has presented his special message on the budget to a joint session of congress .

once the original budget for a fiscal year has been submitted , a president or his successor may submit revisions at any time .

since 1921 , incoming presidents , except for warren harding , clinton , g.w .

bush , and obama , assumed their position with a budget of their predecessor in place .

six incoming presidents chose to modify their predecessor's budget by submitting revisions shortly after taking office: eisenhower , kennedy , nixon , ford , carter , and reagan .

six incoming presidents chose not to submit revisions: calvin coolidge , herbert hoover , franklin d. roosevelt , truman , johnson , and g.h.w .

bush .

since fy1977 , two incoming presidents ( carter and reagan ) submitted revisions of their predecessors' budgets .

though president george h.w .

bush did not submit an official revision of president reagan's fy1990 budget , he submitted a document to congress to coincide with his first state of the union address that contained many of the same elements as budget revisions that had been submitted by previous incoming presidents .

