federal involvement in disaster housing can be traced back at least as far as the great mississippi river flood of 1927 .

at that time , federal assistance was indirect , supporting the american national red cross ( anrc ) , championing anrc fund - raising and donations to support the red cross housing / sheltering mission , and generally coordinating assistance .

in 1951 president truman built on the anrc partnership in executive order 10221 , which delegated the overall responsibility for federal supplemental disaster assistance to the housing and home finance administration ( hhfa ) .

just over two decades later , president nixon assigned the emergency housing responsibility to hhfa's successor organization , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

administration officials created hud's federal disaster assistance administration ( fdaa ) to carry out temporary housing and other disaster response and recovery programs .

the fdaa was one of the legacy components subsequently absorbed into fema in 1979 under reorganization plan number 3 .

the federal government's temporary disaster housing mission ( an integral part of its overall authorities for disaster response and recovery ) has remained at fema for more than a quarter of a century .

on march 1 , 2003 fema became a part of the department of homeland security in accordance with the homeland security act .

the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , as amended ) authorizes the president to provide temporary housing and other disaster response and recovery activities .

through executive orders this authority has been delegated to fema , and other federal departments or agencies as assigned by fema .

this act authorized discrete programs , including the individual and households program ( ihp ) , along with a variety of programs intended to address the unmet needs resulting from a major disaster of families , individuals , and state and local governments .

assessing the performance of government at every level to respond to disaster victims who need housing assistance involves consideration of the continuum of options available to fema in its sheltering and housing mission .

fema traditionally uses two separate stafford act authorities to carry out this mission — section 403 authorities for emergency sheltering and section 408 for temporary housing .

distinct units within fema implement these housing authorities .

the 403 provisions are administered by the public assistance ( infrastructure ) branch in the disaster assistance directorate ( formerly recovery division ) , while the 408 provisions are under the purview of the individual assistance branch within that same directorate .

section 403 provides for general federal assistance to meet immediate threats to life and property .

this aid may include medicine , food and other consumables , and work and services performed on public or private land .

it is the work and services category that is further defined to include debris removal , search and rescue services , emergency medical services , emergency mass care , and emergency shelter .

the assistance provided by states and / or fema immediately following a disaster is usually referred to as "emergency shelter. .

emergency sheltering can take a variety of forms , some of which were adapted to meet the special needs following hurricane katrina .

due to the damage to permanent housing stock ( both private homes and rental properties ) by hurricane katrina , the transition from shorter - term section 403 sheltering / housing to traditional , longer - term section 408 temporary housing assistance was a difficult one .

normally , fema works with a relatively small population , which traditionally makes this "crosswalk" easier ; however , that was not the case for this event .

fema had to contact all recipients of 403 assistance in order to establish their eligibility for longer - term aid under section 408 .

that contact also had to include an explanation of the process as well as available housing options , the location of some housing resources , and the time - tables involved .

disaster victims also had to be assured that the next form of housing assistance was available for those deemed eligible .

accordingly , checks for rental assistance , or a unit of manufactured housing , had to be available before the applicants were moved from their current residences .

eligibility for section 408 assistance is based on several conditions , including a finding by fema that: the applicant's primary residence is unlivable ; the applicant is experiencing financial hardship and ; there are other related difficulties in the aftermath of a declared disaster event .

eligibility determinations are routinely made in most disaster situations by staff at fema's national process service centers ( npscs ) .

at the npscs , staff take registrations ( both telephonically and on - line ) working in concert with fema's on - site staff based at the joint field offices ( jfos ) in or near the affected area , and with fema's contracted housing inspectors .

a major challenge to this traditional approach rested in the sheer number of victims involved in the katrina disaster ; thousands of evacuees were placed in hotel / motel rooms in 48 states as well as in state - rented apartments in 32 states .

the wide dispersal of victims compounded the transition process .

this outreach mission was especially difficult to accomplish within shifting deadlines established by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) / fema .

due to the extent of the devastation in the affected area , housing inspections could not always be conducted within the usual time frames ; such inspections are generally critical to eligibility decisions .

in addition , fema had to cobble together a series of outreach teams to spread out among the diaspora of disaster victims .

these teams consisted of personnel from the corporate lodging consultant ( clc ) contractors , fema community relations staff , and available staff from the respective fema regional offices .

the resources of these groups were already greatly taxed by their own disaster assignments .

dhs / fema had been contacted as early as september 6 , 2005 , by the refugee council usa with a proposed plan to reach out ( through the refugee council's local affiliate network ) and provide case management services to the displaced residents from the gulf coast .

the council had developed the plan in conjunction with the white house homeland security council and the office of faith - based initiatives and its traditional partners in refugee assistance at the department of state and the department of health and human services .

subsequent discussions raised questions about the authority of fema to carry out such a program as well as the potential cost .

the plan was not adopted .

two competing imperatives faced fema: provide safe housing for disaster victims and remain responsible stewards of federal funds .

the goal of transferring applicants from hotels , motels , and state - leased apartments to apartments paid with section 408 rental assistance and manufactured housing was intended to address both goals , but some maintain that efforts to achieve both ends resulted in a disruptive and complicated process .

it was within this environment of shifting deadlines and lingering questions of applicant eligibility that reports of waste , fraud , and abuse within the program surfaced .

the situation led to litigation that continues to embroil fema , applicants , and public interest groups .

as of the end of 2006 , approximately 40,000 households had been moved from 403 to 408 funding — either through clc payments to landlords out of 408 funds or from 408 payments made to applicants to continue apartment rentals .

fema's presumption for this situation is that those households previously in 403 apartments and qualified for , but not receiving , 408 payments represent people no longer in need of fema assistance or those whose landlords did not make contact with clc to maintain the arrangement .

stafford act section 408 housing is administered through the individual and households program ( ihp ) , which consists of temporary housing and other needs assistance ( ona ) .

the housing portion is 100% federally funded .

the ona part of the ihp program ( furnishings , uninsured medical costs , funeral expenses , etc. ) .

is cost - shared with the state , on a mandatory 75% / 25% basis .

the 408 amounts spent for rental / repair / replacement assistance and ona are deducted from an overall ihp cap for each household , currently $28,800 ( this amount is adjusted annually based on the consumer price index ) .

direct housing assistance — that is , aid associated with mobile homes and travel trailers , is not deducted from that amount due to difficulties in precisely calculating the amount of assistance involved .

in addition to the section 408 temporary housing assistance , other federal housing resources were also made available by other federal agencies .

congress has generally chosen to address significant disaster situations in an ad hoc fashion , in part because individual disasters often have unique requirements and also because large disasters frequently require supplemental appropriations .

within those supplemental appropriations bills , congress has addressed disaster - created needs across the government .

this has entailed crafting legislation to fund specific programs within different departments and agencies and also directing certain actions , or waiving certain provisions in law , to assist the disaster response and recovery efforts .

this section discusses some options congress may choose to consider incorporating into standing law to hasten the response and recovery effort and eliminate some uncertainty in policy and program applications following large disaster events .

the housing strategy employed following hurricane katrina was driven by size , time and circumstance .

while some decisions were forced by immediate needs , others were choices made by fema , dhs , and the administration .

still other decisions were driven by choices not made , avenues not explored , perhaps due to caution , or decisions postponed , which became tantamount to decisions themselves .

since the administration did not request expanded authorities , the traditional fema housing programs for much smaller disasters became the default action plan of the federal government for the largest natural disaster event in u.s. history .

it can be argued that parts of this plan worked very well , such as the rental housing provided by hosting states .

however , other parts , such as the dependence on mobile homes and travel trailers , appear not as suitable to either the magnitude or location of this catastrophic event .

what should disaster temporary housing be ? .

is it mainly a home - repair option or a rental - assistance option ( either with cash assistance or a voucher ) , or should manufactured housing be presented as the only option ? .

fema itself has had a shifting emphasis over the years , much of it driven by the nature and location of individual large disasters , which in turn has moved its policies and vehicles for providing temporary housing on a large scale .

that shifting emphasis is reflected in the temporary housing response to katrina .

with the discovery of unsafe levels of formaldehyde in trailers , fema may be shifting its approach once again .

a more definitive approach might be helpful to fema , its state partners , and the disaster victims ; flexibility , however , might also be needed .

despite the very real problems encountered by victims , their communities and their host communities , thousands of families and individuals have received a significant amount of supplemental aid from the government for housing .

at present , the amount of funding spent on housing ( both rental assistance and manufactured housing ) for the gulf coast hurricane season of 2005 stands at over $10 billion .

fema and other staff at federal , state , local , and voluntary agencies struggled to address an unprecedented event .

there have been many challenges along the way , perhaps most importantly , the difficulty in communicating complicated housing policy decisions to a vast and dispersed population .

many of the staff involved , both in the governmental and non - governmental sectors , at all levels , provided assistance through the temporary housing programs and administrative channels that existed .

those programs were severely challenged by a disaster of unprecedented size , compounded by unique problems of devastation and mass evacuations .

new partnerships were established and a significant level of federal resources were provided , if not always judiciously employed .

programs that can work well for a "garden variety" disaster may not be appropriate for a catastrophic event .

assumptions based on the average can be overwhelmed by the exceptional .

for an event such as katrina , new approaches were apparently considered but often rejected in favor of the familiar .

this is understandable given the propensity to avoid establishing precedent based on an outlier event , and the body of law and regulations and policies supporting current housing practices .

however , effective leadership , and carefully drawn legislation , can help to distinguish between the extraordinary and the common events and respond appropriately .

even now , long after katrina's landfall in august of 2005 , congress continues to debate long - term recovery roles among federal agencies and state governments that are still uncertain but clearly consequential .

congress could opt to consider the lessons of this disaster in terms not only of program adjustments and corrections , but also the appropriate governmental role throughout the recovery process for any possible future events of this magnitude .

appendix a. hud and other federal housing resources while fema has the principal responsibility for temporary housing following a presidentially declared disaster , the department of housing and urban development and other federal departments and agencies also played a prominent role in the post - katrina housing mission .

information about the involvement of hud and other federal partners in providing housing aid ; along with the size and extent of their mission in the disaster housing arena , follows .

kdhap and hud assistance .

 — this was the katrina disaster housing assistance program paid for by fema ( from the disaster relief fund ) but managed by hud through an inter - agency agreement .

under this program , hud assisted those citizens who had previously received hud housing assistance at the time of the disaster .

the cooperation between fema and hud has been inconsistent throughout the process .

as a result , congress eventually transferred the funding to hud for this purpose .

it was at this point that hud renamed the program the disaster voucher program ( dvp replacing kdhap ) .

regardless of the acronym employed , the hud - assisted program appears to have reached its targeted population .

further cooperation and information sharing between fema and hud ( and other federal agencies ) might contribute to applicants being aware of all housing options and also lessen each program's susceptibility to fraud .

there have been frequent references to hud section 8 housing vouchers as a solution for the katrina evacuees .

the response to the northridge earthquake in 2004 is usually listed as a prime example of the efficiency of this approach .

fema provided over $140 million in immediate housing help in the form of funds for applicants to rent alternative living spaces ( three months to homeowners and two months to renters ) to more than 47,000 households .

one consideration is whether such vouchers should be limited as disaster housing assistance is ( generally 18 months ) , or if they should continue to be renewed in the manner of regular section 8 vouchers .

for the katrina disaster , unlike some other disasters , hud's help was focused on assisting its own population of clients that had been displaced by the disaster .

as noted earlier , the disaster voucher program is the successor to kdhap ( though , unlike kdhap it also provides help to hurricane rita victims , explaining the more generic title ) and helps hurricanes katrina and rita victims maintain housing over a longer term .

the dvp vouchers are administered by local public housing authorities ( phas ) , which were granted a degree of discretion in their use and in defining the coverage of expenses .

congress provided $390 million for this program ; it is projected to conclude on september 30 , 2007 .

given the announcement on april 26 , 2007 , of a proposed extension of fema housing help and a transfer to hud , these dates may be adjusted depending on the reaction of congress to that plan .

the creation of the disaster housing assistance program ( dhap ) , which was announced in april of 2007 and took effect in november of that year , constituted hud involvement in long - term disaster housing that had been urged by some from the onset of the katrina disaster .

hud assumed management of the housing rental program , while fema maintained management of the manufactured housing ( trailers , mobile homes ) program .

when the program was announced , official statements emphasized the assistance that would be available to bring closure to the program .

one of the actions detailed in the announcement of dhap stated that "families and individuals in both the rental and trailer / mobile home programs will be given complete information , supportive services , resources and ample time to prepare themselves for the end of temporary , subsidized housing. .

the dhap housing program is scheduled to end in march of 2009 .

in addition to its other programs , hud , along with other federal entities , provided housing assistance in the form of their own inventories of housing stock .

in addition to hud , other federal entities providing available housing included the department of agriculture , the department of veterans affairs , and fannie mae .

this assistance was also provided through inter - agency agreements .

some of the houses made available were immediately helpful , while others were in areas too remote to benefit the disaster victims .

that is a central consideration when assessing housing resources for disaster victims interested in being close to home or at least close to new employment and educational opportunities .

fema has been tasked by p.l .

109-295 to convene a group to devise a national housing strategy .

this will include hud and the other federal players , as well as other parties with experience in the disaster housing arena .

congress still awaits that report .

while chartered by congress , the federal national mortgage association ( fannie mae ) is a private , shareholder - owned company .

given that special status and a mission to increase the prospect of home ownership for low and moderate income families , fannie mae's contributions following katrina have been significant .

the company made some of its properties available for rent - leasing for up to 18 months for katrina victims .

in all , fannie mae provided 1,500 single - family properties from its inventory of real estate owned ( reo ) for temporary housing for individuals and families displaced by hurricane katrina .

nearly 4,600 evacuees have been provided temporary housing at no cost through the company's initiative .

... today , katrina evacuees are living rent - free in fannie mae - owned properties in 20 different states .

...[fannie mae] is also making $15,000 available for down payment and closing cost assistance for qualified evacuee families who wish to purchase any fannie mae - owned home any time during their rent - free lease period .

to date , 80 families have taken advantage of the assistance and purchased the fannie mae - owned properties .

appendix b .

victims without homes: the loma prieta earthquake and hurricane andre .

following the loma prieta earthquake in the autumn of 1989 , fema administered a large temporary housing program .

fema asked for proof of residency before providing assistance and required that an applicant live at least 30 days at one address to be eligible for assistance .

due to the unique nature of the bay area's low income population , many of the applicants had lived in single residency occupancy ( sros ) apartments that were similar to ymcas .

due to the force of the earthquake , approximately 2,200 of these rooms had been lost .

oftentimes the applicants had stayed in these rooms for fewer than 30 consecutive days .

for this reason , fema judged them to be ineligible for temporary housing assistance .

the legal aid society of alameda county sued fema over its interpretation of eligibility and prevailed in court .

the plaintiffs realized that temporary housing , as defined under section 408 , would not help the applicants because they no longer had sro rooms available to them .

they also realized that the private property owners of the buildings might not be interested in remaining in the sro business .

instead the settlement was for financial resources to help restore that part of the housing stock .

the eventual settlement was for $23 million to fund 2,200 sro units .

the settlement sum was arrived at by multiplying the number of sro units lost by a unit cost of about $10,500 .

the flexibility of the final settlement was ideal from the point of view of the local agencies , because the funds were provided in a block grant fashion to the counties and as such allowed them the freedom to decide how to put the money to best use , with very few restrictions .

overall , 1,200 to 1,500 units were actually rebuilt using lawsuit funds .

since fema funds could not be provided to private developers , the local governments arranged for the sale of the buildings to non - profit groups , sometimes using community development block grant funds to complete the projects .

in the aftermath of hurricane andrew in 1992 , fema had a very large temporary housing program in south florida .

here , too , many people in the area when the hurricane struck were judged not to be eligible for fema temporary housing assistance because they could not prove previous residency through rental agreements .

however , in this instance fema found a way to work with the local community and contribute to the solutions .

the [dade]county manager's office of homelessness working "in conjunction with catholic community services first attacked the homeless family problem by establishing a tent city .

this comprehensive approach included day care , job counseling , and mental health assistance .

unfortunately , the tent city proved too vulnerable to bad weather and had to be closed .

subsequently , through a coalition of homeless providers and the county , a plan for expanding shelter bed availability was approved .

local agencies involved in hurricane response have received fema funds to continue their expanded services and to initiate new projects to address post - andrew needs. .

