the federal government provides elementary and secondary education and educational assistance to indian children , either directly through federally funded schools or indirectly through educational assistance to public schools .

the bureau of indian education ( bie ) in the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) oversees the federally funded bie system of elementary and secondary schools .

the bie system is funded primarily by the bie but also receives considerable funding from the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

the public school systems of the states receive federal funding from ed , the bie , and other federal agencies .

federal provision of educational services and assistance to indian children is based not on race / ethnicity but primarily on their membership in , eligibility for membership in , or familial relationship to members of indian tribes , which are political entities .

federal indian education programs are intended to serve indian children who are members of , or , depending on the program , are at least second - degree descendants of members of , one of the 567 tribal entities recognized and eligible for funding and services from the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) by virtue of their status as indian tribes .

the federal government considers its indian education programs to be based on its trust relationship with indian tribes , a responsibility derived from federal statutes , treaties , court decisions , executive actions , and the constitution ( which assigns authority over federal - indian relations to congress ) .

despite this trust relationship , indian education programs are discretionary and not an entitlement like medicare .

indian children , as enrollees in public education , are also eligible for the federal government's general programs of educational assistance , but such programs are not indian education programs and will not be discussed in this report .

this report provides a brief history of federal indian education programs , a discussion of students served by these programs , an overview of programs and their funding , and brief discussions of selected issues in indian education .

u.s. government concern with the education of indians began with the continental congress , which in 1775 appropriated funds to pay expenses of 10 indian students at dartmouth college .

through the rest of the 18 th century , the 19 th century , and much of the 20 th century , congress's concern was for the civilization of the indians , meaning their instruction in euro - american agricultural methods , vocational skills , and habits , as well as in literacy , mathematics , and christianity .

the aim was to change indians' cultural patterns into euro - american ones — in a word , to assimilate them .

from the revolution until after the civil war , the federal government provided for indian education either by directly funding teachers or schools on a tribe - by - tribe basis pursuant to treaty provisions or by funding religious and other charitable groups to establish schools where they saw fit .

the first indian treaty providing for any form of education for a tribe — in this case , vocational — was in 1794 .

the first treaty providing for academic instruction for a tribe was in 1803 .

altogether over 150 treaties with individual tribes provided for instructors , teachers , or schools , whether vocational , academic , or both , either permanently or for a limited period of time .

the first u.s. statute authorizing appropriations to "promote civilization" among indian tribes was the indian trade and intercourse act of 1793 , but the civilization act of 1819 was the first authorization and appropriation specifically for instruction of indian children near frontier settlements in reading , writing , and arithmetic .

civilization act funds were expended through contracts with missionary and benevolent societies .

besides treaty schools and "mission" schools , some additional schools were initiated and funded directly by indian tribes .

the state of new york also operated schools for its indian tribes .

the total of such treaty , mission , tribal , and new york schools reached into the hundreds by the civil war .

after the civil war , the u.s. government began to create a federal indian school system , with schools not only funded but also constructed and operated by doi's bia with central policies and oversight .

in 1869 , the board of indian commissioners — a federally appointed board that jointly controlled with doi the disbursement of certain funds for indians — recommended the establishment of government schools and teachers .

in 1870 , congress passed the first general appropriation for indian schools not provided for under treaties .

the initial appropriation was $100,000 , but both the amount appropriated and the number of schools operated by the bia rose swiftly thereafter .

the bia created both boarding and day schools , including off - reservation industrial boarding schools on the model of the carlisle indian industrial school ( established in 1879 ) .

most bia students attended on - or off - reservation boarding schools .

bia schools were chiefly elementary and vocational schools .

an organizational structure for bia education began with a medical and education division during 1873-1881 , appointment of a superintendent of education in 1883 , and creation of an education division in 1884 .

the education of alaska native children , however , along with that of other alaskan children , was assigned in 1885 to doi's office of education , not the bia .

mission , tribal , and new york state schools continued to operate , and the proportion of school - age indian children attending a bia , mission , tribal , or new york school rose slowly .

a major long - term shift in federal indian education policy , from federal schools to public schools , began in fy1890-fy1891 when the commissioner of indian affairs , using his general authority in indian affairs , contracted with a few local public school districts to educate nearby indian children for whose schooling the bia was responsible .

after 1910 , the bia pushed to move indian children to nearby public schools and to close bia schools .

congress provided some appropriations to pay public schools for indian students , although they were not always sufficient and moreover were not paid where state law entitled indian students to public education .

by 1920 , more indian students were in public schools than bia schools .

figure 1 displays the changing number of indian students in bia , public , and other schools from 1900 to 1975 .

the shift to public schools accompanied the increase in the percentage of indian youths attending any school , which rose from 40% in 1900 to 60% in 1930 .

comparable data are no longer available .

in 1921 , congress passed the snyder act in order to authorize all programs the bia was then carrying out .

most bia programs at the time , including education , lacked authorizing legislation .

the snyder act continues to provide broad and permanent authorization for federal indian programs .

in 1934 , to simplify the reimbursement of public schools for educating indian students , congress passed the johnson - o'malley ( jom ) act , authorizing the bia to contract with the states , except oklahoma , and the territories for the education of indians ( and other services to indians ) .

in the 1920s and 1930s , the bia began expanding some of its own schools' grade levels to secondary education .

under the impetus of the meriam report and new deal leadership , the bia also began to shift its students toward its local day schools instead of its boarding schools , and , to some extent , to move its curriculum from solely euro - american subjects to include indian culture and vocational education .

in addition in 1931 , responsibility for alaska native education was transferred to the bia .

the first major non - doi federal funding for indian education in the 20 th century began in 1953 , when the federal assistance for local educational agencies affected by federal activities program , now known as impact aid , was amended to cover indian children eligible for bia schools .

impact aid pays public school districts to help fund the education of children in "federally impacted areas. .

further changes to the impact aid law in 1958 and the 1970s increased the funding that was allocated according to the number of children on indian lands .

congressional appropriations for impact aid increased as the jom funding decreased .

in 1966 congress added further non - doi funding for indian education by amending the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) of 1965 , the major act authorizing federal education aid to public school districts , to add set - asides for bia schools to the program of grants to help educate students from low - income families ; school library resources , textbook , and instructional materials ; and supplementary educational centers and services .

a congressional study of indian education in 1969 that was highly critical of federal indian education programs led to further expansion of federal non - doi assistance for indian education , embodied in the indian education act of 1972 , now known as esea title vi .

the indian education act established the office of indian education ( oie ) within the department of health , education and welfare and authorized oie to make grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) with indian children .

the oie was the first organization outside of doi ( since doi's birth in 1849 ) that was created expressly to oversee a federal indian education program .

federal indian education policy also began to move toward greater indian control of federal indian education programs , in both bia and public schools .

in 1966 , the bia signed its first contract with an indian group to operate a bia school ( the rough rock demonstration school on the navajo reservation ) .

in 1975 , through enactment of the indian self - determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) , congress authorized all indian tribes and tribal organizations , such as tribal school boards , to contract to operate their bia schools .

three years later , in title xi , part b , of the education amendments of 1978 , congress required the bia "to facilitate indian control of indian affairs in all matters relating to education. .

this act created statutory standards and administrative and funding requirements for the bia school system and separated control of bia schools from bia area and agency officers by creating a bia office of indian education programs ( oiep ) and assigning it supervision of all bia education personnel .

ten years later , the tribally controlled schools act ( tcsa ) of 1988 authorized grants to tribes and tribal organizations to operate their bia schools .

these laws provide that grants and self - determination contracts be for the same amounts of funding as the bia would have expended on operation of the same schools .

indian control in public schools received an initial boost from the 1972 indian education act .

the esea title vi requires that public school districts applying for its grants prove adequate participation by indian parents and tribal communities in program development , operation , and evaluation .

the 1972 indian education act also amended the impact aid program to mandate indian parents' consultation in school programs funded by impact aid .

in 1975 , the isdeaa added to the jom a requirement that public school districts with jom contracts have either a majority - indian school board or an indian parent committee that has approved the jom program .

finally , the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-382 , section 9112 ( b ) ) and the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) have expanded eligibility under the current esea title vi formula grant program to indian tribes ; indian organizations ; indian community - based organizations ; and consortia of leas , indian tribes , indian organizations , and indian community - based organizations .

starting in the 1960s , the number of schools in the bia school system began to shrink through administrative consolidation and congressional closures .

for example , all bia - funded schools in alaska were transferred to the state of alaska between 1966 and 1985 , removing an estimated 120 schools from bia responsibility .

the number of bia - funded schools and dormitories stood at 233 in 1930 and 277 in 1965 , but fell to 227 in 1982 and to 180 in 1986 before rising to 185 by 1994 ; it currently stands at 183 .

since the 1990s , congress has limited both the number of bia schools and the grade structure of the schools .

the number of indian students educated at bia schools has numbered approximately 48,000 over the last 15 years .

in 2006 , the secretary of the interior separated the bia education programs in the office of indian education programs from the rest of the bia and placed them in a new bureau of indian education ( bie ) under the assistant secretary – indian affairs .

it is commonly estimated that bie schools serve less than 10% of indian students , public schools serve over 90% , and private schools serve 1% or less .

these general percentages , however , are not certain .

data on indian students come from differing programs and sources .

different federal indian education programs serve different , though overlapping , sets of indian students .

their student data also differ ( and overlap ) .

in addition , it is unlikely that every school or school district that enrolls at least one indian student receives funding from a federal program designed to serve indian students or funded based on numbers of indian students .

although different federal indian education programs have different eligibility criteria , none of the eligibility criteria are based solely on race / ethnicity .

eligibility is based on the political status of the groups of which the students are members or descendants of members .

the bie school system , for instance , serves students who are members of federally recognized indian tribes or who are at least one - fourth degree indian blood descendants of members of such tribes , and who reside on or near a federal indian reservation or are eligible to attend a bie off - reservation boarding school .

many indian tribes allow less than one - fourth degree of tribal or indian blood for membership , so many bie indian students have less than one - fourth indian blood .

separately , the bie's jom program , according to its regulations , serves students in public schools who are at least one - fourth degree indian blood and recognized by the bia as eligible for bia services .

the ed esea title vii - a programs , on the other hand , serve a broader set of students: ( 1 ) members of federally recognized tribes and their first and second degree descendants ; ( 2 ) members of two types of nonfederally recognized tribes , state - recognized tribes and tribes whose federal recognition was terminated after 1940 , and their first and second degree descendants ; ( 3 ) members of an organized indian group that received a grant under the ed indian education formula grant program as it was in effect before the passage of the improving america's schools act of 1994 ; ( 4 ) eskimos , aleuts , or other alaska natives ; and ( 5 ) individuals considered to be indian by the secretary of the interior , for any purpose .

public school districts must have a minimum number or percentage of esea title vii - eligible indian students to receive a grant .

the esea title vii grants are administered by ed , so ed is the source of data on the esea title vii students .

another major ed program , the impact aid program , funds public schools whose students reside on "indian lands" or are federally connected children .

the students residing on indian lands for whom impact aid is provided need not , however , be indian .

although there is no source for the status of indian educational achievement nationally , the educational environment and achievements of bie students and american indian / alaska native ( ai / an ) students are reported .

students who identify their race / ethnicity as ai / an may not be members or descendants of members of federally recognized indian tribes , and not all members of such tribes may identify as ai / an .

for example , ed's national center for education statistics ( nces ) , which collects and analyzes student and school data and produces the national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) , publishes reports on ai / an students' characteristics and academic achievements .

nces data are based on race / ethnicity ( except most data on bie students ) , so the data will include students who identify as ai / an even though they are not members of tribes and do not fall into the eligibility categories of federal indian education programs .

nces's race / ethnicity - based ai / an student population is not the same as the student population served by federal indian education programs .

the two populations overlap , but the degree of overlap has not been determined .

nces data based on race / ethnicity , then , cannot be assumed to accurately represent the indian student population served by federal indian programs .

federal indian elementary and secondary education programs serve indian elementary and secondary students in public schools , private schools , and the bie system .

except for one bie program , public schools do not generally receive bie funding .

public schools instead receive most of their federal assistance for indian education through the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

bie - funded schools , on the other hand , receive funding both from the bie and from ed .

the bie estimates that it provides about 75% of bie - funded schools' overall federal funding , and ed provides the remainder .

this section of the report profiles first the bie programs and second those ed programs that provide significant funding for indian education .

some of the issues of concern with regard to indian education pertain to the comparatively poor academic outcomes of indian students , indian communities' desire for greater control of education , the effect of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) on bureau of indian education ( bie ) schools , the poor condition of bie school facilities , and the allocation of johnson o'malley funds .

the federal government has been actively engaged in addressing these issues in a holistic manner in hopes of ultimately increasing the academic achievement of indian students .

in 2011 , the president signed executive order 13592 , improving american indian and alaska native educational opportunities and strengthening tribal colleges and universities .

the order commits department of the interior ( doi ) and department of education ( ed ) to tribal self - determination ; native language , culture , and history education ; and to working to provide a quality education for american indians and alaska natives .

as a consequence of the order , the departments signed a 2012 agreement to cement and designate the responsibilities of their collaboration toward fulfilling the order .

in recent years , congress has also supported efforts to address these issues .

beginning in 2012 , congress appropriated funds specifically to promote tribal self - determination with respect to public schools .

several esea provisions adopted through essa are designed to increase indian and tribal influence in public schools .

in recent years , authorizing and appropriating committees have held hearings on the condition of bie school facilities .

in addition , congress has required bie to address the process for reallocating johnson o'malley funds .

there are significant gaps in educational outcomes for indian students in bie schools and american indian / alaska native ( ai / an ) students in public schools compared to other students .

for more information on educational outcomes , see the earlier section entitled " status of indian and american indian / alaska native education . .

as noted in the esea , "it is the policy of the united states to fulfill the federal government's unique and continuing trust relationship with and responsibility to the indian people for the education of indian children. .

title 25 of the u.s. code also refers to "the federal responsibility for and assistance to education of indian children. .

in prior decades , there were consistent calls to increase the use of native language instruction to increase cultural relevance and improve overall academic performance .

one argument contends that language , culture , and identity are intertwined and thus are important to the tribal identity .

a counter argument is that native language instruction detracts from the core curriculum .

in recent years , congress has expanded program authorities and appropriated funds to permit native language instruction .

there is not consensus in the research literature regarding the relative effectiveness of native language instruction .

one commonly cited review of research studies with control groups , for instance , suggests that bilingual instruction in some instances was found to improve english reading proficiency in comparison to english immersion , but in other instances it had no impact .

this review focused principally on studies conducted prior to 1996 and examining instruction for spanish - speaking elementary school children , and many of the studies have limitations .

the one study of indian native language students included in the review found no significant difference in english reading outcomes between bilingual and english - immersion instruction .

some longitudinal studies prior to 2007 indicated that native language immersion students achieved higher scores on assessments of english and math than native students who did not receive native language immersion .

however , a more recent review of the literature suggests that rigorous native language and culture programs sustain non - english academic achievement , build english proficiency , and enhance student motivation .

there are several federal programs that support native language acquisition: the esea title iii - a english language acquisition ( see the earlier eponymous section ) permits the use of both english and a child's native language to enable the child to develop and attain english proficiency .

the program set - aside may be used to help indian and ai / an children learn and study native american languages , except that an outcome shall be increased english proficiency .

the esea indian education formula grant program ( esea title vi - a - 1 ) allows funds to be used to support native american language programs and native american language restoration programs .

the special indian education program for the improvement of educational opportunities for indian children ( esea title vi - a - 2 ) allows funds to be used for bilingual and bicultural projects .

the special indian education program for professional development for teachers and education professionals ( esea title vi - a - 2 ) allows funds to be used to train traditional leaders and cultural experts to assist pre - and in - service indian teachers with relevant native language and cultural mentoring , guidance , and support .

the national indian education program for native american and alaska native language immersion schools and programs ( esea title vi - a - 3 ) support the development , maintenance , and improvement of such programs in elementary and secondary schools .

the esea alaska native education equity program ( esea title vi - c ) allows funds to be used for curricula that reflect the cultural diversity , languages , history , or the contributions of alaska native people , and for alaska native language instructional and immersion programs .

the department of health and human services' native american language preservation and maintenance program ( 42 u.s.c .

2991b - 3 ) supports the survival and continuing vitality of native american languages through grants to indian tribes , native american organizations , alaska native villages , and other entities .

in 2015 , the bie introduced a native language policy framework for bie - operated schools , including college and preschool programs .

the policy is intended to require the integration of native language instruction to the extent that native language standards exist .

consistent with this set of aims , doi , ed , and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) signed a memorandum of understanding to work together to encourage instruction in and preservation of native languages .

tribal representatives have indicated that violence and alcohol and drug use are serious community issues that affect students and their ability to learn .

a high incidence of substance abuse in indian country communities contributes to or is symptomatic of high levels of depression , domestic violence , suicide , disease , death , and other situations that are not conducive to learning .

among persons aged 12 or older in 2013 , american indians or alaska natives had the highest rate of substance dependence or abuse ( 14.9% ) compared to other racial / ethnic groups .

this environment affects indian students enrolled in bie and public schools .

a february 2010 evaluation of violence prevention policies and measures at bie schools by doi's office of inspector general ( oig ) found areas of concern for potential violence and deficiencies in the policies and procedures for preventing and managing incidents .

according to the oig evaluation , in recent years 6% of public high school students carried a weapon on campus , whereas 37% of bie middle school students reported the same .

the oig evaluation found that many bie schools had open campuses — little or no fencing , inadequate security access procedures , and flawed camera surveillance systems .

the oig recommended that the bia and bie establish safety policies and accurate incident tracking systems , evaluate campus safety and security , correct weaknesses or require tribal operators to correct weaknesses , address safety as a criterion for tribes to maintain operating grants and contracts , and implement staff training to prevent and manage incidents .

follow - up inspections in 2014 indicated the need for improvement in several areas .

emergency preparedness and security plans failed to cover all applicable topics .

violence prevention training for staff and students also failed to cover all applicable topics .

schools need to evaluate and implement necessary safety measures .

ed has indicated that american indian / alaska native students enrolled in public schools are overrepresented among out - of - school suspensions and expulsions .

suspensions and expulsions can have negative educational consequences .

ed has released a dear colleague letter to schools providing resources regarding their obligation to administer discipline without discriminating on the basis of race , color , or national origin .

bie school - specific issues include how to define an effective academic accountability system for bie schools , construction and repair of bie schools , and insufficient grant support cost funding .

the structure and administration of the bie school system has long been considered a contributor to poor educational outcomes .

a landmark 1928 report , known as the meriam report , found that underfunding and paternal federal policy contributed to deficient boarding school student diets , low qualification standards and salaries for teaching staff , student labor to maintain schools , and a prescriptive and unresponsive curriculum .

another milestone report in 1969 , known as the kennedy report , recommended a promotion of the status of bia within doi but declined to make a recommendation regarding what it characterized as the long - standing and most serious issue of the ineffective internal organization of the bia .

the 1969 report highlighted that education was not the bia's highest priority and called attention to a lack of centralized authority , data , and information ; a clear chain of command ; educational expertise among administrators ; and a high quality , motivated , and stable teaching staff .

additional organizational assessments were conducted in 1992 , 1999 , and 2012 .

since 2013 , the government accountability office ( gao ) has published several reports on doi management of bie schools .

in 2017 , gao added doi management of indian education programs to its high - risk list of government programs .

it found fragmented administrative structures , a lack of clear roles and poor coordination between responsible offices , frequent turnovers in leadership , and inadequate procedures and internal controls .

in addition , gao indicated that the small enrollment of many bie schools makes it more difficult to acquire all of the necessary educational and personnel resources .

the bie has an inadequate number of staff to oversee school expenditures , and staff have inadequate training and written procedures with which to fulfill their administrative obligations .

federal administration of bie schools is complicated by statutory provisions .

while the indian self - determination and education assistance act of 1975 ( isdeaa ) and tribally controlled schools act ( tcsa ) support the federal policy of tribal control , doi management of tribally operated schools is necessarily limited by the two laws .

in contrast , state educational agencies ( seas ) may establish standards , processes , and programs for public schools to implement .

bie administers tcsa grants , which are limited to schools , but bia administers isdeaa contracts , which may include other funding streams such as funds for roads and economic development .

also , the requirement for tribal consultations supports self - determination and may improve results and acceptance , but it slows change and innovation .

several options have been considered to address these long - standing administrative , organizational , and ultimately student achievement issues .

similar to the transfer of bia - funded schools in alaska to the state of alaska , the remaining bie schools or students could be transferred to the states , which have established and known governance systems .

ai / an students in public schools demonstrate higher academic achievement than bie students , which lends some support for this option .

however , ai / an students in public schools on average score lower than white and asian / pacific islander students in public schools ( table 3 and table 4 ) .

in addition , ai / an students in public schools and bie students may not be comparable populations .

some stakeholders have suggested colocating or transitioning bie schools to tribally operated charter schools .

as charter schools are public - state schools , this option is similar to the aforementioned option of transferring bie schools to the states except that charter schools provide greater autonomy to the operator than is available to traditional public schools .

some stakeholders have suggested transferring the bie school system to ed because ed is the federal agency whose mission is educational excellence and equal access .

transferring bie to ed may be difficult as some tribal stakeholders advocate for doi - indian affairs maintaining responsibility for indian affairs and the fact that ed does not have experience operating a school system .

the administration and congress have initiated doi reorganizations and restructurings to address the issue directly .

the proposals have variously tried to centralize or decentralize authority and responsibility , improve options for high - quality personnel recruitment and retention , delineate all of the education functions into a separate or independent organization , share support functions between bie and bia to leverage expertise , publish policy / procedures manuals , and improve tribal participation .

in 2014 following results of the american indian education study group , doi ordered a restructuring of bie in order to address many outstanding issues , in particular encouraging greater tribal control , improving student achievement , and increasing communication within the bie and with its stakeholders .

the reorganization is designed to provide greater support and technical assistance to tribally operated bie schools in order to promote more effective teachers and principals , better respond to resource needs , and foster family and community support for students .

the reorganization is also designed to ensure the budget is aligned with expected outcomes and processes .

during the 114 th congress , the senate committee on indian affairs approved the reforming american indian standards of education act of 2016 ( s. 2580 ) to create an independent indian education agency that would be within doi and that would be directed by a presidential appointee .

the 115 th congress instructed doi to reorganize and present a reorganization plan for indian affairs such that all indian education functions are administered by and accountable to the bie .

the esea , as amended by essa , requires doi to develop regulations for defining bie school standards , assessments , and an accountability system under esea title i - a , and it permits bie schools to waive such regulatory requirements if the tribal governing body or school board of a bie school determines the regulations to be inappropriate .

should such a determination be made , the tribal governing body or school board must submit a proposal to the secretary of the interior that includes alternate standards , assessments , and an accountability system , if applicable , that are consistent with the requirements of esea section 1111 and take into account the unique circumstances of the school .

the bie announced and initiated the accountability negotiated rulemaking committee in january 2017 .

the final regulations are expected to be in place for ay2017-2018 .

the miccosukee tribe and navajo nation had alternative standards , assessments , and accountability plans approved by doi and ed — the miccosukee tribe for ay2014-2015 , ay2015-2016 , and ay2016-2017 , and the navajo nation for ay2015-2016 and ay 2016-2017 .

the ability of the miccosukee tribe and navajo nation to continue using the alternative systems in ay2017-2018 and beyond will likely depend on the waiver requirements established under negotiated rulemaking .

for at least 20 years , bie school facilities have been characterized by a very large number of old facilities with a high rate of deficiencies .

some facilities are in poor condition and do not meet health and safety standards .

reports from students and faculty suggest that conditions affect learning and enrollment .

gao and doi have reported several weaknesses in the management of bie school facilities .

the weaknesses include a lack of consistent and complete facilities condition information , inadequate implementation of procedures to address facilities' deficiencies , insufficient staffing , inadequate staff training , inconsistent oversight , insufficient internal controls and procedures , and poor communication .

the bia retains responsibility for bie school construction , including replacement of all of a school's facilities , replacement of individual facilities at schools , improvement and repair of existing school facilities , and repair of education employee housing .

in 2016 , doi estimated that the replacement cost of bie school facilities exceeded $4.6 billion and that the cost to correct known deficiencies exceeded $430 million .

on december 31 , 2009 , the latest estimate available , the bia estimated that the costs to replace , repair , construct , and improve existing facilities in poor condition , excluding facilities in fair or good condition , would be $1.3 billion .

in 2011 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) reached a settlement with the bia and bie to address alleged violations of waste , water , air , toxics , and community right - to - know laws at schools and public water systems .

the alleged violations are related to the labeling , storage , and release of wastes ; asbestos management plans ; and drinking water monitoring and contaminant levels .

the original settlement required bia and bie to correct alleged violations at 72 schools and 27 water systems and implement an environmental compliance auditing program and an environmental management system ( ems ) to improve environmental practices at all of its bie schools .

the consent agreement was modified in 2014 , expanding the list of bia / bie facilities subject to the consent agreement .

in response to ongoing facilities needs and unsafe conditions , congress has established requirements of doi in an effort to facilitate addressing the issues .

the no child left behind act ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) required that doi establish a negotiated rulemaking committee to report on bie schools' needs for school and school facilities replacement and repair , and to develop formulas to distribute funds to address these needs .

in 2012 , the bia published its catalog of facilities , formulas for renovation and repair , and recommendations for addressing school facilities needs .

congress has periodically directed the bia to develop replacement school priority lists .

the previous replacement school construction priority list of 14 schools was published in 2004 , the fy2016 appropriations act funded replacement of the last two schools on the 2004 list .

in 2016 , the bia published a new construction priority list of 10 schools .

in addition to annual appropriations , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) authorized qualified school construction bonds ( qscbs ; 26 u.s.c .

§54f ) .

qscbs are a tax credit bond program that make bond proceeds available for the construction , rehabilitation , or repair of a public school facility or for the acquisition of land for a public school facility .

treasury allocated $200 million in each of 2009 and 2010 to doi for indian tribal governments to construct or repair bie - funded schools .

as of may 2014 , no tribe had taken advantage of the program partly because many tribes are unable to sell bonds because they are high risk entities ; although the allocation remains available .

there are a several potential options for addressing poor facilities at bie schools .

some that are routinely suggested or have been suggested by organizations like gao include the following: additional funds for maintenance , improvement , and construction could be appropriated to cover the estimated cost of bringing facilities into good condition ; public - private partnerships could be formed to fund and / or provide expertise to affect facilities improvement and construction ; implementation of a doi - based unit or organization that would execute appropriate communication , procedures , internal controls , oversight , and staffing to properly manage bie facilities ; and congressional and administrative oversight of measured progress in facilities' improvement and construction may affect outcomes .

indian education issues affecting public schools include the jom freeze and the participation of indian parents and tribes .

by statute , jom funds are distributed to contractors by formula , based on a count of indian students and average per - pupil operating costs .

student counts for allocating funds have been effectively frozen since fy1995 .

the house and senate reports , accompanying the doi and related agencies appropriations act , 1995 ( p.l .

103-332 ) , instructed the bia to transfer jom allocations to tribal priority allocations ( tpa ) along with certain funds for housing improvement in an effort to stabilize funding for tribes and provide them additional control and flexibility in the use of the funds .

the intention was to include the jom funds in each tribe's recurring base funding .

based on public comment and the appropriations reports , the bia decided to use the fy1995 jom allocations based on the fy1995 student counts to establish jom base funding for each of the tribal contractors , excluding tribal organizations .

there is a statutory prohibition on changing a tribe's base funding .

this transfer to tpa has resulted in what is commonly referred to as the jom freeze .

in fy2005 , jom served about 272,000 students in 33 states .

at the direction of congress , the bie is attempting to count the current number of students served .

as a result of the 1995 freeze , the bie no longer systematically collects data about the numbers of students served by projects , the needs of those students , the services provided , or the outcomes realized .

the freeze allows pre - 1995 contractors to receive funding based on their 1995 student count regardless of the number of students actually served .

the freeze included each tribe's 1995 jom allocation into its base funding or tribal priority allocation ( tpa ) .

tpa allows tribes flexibility in the management and use of funds for various programs and services .

tribes that receive jom as part of their base funding are dependent on this as a fairly stable source of funding .

appropriations conference reports since fy2012 have directed the bie to count the number of students eligible for ( participating in ) the johnson o'malley ( jom ) program and recommend a methodology to distribute funds in the future .

as of may 2017 , the bie was still trying to collect an accurate and complete count .

the participation and influence of indian parents and tribes in the education of indian students has increased over time .

the jom , impact aid , and indian education formula grant programs require consultation with an indian parent committee .

esea , as amended by essa , requires that leas with substantial ai / an or indian student enrollment consult with indian tribes and tribal organizations prior to submitting their applications for several esea formula grant programs .

since fy2012 , through the esea indian education programs , ed has awarded several demonstration grants to partnerships between tribes or tribal education departments ( teds ) and states , leas , or bie schools .

there is continued interest in increasing the role of indian tribes in an effort to increase student achievement and cultural relevance of education .

increasing the role of tribes in public schools may confront sovereignty , accountability , collective bargaining , and property ownership issues and will impact non - indian students in public schools .

for instance , the tribal education departments national assembly , co. has proposed allowing tribal education departments ( teds ) to operate public schools , particularly public schools on or near reservations and public schools with large enrollments of tribal children .

programs funded under esea title vi might be viewed as incremental efforts to increase cultural relevance and tribal influence .

