the united states army—consisting of active , national guard , and reserve units—is required to [b]e able to conduct joint , multinational operations anywhere across the spectrum of operations .

this spectrum ranges from the low end—emphasizing stability and civil support operations—to the high end—emphasizing major combat operations .

to accomplish this mission , the army has chosen to man , equip , and train each of its combat and support units to be "full - spectrum - capable," able to function in all operational scenarios described in the previous passage .

while the army considers its units "full spectrum capable," army units are optimized for traditional ground campaigns against the ground forces of other nations .

there are a variety of proposals for the creation of specialized units to address the needs of counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training and advisory missions .

this section summarizes and examines some of these proposals .

there have also been proposals to create specialized units to deal exclusively with stabilization , security , and reconstruction operations , as well as peace keeping operations .

the following two proposals cover a range of possibilities for the creation of specialized stabilization units .

at present , the army continues to create and train its training and advisory teams on an ad hoc basis .

the marines , however , have recently established a marine corps training and advisory group ( mctag ) at ft. story , virginia .

the purpose of the mctag is to "coordinate , form , train , and equip marine corps advisor and training teams for current and projected operations. .

it is not known if this will form the basis of a specialized marine corps training and advisory unit , but it is likely that marines will be assigned training and advisory duties on a temporary basis , much as is the current case with the army .

the army's insistence that specialized units are not needed and that full - spectrum units can meet the operational challenges of counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training / advising appears to be "more of the same" or "the path of least resistance" to some , but the army cites its experiences in iraq as validation of its position .

the army maintains that its bcts , particularly in iraq , have been required to rapidly transition between counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training / advisory missions on a frequent and unpredictable basis .

because there is not a predictable linear progression from one type of an operation to another , it would become both difficult and risky to replace a bct with a specialized stabilization unit , particularly when the tactical situation could rapidly and unexpectedly deteriorate into open conflict .

the army also suggests that relationships with both the indigenous population and security forces are a crucial factor in any sort of operation and that it might be more effective to leave a bct in place over a period of time to conduct all missions as opposed to transitioning to specialized units and advisory teams which would require re - establishing these crucial relationships with indigenous personnel .

if dod and the army decide to elevate the training and advisory mission to a "core mission," army units would then be equally responsible for conventional combat , counterinsurgency , stabilization and reconstruction , and training / advisory missions—the full spectrum of military operations .

in theory , the army would be required to maintain a high - level proficiency for four distinctly different and , some might argue , mutually exclusive missions .

this being the case , some might argue that the army runs the risk of becoming a "jack of all trades , master of none" force .

given these circumstances , it can be argued that prioritizing the army's missions , as was done during the cold war , might be a more viable solution .

if secretary of gates truly believes that unconventional wars are "the ones most likely to be fought in the years ahead," then perhaps unconventional wars should become the army's priority .

the lack of a peer or near - peer potential ground force adversary—like the warsaw pact—could present a low - risk opportunity to designate "unconventional wars" as the army's priority mission , and perhaps revise army force structure to more effectively function in an unconventional role .

when examining the changes instituted by the army in response to the challenges of counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training / advising in doctrine , education , and training , it appears that they far exceed innovative changes in army force structure .

while few would argue that doctrine , education , and training reforms are unimportant , some might consider it reasonable to expect that there would be a commensurate degree of change in army force structure .

while the army has embarked on its "divestiture of cold war force structure" as previously described , it can be argued that these changes are long overdue and more rooted in the army's 1990s experiences in the balkans and rwanda than in iraq and afghanistan .

because the army has opted to continue with full - spectrum units while radically redesigning military doctrine , education , and training , some might question why the army has not taken that final step and custom designed special units to deal with counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training and advising .

discussions with army officials and reports in the press suggest that the army is well aware of some of the proposals for the creation of specialized units .

what is less well - known , however , is whether the army has subjected any or all of these proposals to any form of critical analytic review .

without a formal analytic review , the army could be accused of being dismissive and "choosing the easier path" of continuing to rely on full - spectrum forces .

a comprehensive analytic comparison by the army , as well as independent organizations , of all options—including the current full - spectrum approach—could highlight the advantages , disadvantages , and resource requirements of the various proposals and , if the results favor a full - spectrum approach , add further weight to the army's current position on the need for specialized units .

on one level , in order for a brigade combat team ( bct ) and its soldiers to conduct the current and potential panoply of full - spectrum missions , additional training , education , and equipment are the key .

on another level , soldiers are the key .

the army's need for "pentathletes"—particularly among its officer and non - commissioned officer ( nco ) corps—may prove to be an unobtainable goal .

reports suggest that the army is losing "our combat experienced mid - career ncos and captains at an excessive rate. .

of even greater concern perhaps is a reported internal army warning in 2005 that there was a "disproportionate loss of high - potential , high - performance junior leaders," precisely the types the army envisions as its "pentathletes. .

the loss of these junior officers has other implications as well .

one is that there is less competition for promotion , meaning that less capable officers could be promoted to more senior ranks .

another is that to fill these depleted officer ranks , the army is sending more ncos and junior soldiers with nco potential to officer candidate school , thereby depriving the nco corps—already several thousand ncos short—of much needed high - potential , high - performance ncos .

these circumstances may preclude the army from achieving and maintaining a full - spectrum capability and further stress soldiers and bcts by requiring them to perform at a level currently beyond their abilities .

section 941 of the conference report for h.r .

1585 , the fiscal year 2008 national defense authorization act , establishes a requirement for dod to conduct a quadrennial review of its roles and missions beginning in 2008 .

while this review is foremost a means to identify core mission areas and service capabilities , it may also examine how counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training and advisory missions are being addressed by the services .

the review might also recommend joint or service - specific actions to better address these potential core mission areas—to include the formation of units specifically designed to address these mission areas .

