federal and state laws have always played a role in protecting minors from criminal victimization .

for example , congress has enacted laws dealing with child pornography , child luring , and child sexual exploitation .

however , given its immediacy , anonymity , and accessibility , the internet offers a forum , through social networking sites , for harassment and other social ills committed against minors .

the internet's nuances present new challenges for federal and state legislators and law enforcement personnel responsible for defining and prosecuting criminal use .

this is especially true with the relatively new crime of internet "harassment. .

the term internet harassment usually encompasses "cyberstalking," "cyberharassment," and / or "cyberbullying. .

these activities , when committed against minors , may cause emotional harm .

recent high - profile cases involving teen suicides demonstrate the potentially severe consequences of this emotional harm .

as such , legislators are faced with determining how to handle the problem .

various laws , not specific to minors , govern traditional crimes such as stalking and harassment , which generally include a threat of harm .

these laws generally criminalize unlawful conduct that fails to rise to the level of assault or battery .

recognizing that the internet can be used to stalk or harass individuals , congress and some states have amended "traditional" stalking and harassment statutes to include internet activity .

however , these statutes are generally inapplicable in situations in which minors suffer emotional harm due to embarrassment or humiliation .

when , if ever , should criminal sanctions be imposed for these incidents ? .

should legislators amend traditional stalking and harassment statutes to cover these situations ? .

or should legislators create new crimes covering such activity ? .

should such activity conducted by a neighbor , for example , be prosecuted on the federal level because the internet was used ? .

or should prosecution of such activity remain at the state level ? .

these are just some of the questions legislators may consider in addressing the problem of internet harassment of children .

while these policy considerations are noteworthy , this report focuses on the applicable constitutional constraints legislators may consider in drafting legislation in this area .

internet harassment is a new phenomenon that presents a challenge for law enforcement , legislators , educators , and parents .

the term internet harassment lacks a uniform definition but usually encompasses cyberstalking , cyberharassment , and / or cyberbullying .

it is worth noting that most cyberstalking and / or cyberharassment statutes cover both adult and minor victims .

if one were to categorize these activities based on danger or greatest potential harm , cyberstalking would be the most dangerous , followed by cyberharassment and then cyberbullying .

generally , cyberstalking includes a credible threat of harm , while the other two do not .

cyberharassment and / or cyberbullying may cause embarrassment , annoyance , or humiliation to the victim .

some individuals use the terms cyberharassment and cyberbullying interchangeably , while others reserve the term cyberbullying to describe harassment between minors , usually within the school context .

in a criminal context , these activities are predicated on a perpetrator's desire to inflict emotional harm , usually in the form of humiliation or embarrassment .

legislators are faced with several questions in tackling this problem as it pertains to minors .

when , if ever , should individuals be criminally liable for causing humiliation or embarrassment to another ? .

should new laws be created to cover such action ? .

or , is it sufficient to amend existing laws ? .

there are constitutional principles that limit the authority of all governmental entities ( federal , state , and local ) to enact cyberharassment and / or cyberbullying statutes , namely the first and fourteenth amendments .

with the proliferation of potential uses and abuses of the internet , the crime of internet harassment presents challenges for law enforcement personnel , legislators , educators , and parents .

these challenges are exacerbated by a lack of uniformity in defining the terms cyberharassment and cyberbullying .

in addition , jurisdictional limits and the anonymity of the internet sometimes make it difficult for law enforcement personnel to identify , locate , arrest , and prosecute alleged offenders .

while states generally assert jurisdiction over law enforcement authority within their borders , congress may legislate , pursuant to the commerce clause , internet activities .

or congress may elect to adopt a wait - and - see approach , monitoring state internet harassment - related activities and the types of behavior prosecuted .

legislators and school administrators continue to grapple with ways of combating cyberbullying , in light of recent high - profile teen suicides , while maintaining the free flow of information and opinion on the internet .

as internet harassment may cause its victims emotional harm as opposed to physical harm , legislators must determine what level , if any , of harassment should be criminalized .

while traditional harassment statutes may provide some guidance in drafting legislation and / or school policies , it is important to differentiate between the one - to - one communication of a telephone or e - mail communication and the one - to - many communication of a posting on a public website .

in drafting legislation or school policies , legislators and school administrators must consider the constitutional constraints of the first and fourteenth amendments .

statutes and school policies must be narrow enough not to infringe upon protected speech .

in addition , such restrictions must provide adequate notice of what activities constitute internet harassment .

while school administrators arguably have more leeway in adopting internet harassment policies , they are still generally limited to restricting speech that substantially or materially disrupts the educational process .

to facilitate this goal , it may be desirable for legislation and school policies to include definitions for all relevant terms such as "annoy," "harass," "repeated communication," "alarm," or "torment," as these may be too vague or subjective , which may lead to an inordinate amount of prosecutorial discretion .

