the first text messages were sent during 1992 and 1993 , although commercially , text messaging was not widely offered or used until 2000 .

even then , messages could only be sent between users subscribed to the same wireless carrier ; for example , sprint customers could only exchange messages with other sprint customers .

in november 2001 , however , wireless service providers began to connect their networks for text messaging , allowing subscribers on different networks to exchange text messages .

since then , the number of text messages in the united states has grown to over 48 billion messages every month .

additionally , text messages are no longer only sent as "point - to - point" communications between two mobile device users .

for example , messages are also commonly sent from web - based applications within a web browser and from instant messaging clients like aim , msn , or google chat .

for congressional policymakers , the major issues that have arisen stem from what could be called "same problem , different platform. .

for example , issues such as consumer fraud and children's accessing inappropriate content , which have existed previously in the "wired world," have now found their way to the "wireless world. .

other issues stem from the difficulty in applying technical definitions to a given service , such as whether a text message is sent "phone - to - phone" or using the phone's associated e - mail address .

for example , spam sent between two phones or from one phone to many phones does not fall under the legal definition of spam ; but if that same message is sent from a phone or computer using the phone's associated e - mail address , it does .

the issues discussed in this report have prompted different levels of response from congress and the wireless industry: issues that are being addressed by industry , so policymakers may wish to wait and see how those efforts play out ; issues that have not risen to a level of priority in congress , but would require statutory action to effect change ; and issues that have triggered a legislative response .

as wireless communications technologies , and the issues that accompany them , evolve over time , so likely will the approaches that industry and congress will take to ensure consumer safety and satisfaction .

at&t customers must log in at mymessages.wireless.att.com .

text - blocking and alias options are available under "preferences. .

messages from specific e - mail addresses or websites can also be blocked from this page .

verizon wireless customers must log in at vtext.com .

text blocking options are available under "text messaging" / "preferences. .

select "text blocking. .

consumers may block text messages from e - mail or from the web , including blocking specific addresses or websites .

sprint customers must log in at http: / / www.sprint.com .

sprint does not offer auto - blocking , but consumers can block specific phone numbers and addresses .

on the top navigation bar , select , "my online tools" / "communication tools" / "text messaging. .

on the compose a text message page , under text messaging options , select "settings & preferences. .

in the text box , customers can enter a phone number , e - mail address , or domain name to block .

t - mobile customers must log in at http: / / www.t - mobile.com and select "communication tools. .

t - mobile doesn't yet offer a "block text messages from the internet" option .

customers can block all messages sent by e - mail , though , or permit only messages sent to the phone's e - mail address or alias , or create filters that block text messages containing certain phrases .

