the primary source of federal aid to k - 12 education is the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , particularly its title i , part a program of education for the disadvantaged .

the esea was initially adopted in 1965 , and was most recently reauthorized and amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ) , p.l .

107-110 , that authorized esea programs through fy2008 .

it is widely expected that the 111 th congress will consider whether to amend and extend the esea .

the nclb initiated a major expansion of federal influence on several aspects of public k - 12 education , primarily with the aim of increasing the accountability of public school systems and individual public schools for improving achievement outcomes of all pupils , especially the disadvantaged .

states that receive grants under esea title i - a must implement in all public schools and school districts a variety of standards - based assessments in reading , math and science ; make annual adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) determinations for each public school and local educational agency ( lea ) ; and require virtually all public school teachers and aides to meet a variety of qualification requirements .

state ayp policies must incorporate an ultimate goal of all public school pupils reaching a proficient or higher level of achievement in reading and mathematics by the end of the 2013-2014 school year .

further , states participating in esea title i - a must enforce a series of increasingly substantial consequences for most of their schools and almost all school districts that fail to meet the ayp standards for two consecutive years or more .

major esea programs other than title i - a provide grants to support the education of migrant students ; recruitment of and professional development for teachers ; language instruction for limited english proficient ( lep ) students ; school safety and drug abuse prevention programs ; after - school instruction and care ; expansion of charter schools and other forms of public school choice ; education services for indian , native hawaiian , and alaska native students ; impact aid to compensate leas for taxes foregone due to certain federal activities ; and a wide variety of innovative educational approaches or instruction to meet particular student needs .

the esea contains 45 separately authorized programs , plus approximately 20 specified sub - programs .

the methods by which federal funds are provided to grantees under these programs fall into five general categories: programs under which federal funds are allocated by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) to states , as well as to all or most leas via one or more formulas specified in the esea ( example: esea title i , part a , education for the disadvantaged ) ; programs under which federal funds are allocated by ed to states via a statutory formula , while state educational agencies ( seas ) suballocate these funds either on a competitive or discretionary basis , or via a state - developed allocation formula consistent with general statutory guidance ( example: esea title iv , part b , 21 st century community learning centers ) ; programs under which federal funds are allocated by ed directly to leas via formulas specified in the esea ( example: esea title viii , impact aid ) ; programs under which federal funds are allocated by ed to state and / or local grantees on a competitive or discretionary basis ( example: esea title v , part d , subpart 6 , gifted and talented students ) ; and programs under which federal funds are allocated by ed to a single eligible grantee specified in the esea ( example: esea title ii , part c , subpart 2 , national writing project ) .

esea allocation formulas are mechanisms established through statute or other official policy documents that define how appropriated funds are to be allocated among seas or leas nationwide .

they take the form of mathematical equations through which ed , and possibly also seas , calculate specific grant amounts for each potential grantee meeting statutory eligibility criteria .

they almost always include one or more population factors , but typically include a number of additional factors .

this report discusses and analyzes the current allocation formulas for esea programs in the first three categories listed above .

it provides the following: 1. a description of general categories of factors used in the esea's allocation formulas ; 2. descriptions of each program's formula ( s ) ; and 3. analyses of general patterns and issues related to these formulas .

other crs reports provide more detailed discussions and analyses of the allocation formulas of major individual esea programs .

this report will be updated infrequently , when major changes occur in esea program allocation formulas .

it is important to understand the vocabulary commonly applied to federal k - 12 education allocation formulas .

therefore , an explanation of key terms precedes the discussion of the esea formulas .

level of recipient entity and level at which grants are calculated by ed .

under most esea formula grant programs , grants are made to leas via the seas .

if leas are the ultimate grantees in a state formula grant program , the esea program may provide for substate distribution of grants by sea - administered competition , through a statutory substate allocation formula directing seas how to determine lea grants or , less frequently , through a statutory lea - level formula with grants calculated by ed itself but distributed to leas by seas ( with limited options for seas to adjust the lea grants as calculated by ed ) .

under a few esea formula grant programs , lea grants are calculated and directly allocated by ed ( eg , impact aid ) .

formula factors .

allocation formulas have one or more factors that target funds to seas , leas , or other entities to accomplish or facilitate some policy outcome .

for example , a program aiming to serve children from poor families would have a formula based on estimated numbers of school - age ( 5-17 years ) children in poor families .

in a simple formula , each state would be allocated funds in proportion to the estimated number of such children living in that state: that is , a state's proportion is obtained by dividing its number of school - age children in poor families by the total number of such children nationwide .

for example , if 14% of all school - age children in poor families live in california , this simple formula would allocate 14% of all state grant funds to california .

a formula can include more than one population factor , and it can weight the factors differently .

for example , a formula could distribute 50% of funds based on total school - age population and 50% based on school - age children in poor families .

population factor .

the most common allocation formula factor is a population factor .

almost all federal k - 12 education program allocation formulas include such a factor .

the most common population factors are school - age children in poor families and total school - age children .

in addition , several esea programs allocate funds on the basis of a population factor that is specifically related to the program's purpose , such as indian pupils , migratory children , or children whose parents live or work on federal property .

usually , a population factor is direct , but sometimes it is indirect .

for example , if a program allocates grants in proportion to grants made under esea title i - a , this provision indirectly incorporates the title i - a formulas' population factors ( primarily school - age children in poor families ) .

title i - a grant factor .

many esea programs allocate some or all of their funds in proportion to grants made under the largest esea program — aid for the education of the disadvantaged under title i , part a .

for example , grants under esea title ii , part d , education technology , are made in proportion to title i - a grants ( subject to a higher state minimum grant provision than under title i - a ) .

thus , grants calculated under title i - a become an allocation factor for several other programs .

eligibility threshold .

many esea programs require leas to meet population factor thresholds in order to be eligible to receive grants .

for example , under the title i - a concentration grant allocation formula , leas must meet either of two population factor eligibility thresholds: ( 1 ) 6,500 population factor children ( mostly school - age children in poor families ) or ( 2 ) a population factor child percentage ( population factor children divided by total school - age population ) of 15% , in order to receive grants .

expenditure factor .

several esea program allocation formulas include an expenditure factor .

these are based on state or ( less frequently ) lea average per pupil expenditure for public k - 12 education .

expenditure factors are intended to adjust for state or local differences in the costs of providing public k - 12 education , although they are often criticized as reflecting differences in ability to pay for educational services as well .

in most cases , floors and ceilings , based on percentages of the national average , are applied to this factor ( eg , a floor of 80% and a ceiling of 120% of the national average per pupil expenditure ) .

usually , an expenditure factor is direct , but sometimes it is indirect .

for example , if a program allocates grants in proportion to grants made under esea title i - a ( see above ) , this provision indirectly incorporates the title i - a formulas' expenditure factors .

hold harmless .

some formulas establish a minimum state or lea grant equal to a specified percentage of the amount received in a previous year .

usually , this is the immediately preceding year , although sometimes it is a "base year" that may be several years in the past .

the minimum percentage may be the full amount received in the previous year ( i.e. , 100% ) or , more often , some lesser percentage ( eg , 85% ) .

raising a state or lea to its hold harmless level almost always reduces grants to other states or leas that do not benefit from the hold harmless .

hold harmless amounts are only guaranteed if funds are sufficient to pay for them .

if not , hold harmless amounts are ratably reduced ( see below ) to meet the level of the appropriation .

further , in almost all cases , hold harmless provisions only apply to grantees meeting program eligibility criteria for the current year , not necessarily every grantee that received a grant in the preceding year .

foundation grant .

under some esea programs , each state or lea first receives a "foundation grant" amount , then additional appropriations , if any , are allocated on the basis of a population and possibly other formula factors .

if funds are insufficient to pay the full foundation grant amount , then each grantee receives an equal proportion of its foundation grant .

the foundation grant may be an equal amount per grantee ( eg , $3 million per state ) or , more often , it is the amount received in a base year under one or more antecedent programs .

the latter usually occurs when two or more programs are consolidated into one new program in a reauthorization of the esea .

minimum state grant .

in addition to hold harmless amounts ( see above ) , which are always expressed in terms of a percentage of a previous year grant , several programs have a state minimum grant expressed primarily in terms of a percentage of all allocations to states or as a fixed dollar amount per state .

such minimum grant provisions are aimed at providing what advocates argue is a minimum 'viable' grant to all states .

state minimums are set at a percentage of total state grants ( typically 0.25% , 0.35% , or 0.5% ) .

occasionally , they are fixed dollar amounts ( eg , $500,000 ) or the greater ( or lesser ) of a fixed amount or a percentage of the total .

in some cases , one or more "caps" may be placed on these minimums ( eg , a state minimum might be 0.25% of total state grants , subject to a cap of 150% of the national average grant per population factor child multiplied by the state total number of such children ) .

when applying the minimum , the money to increase grants to relatively low population states that would otherwise receive less than the minimum amount comes from all other states , which would see their initial grants ratably reduced .

ratable reduction or ratable increase .

this is the process of either reducing or increasing grants as initially calculated in order to adjust for the level of available appropriations or application of certain formula factors , such as a state minimum or lea hold harmless .

these reductions or increases are applied in proportion to initial grants ( i.e. , they are "ratable" ) .

for example , raising certain states to minimum grant amounts requires that funds be redistributed from states with initial grants above the minimums .

ratable reduction reduces funds in proportion to their initial grants for states above minimum levels and redistributes these funds to states with initial grants below minimum levels .

when ratable reduction occurs , all states ( or leas ) above the minimum have their initial grants reduced by the same percentage , resulting in different dollar amount changes .

similar processes of ratable reduction occur in the application of hold harmless provisions .

fiscal accountability requirements .

most esea programs include one or more of three types of fiscal accountability requirements .

these are intended to assure that federal funds provide a net increase over state and local funds devoted to k - 12 education .

the two most common esea fiscal accountability requirements are ( 1 ) maintenance of effort: recipients must provide , from state and local sources , a level of funding ( either aggregate or per pupil ) in the preceding year that is equal to at least some specified percentage ( usually 90% ) of the level in the second preceding year ; and ( 2 ) funds must be used so as to supplement , and not supplant , state and local funds that would otherwise be available for the same purpose as under the esea program in question .

a third type of fiscal accountability requirement , comparability , applies only to title i , parts a , c , and d: services provided with state and local funds in schools participating in title i - a must be comparable to those in non - title i - a schools of the same lea .

treatment of puerto rico , outlying areas , and the bureau of indian affairs .

esea programs usually distribute funds by formula only to the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico ( the latter two entities are defined as 'states' for the purposes of program formulas ) .

other entities usually receive funds from amounts that are reserved from the total appropriation .

these set - asides can include funds for the outlying areas ( american samoa , guam , commonwealth of the northern marianas , and the u.s. virgin islands ) , and funds provided to the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) for services to certain indian students .

typically , a total of 1% of program appropriations is reserved for these entities .

other reservations from appropriations .

under many programs , before remaining funds are allocated to states , a portion of appropriations is also reserved for such national activities as competitive grants , program evaluation , research , or technical assistance related to the overall program .

further adjustments by seas of lea grants as calculated by ed .

many state grant formulas permit states to reserve a proportion of their total grant for state level activities .

these activities include state administration of the program together with statewide services , such as technical assistance and program evaluation , aimed at assisting and improving the implementation of the program .

under title i - a , states are required to reserve 4% of state grants ( subject to certain limitations described later in this report ) for school improvement activities .

a typical total state set - aside might be 5% of the state grant , with no more than 1% of the grant ( i.e. , 20% of the set - aside ) for administration and 4% for other state activities .

the following tables 1-9 summarize the provisions of esea allocation formulas with respect to many of the formula factors or provisions discussed above .

as illustrated in table 1 , the recipients of a majority of the funds under almost all esea formula grant programs are leas .

under most of these programs , grants are provided to leas via seas: that is , they are "state - administered formula grant" programs .

funds are allocated by ed directly to leas only under a limited number of esea programs .

within states , either ( a ) funds are allocated to leas under formulas that are specified in the esea , but are actually calculated by seas , or ( b ) funds are distributed on a competitive or discretionary basis within states .

title i - a is the only esea program under which funds are allocated via seas , but grants are calculated by ed at the lea level .

even under title i - a , seas make a number of authorized adjustments to initial lea grants as calculated by ed .

as indicated in table 2 , in terms of numbers of programs in each category ( without regard to program size ) , esea formula grant programs fall relatively evenly into three groups: ( a ) programs where the primary population factor is school - age children in poor families ( either directly or indirectly ) , ( b ) programs under which the primary population factor is a measure of total school - age population ; and ( c ) programs with a primary population factor that is specifically related to the program's purpose ( eg , indian children and youth for the title vii - a - 1 indian education program ) .

the programs where school - age children in poor families are the indirect primary formula factor are those where all or part of funds are allocated in proportion to grants under esea title i - a .

two programs , improving teacher quality ( title ii - a ) and safe and drug - free schools and communities ( title iv - a ) , have both ( a ) and ( b ) as primary population factors .

in terms of funding , given the relative size of title i - a , as well as the number of other programs with allocations linked to those under title i - a , a majority of esea funds are allocated under programs where school - age children in poor families are the primary population factor .

note that all esea formula grant programs are included in table 1 and table 2 , above .

the remaining tables in this section include only the esea formula grant programs that are relevant to the specific topic of the table .

as listed in table 3 , there are five esea programs under which grants are made , in part or in full , on the basis of lea grants calculated under title i , part a .

four of these programs base allocations on total title i - a grants , whereas the fifth uses title i - a concentration grants only .

in calculating grants under such programs outside of title i - a , the title i - a lea hold harmless provision is not to be applied to the title i - a grants upon which allocations are based .

only the esea formula grant programs listed below in table 4 include an expenditure factor , either directly or indirectly ( i.e. , as a result of allocating funds in proportion to grants under title i - a ) .

under the title i - a formulas ( and by extension , the other formulas based on title i - a grants ) , title i - c , title i - d , and the title vii - a - 1 indian education program , the expenditure factor is based on state average per pupil expenditure for public k - 12 education , after applying a floor and ceiling ( in the case of indian education , a floor only ) on the basis of the national average per pupil expenditure .

the title viii impact aid programs employ an expenditure factor ( local contribution rate ) that in most cases is either one - half of the state average per pupil expenditure or one - half of the national average per pupil expenditure .

esea formula grant programs that have minimum or hold harmless provisions at either the state or lea level are listed in table 5 .

state minimum grant provisions are applied to several programs ; they range from up to 0.25% of total grants to states with respect to appropriations equal to or below the fy2001 funding level for title i - a basic and concentration grants , to 0.5% of the total amount available for state grants under several programs .

in general , state minimum grant provisions ( expressed as a percentage of total state grants ) are more common than hold harmless provisions ( expressed as a percentage of grants for a previous year ) in the esea .

only the title i - a formulas have lea hold harmless provisions ( minimum percentages of the previous year grant , if sufficient funds are available and eligibility thresholds are met where applicable ) , while only the safe and drug - free schools and communities program has a state level hold harmless ( which is not currently fully met ) .

several of the esea formula grant programs include provisions allowing seas to reserve a limited percentage of state total grants for administration , evaluation , and technical assistance .

maximum reservations for these specific activities range from approximately 1% for title i - a to 5% under a number of other esea programs .

as noted in table 6 , some programs have maximum reservation percentages above 5% , but these funds are to be used for a variety of activities in addition to administration , evaluation , and technical assistance , such as statewide competitive grant programs .

limits on the use of funds by leas for administration , evaluation , and technical assistance occur only with respect to four esea programs , with limits ranging from 2% to 5% .

as seen in table 7 , a large majority of esea formula grant programs provide for grants to be made to the outlying areas ( american samoa , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , guam , and the virgin islands ) .

some programs simply treat these areas the same as the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico ; others reserve a share of state grants ( either 0.5% or 1% ) for this purpose .

a somewhat smaller majority of esea formula grant programs provide funds to the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) for services to indian pupils , either by treating the bia the same as a state , or more often by reserving 0.5% or 1% of grants for this purpose .

only a few esea formula grant programs reserve a share of formula grant funds for national programs or activities .

national programs are much more often authorized under separate provisions of the statute ( eg , safe and drug - free schools and communities national programs are authorized in esea title iv , part a , subpart 2 , whereas state formula grants are authorized under subpart 1 ) .

similarly , only a few programs authorize reservations from formula grant appropriations for evaluations and technical assistance .

however , as with national programs , several esea formula grant programs contain separate authorizations for evaluations ( eg , evaluations for title i - a are authorized in title i - e ) .

in addition , the esea contains a general authorization ( in title ix , part f ) for the secretary of education to reserve for program evaluation up to 0.5% of appropriations under any esea program , except those in titles i and iii ( or any other esea program for which the reservation of funds by the secretary for evaluation is explicitly provided ) .

as indicated in table 8 , most esea formula grant programs have both maintenance of effort and supplement , not supplant , provisions .

a few programs have only one , but not both of these fiscal accountability provisions .

only title i , parts a , c , and d have comparability provisions ( requirements that educational services funded from state and local sources be comparable in schools that do , and do not , participate in the program within the same lea ) .

table 8 depicts the types of fiscal accountability provisions that are in place ; details about these provisions are included in the discussions of individual programs .

as shown in table 9 , three current esea programs allocate grants on a competitive basis if annual appropriations are below a specified threshold level , then allocate funds to states by formula if appropriations meet or exceed this threshold .

the threshold is $100 million for two of these programs and $250 million for the third .

only one of these programs , mathematics and science partnerships , has met its threshold thus far .

detailed descriptions of individual esea program allocation formulas are provided below .

programs are discussed in the order of their appearance in the esea .

this report concludes with a series of analyses of selected aspects of the esea allocation formulas .

given space limitations , as well as the limited availability of current grant data at the lea level , all of these analyses are conducted at the state ( not lea ) level .

 table 13 , below , provides two different "federal share" calculations for each state .

the first of these compares total esea formula grant allocations for fy2006 to total revenues for public k - 12 education for the 2005-2006 school year .

the table is sorted on the basis of this calculation , from lowest to highest .

the second calculation compares federal grants under all k - 12 education programs administered by ed , including not only the esea but also the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) and other federal programs , to total public k - 12 revenues for 2005-2006 ( i.e. , the same denominator as in the first comparison ) .

figure 1 further illustrates this esea share for the states ; states are again sorted according to the esea share of total public k - 12 revenues , from lowest to highest .

as seen in table 13 , the share of public k - 12 education revenues that is provided under esea programs varies substantially among the states , although esea funding constitutes only approximately one - tenth or less of total public k - 12 education revenues in all cases except puerto rico .

the esea share of revenues is lowest , 2.5% or less , for the states of iowa , massachusetts , minnesota , connecticut , and new jersey .

these states have relatively low rates of poverty , so their grants under title i - a and other programs with formulas based on title i - a grants are relatively low .

also , three of these states ( connecticut , massachusetts , and new jersey ) have especially high levels of state and local source funding for public k - 12 education , so federal grants are low in comparison .

at the other end of the scale , puerto rico is a special case , with an esea share ( 21.3% of total revenues ) that is at least twice as high as that of any state .

among the states , the esea share is highest , at 8.4% to 10.7% , for the states of new mexico , montana , north dakota , south dakota , and alaska .

these states receive relatively high grants under the esea impact aid and indian education programs , among others .

in addition , alaska , montana , north dakota , and ( to a lesser extent ) south dakota benefit substantially from the state minimum grant provisions in several of the esea program formulas .

the total federal share of revenues is in most cases slightly more than twice the esea share .

for example , the national average for esea grants as a share of total public k - 12 education revenues is 4.1% , while the national average for total ed funds as a share of public k - 12 education revenues is 9.1% , a ratio of 2.2 .

states where this ratio is much lower , 1.6 or below , include south dakota , montana , alaska , wyoming , and north dakota , plus puerto rico — all jurisdictions where the esea share is relatively high .

in contrast , states where the ratio of the total federal share to the esea share is especially high , at 2.8 to 3.4 , include maine , minnesota , louisiana , utah , mississippi , and iowa .

most of these states have especially low esea shares , but louisiana and mississippi have both relatively high esea shares and high ratios of total federal share to esea share , indicating a comparatively high level of support from both esea and other federal programs , as well as lower than average non - federal revenues per pupil .

 table 14 , table 15 , and table 16 , along with figure 2 , figure 3 , and figure 4 , provide the state expenditure , effort , and equity factors that are used in one or more of the esea title i - a allocation formulas .

the expenditure factor is the most broadly influential of these factors , as — in one form or the other — it applies to all title i - a grants .

further , all title i - a formula factors apply indirectly to several other esea formulas .

as was discussed earlier , expenditure factors are intended to adjust for state or local differences in the costs of providing public k - 12 education , although they are often criticized as reflecting differences in ability to pay for educational services as well .

one version of the title i - a expenditure factor applies to all title i - a formulas except education finance incentive grants ( efig ) , while the other version is used in the calculation of efig grants .

these versions differ only with respect to the constraints , expressed as a percentage of the national average per pupil expenditure , applied to the state average per pupil expenditure ( 80% / 120% of the national average for three formulas , 85% / 115% for efig grants ) .

in table 14 and figure 2 , states are sorted on the basis of the three - formula version of the expenditure factor , from lowest to highest .

ten states , those at the floor or the ceiling , are grouped at each end of the expenditure factor scale for the three - formula version of the expenditure factor ; within each of the groups , states are listed in alphabetical order .

for the efig grant version , even more states are grouped at the floor ( 15 states ) or the ceiling ( 13 states ) , since the bounds associated with this version of the expenditure factor are more narrow .

the remaining states are distributed throughout the range between these bounds .

while the state variation in expenditure values is not large in absolute terms , the factor does have substantial influence on the size of title i - a grants .

holding all else constant , the expenditure factor provides grants that are 50% higher in states at the maximum factor than in states at the minimum factor under the three - formula version of the factor , and that are 35% higher in the efig grant version .

the effort factor used in the title i - a efig grant formula is illustrated in table 15 and figure 3 , below .

as discussed above , this factor is intended to reward states with relatively high levels of expenditures per pupil for public k - 12 education compared to their level of personal income per capita .

this factor is equal to the average per pupil expenditure ( appe ) for public elementary and secondary education divided by state personal income per capita ( pci ) for each state , divided by the national average of this ratio .

in other words , it is the ratio of appe to pci for each state divided by the ratio of appe to pci for the nation .

the effort factor is greater than 1.0 for states where the ratio of expenditures per pupil for public elementary and secondary education to personal income per capita is greater than average for the nation as a whole , and below 1.0 for states where the ratio is less than average for the nation as a whole .

however , the range of the effort factor is limited to 0.95 to 1.05 .

the limited range , and therefore the limited impact on grant levels , of this factor is evident .

only 14 states fall within the narrow range between the minimum of 0.95 and the maximum of 1.05 , while 18 states are at the minimum of 0.95 and the remaining 20 states are at the maximum of 1.05 .

if all other relevant factors are held constant , a state with a maximum effort factor ( 1.05 ) would receive an efig grant of 11% more than if its effort factor were at the minimum ( 0.95 ) .

as a result , the factor has a limited impact on actual grants .

finally , the efig equity multiplier is displayed in table 16 and figure 4 .

as discussed above , this factor is intended to reward states with relatively equal levels of expenditures per pupil among their leas .

the equity multiplier is equal to 1.3 minus the state's equity factor .

the equity factor is the coefficient of variation for average per pupil expenditure among the state's leas .

in the cv calculations for this formula , an extra weight ( 1.4 vs. 1.0 ) is applied to estimated counts of children from poor families .

as a result , the lower a state's expenditure disparities among its leas , the lower is its cv and equity factor , and the higher is its multiplier .

conversely , the greater a state's expenditure disparities among its leas , the higher is its cv and equity factor , and the lower is its multiplier .

among the states , equity multipliers for fy2007 ranged from 1.0653 ( illinois ) to 1.3 for the single - lea entities of the district of columbia , hawaii , and puerto rico .

thus , all other relevant factors held constant , a state with a maximum multiplier would receive an efig grant of approximately 22% more than if it had the lowest equity multiplier .

states with the lowest equity multipliers ( 1.13 or below ) , in addition to illinois , include montana , virginia , massachusetts , missouri , wyoming , vermont , and new york .

states with the highest equity multipliers ( 1.21 or above ) , in addition to the 3 jurisdictions noted above , include west virginia , florida , iowa , washington , delaware , and north carolina .

 table 17 and figure 5 , below , provide state total esea formula grants per child for fy2007 calculated on the basis of total school - age children and school - age children in poor families .

the states are sorted only on the basis of their total number of school - age children , from largest ( california ) to smallest ( district of columbia ) .

as shown below , there is substantial variation in average grants per school - age child as well as grants per school - age child in a poor family among states in all population size ranges .

for example , among the 5 smallest jurisdictions ( wyoming , vermont , north dakota , alaska , and the district of columbia ) , the average grant per school - age child ranges from $592 to $1,407 , while the average grant per school - age child from a poor family varies from $3,957 to $10,935 .

this variation results largely from 3 factors: the varying impact of "caps" placed on state minimums under the title i - a allocation formulas ; variations in school - age child poverty rates ( a higher poverty rate is associated with higher grants per school - age child but , at least in the smallest states , lower grants per school - age child from a poor family ) ; and the eligibility of alaska for substantial funds under titles vii and viii .

smaller , but still substantial , variation also may be seen among states in other size ranges .

nevertheless , overall the average grants per child are generally much higher for the smallest states than for the remaining states .

the average for the 12 smallest jurisdictions ( new hampshire and smaller ) is $644 per school - age child and $4,879 per school - age child from a poor family .

similarly , these jurisdictions received 5.18% of esea formula grants for fy2007 , but have only 3.14% of the nation's school - age children and 2.46% of the school - age children from poor families .

in contrast , the average for all of the other states plus puerto rico is $386 per school - age child and $2,254 per school - age child from a poor family .

thus , the smallest states receive approximately 1.7 times as much as the remaining states per school - age child , and approximately 2.2 times as much per school - age child from a poor family .

this results primarily from the state minimum grant provisions in many of the esea allocation formulas .

while the differences in average grants per child between the smallest and other states are quite substantial , the small states receive a relatively modest share of total esea funds .

the total share of funds received by the 12 smallest jurisdictions ( 11 smallest states plus the district of columbia ) for fy2007 was 5.2% .

even if these small states were to receive the same amount of esea funds per child as other states , the net increase in funds reallocated to the larger states would be relatively marginal .

for example , if the share of funds going to the smallest states were reduced by half , the average increase for the remaining states would be approximately 2.7% .

 table 18 and figure 6 provide state total esea formula grants for fy2007 per child ( both total school - age population and school - age population in poor families ) with states sorted by their school - age child poverty rate , from lowest ( new hampshire ) to highest ( puerto rico ) .

the states are divided into three groups based on their relative poverty rates .

differences among states are less obvious or large than in the state population size analysis above .

however , especially if one focuses on groups of states according to their school - age child poverty rate , as in figure 6 , two significant patterns appear .

first , the average grant per school - age child increases as the state average poverty rate rises , from $309 per child for low poverty states to $363 for states in the middle range to $445 for high poverty states , 1.44 times as much as for low poverty states .

this reflects the fact that most esea funds are allocated under , or in proportion to , the title i - a allocation formulas , and estimated school - age children in poor families is the primary formula factor in those .

at the same time , an opposite trend is found in average grants per school - age child in a poor family .

this figure declines from $2,820 for low poverty states to $2,393 for states in the middle range and $2,182 for states with the highest poverty rates .

this is a reflection of at least 3 factors .

first , many of the states with the lowest poverty rates are small , and receive high grants per child as a result of state minimum provisions ( eg , new hampshire , wyoming , vermont , north dakota , and delaware ) .

second , a large proportion of the low poverty rate states have high expenditure factors ( eg , connecticut , new jersey , massachusetts , and others ) while a large proportion of the highest poverty rate states have low expenditure factors ( eg , california , arizona , tennessee , north carolina , alabama , arkansas , mississippi , and others ) .

and third , the targeting on high poverty areas under the title i - a concentration , targeted , and education finance incentive grant formulas is carried out at the lea , not the state , level .

as was noted above , these formulas tend to favor leas with especially large numbers of school - age children in poor families .

in many cases , leas with such high concentrations of poverty are found in states with low poverty rates overall ( eg , baltimore city , maryland or boston , massachusetts ) , while in several states with high poverty rates , poverty tends to be widely dispersed ( eg , west virginia or mississippi ) .

