since january 2007 , bangladesh has been ruled under a state of emergency by a military - backed caretaker government led by "chief adviser" fakhruddin ahmed .

this interim administration assumed control of the government and postponed elections that had been scheduled for january 2007 at a time when many feared that election related violence would escalate .

since , it has embarked on an anti - corruption drive and has pledged to return bangladesh to democracy by holding elections by the end of the 2008 .

the current government's anti - corruption drive appears to be aimed at ridding bangladesh of what many see as endemic corruption associated with sheikh hasina of the awami league ( al ) and khaleda zia of the bangladesh national party ( bnp ) , both of whom are former prime ministers of bangladesh .

despite this effort , it appears that the bnp and the al , or factions thereof , will be the leading political contenders in the next election .

discontent over increasing food prices may exacerbate political tensions and lead to street protests .

this could hinder the caretaker government's ability to govern and could lead to a prolonged state of emergency that could lead to further destabilization and further erode democracy in bangladesh .

the government reportedly arrested some 10,000 people in early june to "maintain law and order" in the lead - up to elections .

"local leaders and activists of major political parties , labour leaders , student activists and local government representatives" were reportedly among those arrested .

in may 2008 , the interim government invited the main political parties to enter into a dialogue with it to discuss the restoration of democracy in bangladesh .

sheikh hasina and khaleda zia boycotted the talks on the basis that elections could not proceed without the country's two main political leaders .

former deputy assistant secretary of state for south and central asia john gastright stated on august 1 , 2007 , in testimony before the house subcommittee on the middle east and south asia , that bangladesh was "... fast becoming a democracy in name only , where money , cronyism and intimidation increasingly dictated the outcome of elections. .

in discussing the shift to the new military - backed caretaker government , he stated that u.s. was initially "troubled that this dramatic shift in government might signal a hidden agenda to indefinitely delay a return to democracy and conceal a secret military coup. .

he added that the caretaker government was responsive to calls for outlining a roadmap to elections and the restoration of democracy .

the united states has long - standing supportive relations with bangladesh and has viewed bangladesh as a moderate voice in the islamic world .

major u.s. interests in bangladesh include political stability and democratization ; continuation of economic reform and market - opening policies ; social and economic development ; environmental issues ; countering anti - western islamist groups ; and improvement of the human rights situation .

many in the united states would particularly like to bolster bangladesh's democracy , which is destabilized by political violence .

in early 2003 , dhaka was the site of modestly - sized street demonstrations in opposition to the u.s. - led invasion of iraq .

bangladesh is a recipient of significant international aid .

it has received more than $30 billion from foreign donors since its independence in 1971 .

the state department has requested a total of $88.8 million in assistance for bangladesh in the fy2008 budget request .

u.s. assistance to bangladesh supports health and economic development programs , the improvement of working conditions , including the elimination of child labor .

p.l .

480 funds provide food assistance for the poorest families and for disaster relief .

international military education and training programs strengthen the international peacekeeping force of bangladesh , which is a leading contributor of u.n. peacekeeping personnel .

the united states has generally had a negative balance of trade with bangladesh since 1986 .

the united states is bangladesh's largest export destination .

ready made garments and jute carpet backing are two of bangladesh's key exports to the u.s. bangladesh's main import partners are india , china , kuwait , singapore , japan , and hong kong .

the united states exports wheat , fertilizer , cotton , communications equipment , and medical supplies , among other goods to bangladesh .

in april 2008 , u.s .

ambassador james moriarty reportedly articulated three key dimensions to american foreign policy toward bangladesh .

these are democracy , development , and preventing terrorists from gaining influence in the country .

he also stated that credible and transparent elections will be extremely difficult to conduct under a state of emergency , and he believes the caretaker government is taking steps to hold elections by the end of the year and that progress has been made in the area of human rights .

moriarty is cited as saying that "we are working closely with the government to strengthen the capacity of law enforcement agencies to fight terrorism and improve control of bangladesh's borders and ports of entry. .

the state department budget has identified american aid priorities as focused on promoting "peace and security by strengthening democratic governance and tackling the underlying social , demographic , and economic factors that make bangladesh vulnerable to violent extremism" through programs aimed at "democracy and governance , health , education , disaster management , food security , and economic growth. .

the u.s. has provided about $5 billion in aid to bangladesh since independence in 1971 .

bangladesh is among the poorest and most corrupt countries in the world .

the largely agricultural economy suffers frequent and serious setbacks from cyclones and floods .

bangladesh is believed to have large reserves of natural gas .

bangladesh was originally founded on secular - socialist principles and firmly grounded in an ethnic bengali nationalism as opposed to a muslim religious identity .

some have attributed the rise of islamist influence in bangladesh to the failure of bangladeshi political elites to effectively govern .

this has been described as a crisis of hegemony of the rulers who have failed to provide moral leadership or effectively represent the interests of the masses .

many believe this has created political space for the islamists to gain influence .

the may 2008 attacks in jaipur , india suggests that islamist extremists from bangladesh remain a threat in the region .

the may 13 bombings in jaipur are thought to have killed 80 and wounded 200 .

it has been reported that indian investigators believe that the bangladeshi group harkat ul - jihad - al - islami is responsible for the attacks .

such attacks also threaten to undermine inter - communal harmony in india as indian muslims increasingly fear reprisals for such attacks .

the caretaker government indicated its resolve to fight islamist extremism by executing six leaders of the islamist extremist group jamaatul mujahideen bangladesh ( jmb ) in march 2007 .

the previous bnp government also demonstrated new - found resolve to fight terrorism before it stepped down , despite having islamist political parties in its coalition .

there is a fear among some observers that the current crisis confronting bangladesh may create a political or security vacuum that radical islamists may seek to fill .

the political context for the potential influence of islamist extremism is demonstrated by the role that islamist parties played as coalition partners in the previous bnp government .

the bnp government of khaleda zia ruled with coalition support from the jamaat islami ( ji ) and islami okiya jote ( ioj ) political parties .

these two political parties have an islamist political agenda and are thought to have ties to radical extremists .

because of the near even electoral balance between the bnp and the al in the pre - 2007 political environment , the islamist political parties , ji and ioj in particular , enjoyed political influence disproportionate to their support among the bangladeshi electorate .

the current split within the bnp appears to be creating a more multi - party system in which islamist political parties may not enjoy the same degree of influence .

some analysts believe the parties' abilities to be political queen - makers may be less obvious with more potential political factions and parties .

islamists rioted in dhaka in april 2008 to protest a draft law that would give equal inheritance rights to women .

this triggered further protests in chittagong on april 11 in which islamist activists , many of them reportedly madrasa students , attacked a police station .

bangladesh is one of the poorest countries in asia , with almost half the population living on a dollar a day or less .

population growth , natural disasters , and political instability have all placed constraints on the economic development of the country .

bangladesh is believed to have significant onshore and offshore natural gas deposits that could bring future prosperity to the country .

the most immediate economic challenge for the interim government is to gain control over consumer price inflation , as many bangladeshis are finding food too expensive .

one survey found that the cost of food staples grew 50% in 2007 and food prices have continued to rise in 2008 .

speculators are thought to be hoarding rice and the government has moved to try to restrict banks from loaning money to hoarders of rice .

cyclone sidr , which killed an estimated 3,400 and destroyed an estimated $291 million worth of the winter rice crop , followed heavy flooding in july and august 2007 which also had a negative impact on the harvest .

as a result , bangladesh had a 3.1 million ton shortfall to meet domestic demand for the year ending in june 2008 .

such discontent could make an already volatile political situation even more difficult .

another key challenge is underemployment which is estimated to be 24.5% of the population .

bangladesh's economic growth is expected to slow .

although actual gnp growth was 6.6% in 2006 , bangladesh's gnp growth is estimated to be 6.5% in 2007 and is projected to slow to 5.7% in 2008 .

weakened external demand for textiles and labor problems are contributing causes for this slowdown , though there are signs that textiles are already recovering .

the garment sector in bangladesh accounts for 80% of exports and 40% of industrial jobs .

key export markets include the united states ( 25.2% ) , germany ( 12.7% ) , the united kingdom ( 9.9% ) , france ( 5.5% ) , and italy ( 3.9 ) % .

private consumption in bangladesh now accounts for some 65% of gdp .

bangladesh is thought to have significant reserves of natural gas , although estimates of its reserves have varied over the years .

it was reported in oil and gas journal in 2006 that bangladesh had 5 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) of proven gas reserves .

in 2004 , bangladesh's ministry of finance estimated that bangladesh had some 20.5 tcf of recoverable reserves .

in 2001 , the u.s. geological survey estimated that bangladesh had over 32 tcf of undiscovered reserves .

natural gas accounts for 80% of bangladesh's commercial energy consumption .

though there have been negotiations to build a pipeline to export gas to india these have not come to fruition .

instead , the bangladesh government appears to have focused on meeting bangladesh's current and future energy needs .

as a result , india has explored building a pipeline around the north of bangladesh to access gas in neighboring burma .

it is estimated that burma made $2.7 billion from gas exports in 2007 .

approximately 88% of bangladesh's population is muslim .

approximately 10% of the population is hindu , while the remainder is christian and buddhist .

ethnic and religious minority groups overlap in areas such as the chittagong hill tracts area where most buddhists and non - bengali people are found .

while there is relative peace between religious groups at present , bangladesh's struggle for independence in 1971 led to much inter - communal strife and death with some estimates listing the number killed at over a million .

a further eight to ten million refugees fled into west bengal , india .

though the state religion of bangladesh is islam , the nation's constitution provides for the right to practice the religion of one's choosing .

according to the state department's international religious freedom report 2007 , while the government publically has supported freedom of religion "... attacks on religious and ethnic minorities continued to be a problem .. .

religion exerted a significant influence on politics , and the government was sensitive to the islamic consciousness of its political allies and the majority of its citizens. .

the report went on to add that public officials and the police were "sometimes slow to assist religious minority victims of harassment and violence ... hindu , christian , and buddhist minorities experienced discrimination and sometimes violence by the muslim majority. .

there were also continuing calls for the ahmadi sect to be declared non - muslim .

the ongoing state of emergency and postponement of elections are widely viewed as undermining political rights in bangladesh .

many rights , such as the freedom of expression , freedom of the press , freedom of association , and the right to bail , were suspended .

the state department concluded that , "the anti - corruption drive initiated by the government , while greeted with popular support , gave rise to concerns about due process. .

it also observed that "there was a significant drop in the number of extrajudicial killings by security forces," though members of the security forces continued to act "with impunity and committed acts of physical and psychological torture. .

