the section 8 housing choice voucher program provides monthly rental assistance to around 2 million low - income households each year .

it is administered at the local level by quasi - governmental public housing agencies ( phas ) .

while some form of section 8 rental assistance has been in place since the mid - 1970s , the modern program was shaped largely by the 1998 assisted housing reform act ( p.l .

105-276 ) .

more than a decade later , the section 8 housing choice voucher program has come under new scrutiny , with pha industry leaders , low - income housing advocates , both the bush and obama administrations , and some members of congress calling for reforms .

further , recent efforts to reduce domestic discretionary spending have resulted in constraints in funding for the program , which has intensified phas' calls for cost - saving administrative reforms .

this report introduces the primary features of the section 8 housing choice voucher program , issues that have arisen , and recent reform proposals .

in recent years there have been calls to expand the moving to work ( mtw ) demonstration .

mtw was authorized by section 204 of the omnibus consolidated rescissions and appropriations act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-134 ) in order to design and test ways to promote self - sufficiency among assisted families ; achieve programmatic efficiency and reduce costs ; and increase housing choice for low - income households .

under moving to work , hud can select up to 30 phas to participate in the demonstration and receive waivers of most rules that govern public housing and the section 8 voucher program ( those under the u.s. housing act of 1937 ( p.l .

75-412 , as amended ) ) .

with hud approval , mtw agencies can merge their section 8 voucher , public housing capital and public housing operating funds , alter eligibility and rent policies , modify their funding agreements and reporting requirements with hud , and make other changes .

rules outside of the u.s. housing act cannot be waived under mtw , such as labor requirements and fair housing rules , nor can rules governing the demolition and disposition of public housing .

participating agencies must also agree to serve substantially the same number of people they were serving before the demonstration and they must agree to continue to serve low - income families .

agencies participating in mtw have used the flexibility it provides differently .

some have made minor changes to their existing section 8 voucher and public housing programs , such as limiting reporting requirements ; others have implemented full funding fungibility between their public housing and voucher programs and significantly altered their eligibility and rent policies .

some have adopted time limit and work requirement policies , similar to those enacted in the 1996 welfare reform law .

several of the national pha industry groups support an expansion of mtw .

they argue that the flexibility provided under mtw would permit phas to more efficiently and effectively manage their limited federal funding and make programmatic changes tailored to their local communities .

low income housing advocates , particularly the national low income housing coalition , have expressed opposition to an mtw expansion .

specifically , they are concerned that mtw agencies will choose to serve higher income families than they are permitted under the rules of the u.s. housing act and that the agencies will disconnect rent - setting policies from income with the result that tenants will pay increased rents .

while the initial intent of phas may not be to charge higher rent or serve higher - income families , there is concern that in a restricted funding environment , such policy changes will have to be made in order to balance budgets .

the existing mtw program , while called a demonstration , was not implemented in a way that would allow it to be rigorously evaluated .

therefore , there is not sufficient information about different reforms adopted by mtw agencies to evaluate their effectiveness .

there is some information available about how phas have implemented the program ( as noted earlier ) ; however , it is unclear whether phas implementing a modified mtw program in an environment where funding is limited would make the same choices that earlier mtw agencies made .

 ( for more information , see crs report r42562 , moving to work ( mtw ) : housing assistance demonstration program , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

several bills were considered in the 110 th and 111 th congresses to expand the mtw program , although none were enacted before the end of those congresses .

the moving to work charter program act has been introduced in each of the past several congresses , and was introduced again in the 112 th congress ( s. 117 ) .

it proposed to expand and modify the mtw program , permitting the secretary of hud to enter into a new form of charter contract with up to 250 phas .

the section 8 voucher reform act , ordered reported by the house financial services committee in the 111 th congress and introduced in the 112 th congress , included a provision that would have replaced the existing moving to work program with a new housing innovation program ( hip ) .

the hip would have maintained several aspects of mtw , including the ability to blend public housing and voucher funding , but would make several major changes .

hud would have been required to designate up to 60 agencies to participate in hip , with the option of adding another 20 under a modified version of the program .

hud would have been required to develop a selection process , based on priorities established under the bill , and select a diverse group of agencies ( including a limited number of lower - performing agencies , but not troubled agencies ) .

hud would also have been required to establish performance standards and evaluate , or contract for the evaluation of , hip participating agencies with the goal of developing successful models that can be adopted by other agencies .

unlike mtw , hip would have included limits to some policies pursued by participating agencies , including guidelines for time limit and employment condition policies and limits on rent policies that result in higher rent burdens for tenants .

also in the 112 th congress , the house financial services committee circulated a discussion draft of the moving to work improvement , expansion , and permanency act of 2011 .

the discussion draft bill proposed to make the mtw program permanent and lift the cap on the number of participating agencies .

it also proposed to modify the purposes of mtw to include promoting economic independence , flexibility and cost effectiveness , and housing choice .

the draft bill included modifications to reporting requirements both for phas to hud , and for hud to congress .

it also included a mechanism to transition existing mtw agencies to the new model .

the language from this draft bill was included in the draft affordable housing and self sufficiency improvement act ( ahssia ) , discussed in the next section of this report .

since the early 2000s , congress has considered reforms to the housing choice voucher program each year .

from 2003 through the end of its second term , the george w. bush administration proposed either eliminating the section 8 voucher program and replacing it with a new initiative , or substantially reforming the program .

bills to enact president bush's reforms were introduced in congress , although no further action was taken .

legislative proposals in the 107 th and 108 th congresses envisioned fundamentally reworking the voucher program , with initiatives including transferring administrative responsibilities from phas to the states , implementing time limits and work requirements , and allowing phas to experiment with various rent - setting policies .

bipartisan reform bills from the past couple of years have been narrower in scope than the earlier reform proposals .

they have proposed changes to the rules governing the existing program , rather than fundamentally altering it .

in 2006 , a bipartisan voucher reform bill , the section 8 voucher reform act of 2006 ( sevra ) ( h.r .

5443 , 109 th congress ) was approved by the house financial services committee , but no further action was taken before the close of the 109 th congress .

similar , bipartisan reform legislation was proposed in the 110 th congress .

the section 8 voucher reform act of 2007 ( h.r .

1851 , 110 th congress ) passed the house and the section 8 voucher reform act of 2008 ( s. 2684 , 110 th ) was introduced in the senate .

the bills were similar but had several key differences .

reform legislation was not enacted before the end of the 110 th congress .

a new version of sevra — the section eight voucher reform act of 2009 ( h.r .

3045 ) — was introduced in the 111 th congress and reported out of the house financial services committee , but not enacted before the 111 th congress adjourned .

several section 8 reform bills were again circulated , introduced , or considered in the 112 th congress .

no reform legislation has been introduced in the 113 th congress .

the following section of the report summarizes reform efforts from the 112 th congresses .

a version of sevra very similar to the one approved by the house financial services committee in the 111 th congress was introduced by representative waters in the 112 th congress .

the bill proposed to simplify the income calculation process by streamlining deductions , permitting families on fixed incomes to self - certify their income for up to three years , and permitting phas to use tenants' prior - year income to calculate current year income .

it would have modified the inspection process to permit phas to inspect units every other year , rather than every year .

it proposed other changes , including requiring phas to absorb portability vouchers , allowing phas to establish alternative rent structures for non - elderly , non - disabled tenants ( with limits on how much families could be required to pay ) , and making it possible for phas to use their voucher funding to provide downpayment assistance for first time homebuyers ( without requiring direct appropriations ) .

the bill would have established a new renewal funding allocation formula for phas , similar to the formula enacted in appropriations laws since fy2007 , but including provisions for reallocating unused funds and permitting phas to borrow against future appropriations .

it would have directed the secretary to develop a new administrative fee formula as well as a new performance rating system ( both within guidelines set in the bill ) .

the major difference between the section 8 voucher reform act of 2011 ( h.r .

1209 ) and the version from the prior congress is that the most recent version did not contain a controversial firearms provisions that had been added during committee consideration .

sevra was not considered before the end of the 112 th congress .

on june 23 , 2011 , the insurance , housing and community opportunity subcommittee of the house financial services committee held a hearing entitled "legislative proposals to reform the housing choice voucher program. .

at that hearing , witnesses discussed a draft bill that has been circulated by the subcommittee , the section eight savings act of 2011 ( sesa ) .

on october 13 , 2011 , the subcommittee held another hearing entitled " the section 8 savings act of 2011: proposals to promote economic independence for assisted families," where a revised draft version of sesa was circulated .

the two draft versions of sesa both included many provisions from sevra , but also made changes ; most notably , neither version of sesa included an expansion of mtw .

with the start of the second session of the 112 th congress , the house financial services committee circulated a new draft reform bill .

it contained many provisions from sevra and sesa , but with several changes , including a new name , which reflected the fact that all of these bills included provisions beyond the section 8 voucher program: the affordable housing and self sufficiency improvement act of 2012 ( ahssia ) .

like sevra , ahssia contained provisions that address inspection of units under the section 8 voucher program .

the primary difference is that sevra would have permitted phas to use rent payments withheld from property owners whose units had failed inspections to make repairs to the unit ; ahssia would not permit the use of withheld rent to make repairs .

both ahissa and sevra proposed to change the way income eligibility and tenant rent are defined and calculated for families participating in assisted housing programs .

ahissa , unlike sevra , would have increased the minimum rent threshold , subjected it to future inflation increases , and required phas to use the new minimum rents .

like sevra , ahssia proposed an expansion of mtw .

ahssia would have changed mtw from a demonstration to a hud program , lifted the existing cap on the number of participants , required hud to evaluate participating phas' progress in achieving the purposes of the program , and required hud to evaluate the program to identify replicable program models .

ahssia also contained several new provisions that were not included in sevra , including a title to modify the family self sufficiency ( fss ) program .

among other changes to fss , the draft legislation proposed to combine the public housing and section 8 voucher versions of the fss program into one program and allow for it to be available to section 8 assisted multifamily housing properties .

it would have made participation in fss mandatory for large phas ( subject to the availability of funding ) , created a new formula for distributing funding , and prohibited phas from terminating tenancy for families because they fail to successfully complete the program .

under the same title of the draft legislation , ahssia would have required hud to conduct a new rigorous demonstration to identify the most effective methods for promoting economic security among non - elderly , non - disabled assisted tenants .

further , ahssia included an authorization for the rental assistance demonstration ( rad ) to convert certain assisted housing properties to a new form of section 8 rental assistance .

rad was initially authorized in the fy2012 appropriations legislation .

ahssia also contained a new provision to allow phas to have additional funding flexibility in their public housing programs .

the subcommittee on insurance , housing , and community opportunity marked up and approved a draft version of ahssia in early february 2012 , but the bill was not formally introduced , nor was it considered by the full committee , before the end of the 112 th congress .

the president's fy2014 budget request to congress , like his fy2012 and fy2013 requests , included proposals for several statutory changes that would affect hud's rental assistance programs , including the section 8 housing choice voucher program .

specifically , hud asked for language that would broaden the definition of "extremely low - income" to reflect the higher of 30% of area median income or the poverty thresholds published by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; revise the deductions from income used to calculate rent for elderly or disabled families by increasing the standard deduction and increasing the threshold for deducting medical or related costs ; cap the amount of utility allowance a family can receive based on the size of the family , rather than the size of the unit leased by the family ; alter inspection requirements ; and permit hud to run a demonstration to test different models for setting rent in rental assistance programs .

similar provisions were included in section 8 voucher reform legislation considered in the 111 th congress and included in sevra , sesa and , most recently , ahssia .

hud's fy2014 budget estimated that these changes would result in an overall reduction in the cost of hud rental assistance programs .

