this report is intended to provide members and congressional staff with the background needed to understand the debate over proposed strategies to redesign the global nuclear fuel cycle .

it begins with a look at the motivating factors underlying the resurgent interest in nuclear power in some parts of the world , the nuclear power industry's current state of affairs , and the interdependence of the various stages of the nuclear fuel cycle .

after languishing for several decades , nuclear power in the united states appears poised for new growth , with license applications announced for up to 30 new commercial reactors .

two new u.s. uranium enrichment plants are currently under development in anticipation of an increased demand for nuclear fuel , and two others have been proposed .

however , no u.s. facilities are currently planned for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel — the separation of uranium and plutonium to make new fuel .

other countries provide commercial reprocessing services and , with several notable exceptions , have kept their commercial and weapons fuel cycles separate .

renewed interest in expanding the role of nuclear power in meeting world energy demand , particularly in countries considering their first nuclear power plants , has also led to increased concerns about limiting the spread of nuclear weapons - relevant technology .

most of this concern focuses on the nuclear fuel cycle , which includes facilities that can be used to make fuel for nuclear reactors or materials for weapons .

concerns about the nuclear fuel cycle have been increased by several high - profile cases of subversion of ostensibly commercial uranium enrichment and reprocessing technologies for military purposes .

in 2003 and 2004 , it became evident that pakistani nuclear scientist a.q .

khan had sold sensitive technology and equipment related to uranium enrichment to states such as libya , iran , and north korea .

leaders of the international nuclear nonproliferation regime have suggested ways of reining in the diffusion of such inherently dual - use technology , primarily through the creation of incentives not to enrich uranium or separate plutonium .

because a major justification for building enrichment or reprocessing facilities as part of a nuclear power program is to ensure fuel supplies for a nation's nuclear power plants , proposals to discourage these facilities in new states have focused on alternative ways to guarantee supplies of nuclear fuel .

most of the proposals are not new , but rather variations of those developed 30 or more years ago .

in the 1970s , efforts to limit or manage the spread of nuclear fuel cycle technologies for nonproliferation reasons foundered for technical and political reasons , but many states were nevertheless deterred from enrichment and reprocessing simply by the high technical and financial costs of developing sensitive nuclear technologies , as well as by a slump in the nuclear market .

several developments may now make efforts to limit access to the nuclear fuel cycle more feasible and timely: a growing concern about the spread of enrichment technology ( specifically via the a.q .

khan black market network , as well as iran's enrichment program ) ; a growing consensus that the world must seek alternatives to polluting fossil fuels ; and optimism about new nuclear technologies that may offer more proliferation - resistant systems .

central to the debate is developing proposals attractive enough to compel states to forgo what they see as their inalienable right to develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes .

at the same time , there is debate on how to improve the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards system and its means of detecting diversion of nuclear material to a weapons program in the face of a worldwide nuclear power expansion .

commercializing nuclear power has proved far more challenging than supporters of the technology had first envisioned .

after the first wave of commercial reactor orders in the 1960s and 1970s , world nuclear capacity reached about 200 gigawatts during the 1980s , but as confidence in nuclear power safety declined after accidents at three mile island and chernobyl , the rate of further capacity additions fell more than 75% during the following decade .

today , nuclear power plants have a total capacity of about 372 gigawatts — providing about 14% of the world's electricity generation .

though a significant amount , it is far less than was generally projected 50 years ago .

high construction and operating costs , safety problems and accidents , and controversy over nuclear waste disposal slowed the worldwide growth of nuclear power .

with uranium once considered a scarce resource , reprocessing and fast breeder technology was developed as a means of capturing the large amounts of potential energy remaining in spent nuclear fuel after it had been discharged from a reactor .

in the 1980s , as the economics of advanced nuclear technology became questionable with declining fossil fuel prices and increased uranium supplies , national programs to develop fast breeder reactors came nearly to a standstill .

moreover , the plutonium fuel produced by breeder reactors drew strong opposition over its potential use in nuclear weapons .

in the past few years , the original promises of nuclear power attracted renewed interest around the world and led to predictions of a "nuclear renaissance. .

the march 2011 accident at japan's fukushima dai - ichi nuclear plant has prompted some countries , notably japan , to reverse their nuclear expansion plans , but others , such as china , have continued building new reactors .

therefore , while safety is clearly a major concern , several other key considerations are also driving current nuclear energy policy .

volatile prices for oil and natural gas are a fundamental factor in national energy policymaking .

average world prices for a barrel of oil rose from below $10 at the beginning of 1999 to above $130 in mid - 2008 .

they then declined to around $50 in early 2009 and rose to around $100 through mid - 2012 .

u.s. natural gas prices have been similarly volatile , although falling sharply in 2012 with increased production from shale formations .

to reduce their vulnerability to oil and gas price swings , national governments are searching for alternative energy sources , often including nuclear power .

however , only 21% of the world's electricity generation is fueled by natural gas and 5% by oil , so nuclear power's ability to directly substitute for oil and gas is limited , at least in the near term .

for nuclear power to have a significant impact on oil demand , long - term changes in energy - use patterns would have to take place , particularly in the transportation sector .

one possibility is that nuclear power plants could be used to produce hydrogen , which could provide energy for fuel - cell vehicles .

the u.s. department of energy has been developing processes that could produce hydrogen in a high - temperature reactor , an effort that has continued under the obama administration .

another possibility is the commercialization of all - electric or plug - in hybrid vehicles that could be recharged with nuclear - generated electricity .

but even if such technologies were to be successfully developed , it would take many years for the new vehicles and , in the case of hydrogen , fuel delivery infrastructure to have a significant energy impact .

government policies aside , volatile oil and gas prices are having a significant effect on projections of nuclear power's economic viability .

in the united states , natural gas has been the overwhelming fuel of choice for new electrical generation capacity since the early 1990s , although coal - fired plants still generate about 40% of u.s. and world electricity .

because fuel costs constitute a relatively small percentage of nuclear power costs , higher natural gas prices could make new nuclear power plants economically competitive , despite higher uranium prices .

growing worldwide concern about greenhouse gas emissions , particularly carbon dioxide from fossil fuels , has renewed attention to nuclear power's lack of direct co 2 emissions .

president obama's 2011 state of the union address explicitly included nuclear power as part of the nation's "clean energy" strategy .

policies to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions may also indirectly encourage nuclear power expansion by increasing the cost of electricity from new fossil - fuel - fired power plants above that of nuclear power plants .

some support for using nuclear power to reduce ghg emissions has emerged in academic and think - tank circles .

as stated by the massachusetts institute of technology in its major study the future of nuclear power : "our position is that the prospect of global climate change from greenhouse gas emissions and the adverse consequences that flow from these emissions is the principal justification for government support of the nuclear energy option. .

but environmental groups generally contend that the nuclear accident , waste , and weapons proliferation risks posed by nuclear power outweigh any ghg benefits .

the large construction expenditures required by commercial reactors , they contend , would yield greater ghg reductions if used for energy efficiency and renewable generation .

finally , they note that nuclear power , while not directly emitting greenhouse gases , produces indirect emissions through the nuclear fuel cycle and during plant construction .

another key factor behind the renewed interest in nuclear power is improved performance of existing reactors .

u.s. commercial reactors have generated electricity at an average of around 90% of their total capacity for the past decade , after averaging around 75% in the mid - 1990s and around 60% in the mid - 1980s .

worldwide performance has seen similar improvement .

the improved operation of nuclear power plants has helped drive down the cost of nuclear - generated electricity .

average u.s. reactor operations and maintenance costs ( including fuel but excluding capital costs ) dropped steadily from a high of about 3.5 cents / kilowatt - hour ( kwh ) in 1987 to below 2 cents / kwh in 2001 ( in 2001 dollars ) .

u.s. nuclear plant operating costs in 2011 averaged about 2.2 cents / kwh in current dollars .

nuclear interest has been further increased in the united states by incentives in the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

the law provides a nuclear energy production tax credit for up to 6,000 megawatts of new nuclear capacity , compensation for regulatory delays for the first six new reactors , and federal loan guarantees for nuclear power and other advanced energy technologies .

under certain baseline assumptions , the tax credits and loan guarantees could determine whether new u.s. nuclear plants would be economically viable .

u.s. electric utilities and other companies during the past five years have announced plans to submit license applications to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) for about 30 new commercial reactors .

nrc has issued "early site permits" — which resolve site - related issues for possible future reactor construction — at locations in illinois , mississippi , virginia , and georgia .

the tennessee valley authority in 2007 restarted construction of its long - delayed watts bar 2 reactor , which had been ordered in 1970 .

nrc in early 2012 issued combined construction and operating licenses for four new reactors in georgia and south carolina , allowing full construction to proceed .

the status of the other planned new u.s. reactors appears to be more tentative , however .

 ( for details on u.s. nuclear construction plans , see crs report rl33558 , nuclear energy policy , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

new reactors are on order elsewhere in the world , and several non - nuclear countries have announced that they are considering the nuclear option .

as figure 2 shows , the vast majority of reactors currently under construction are in asia , with only a handful in the rest of the world , primarily russia .

despite the recent positive developments for nuclear power , much uncertainty still remains about its prospects .

construction costs for new nuclear power plants — which were probably the dominant factor in halting the first round of nuclear expansion — continue to loom as a potential insurmountable obstacle to renewed nuclear power growth .

average u.s. nuclear plant construction costs more than doubled from 1971 to 1978 , according to the office of technology assessment , and nearly doubled again by the mid - 1980s , not including interest accrued during construction .

including interest , many u.s. nuclear plants proved to be grossly uneconomic , often with capital costs totaling more than $3,000 per kilowatt of capacity in 2000 dollars , and relying on the utility regulatory system to recover their costs .

major reactor vendors , such as general electric and westinghouse , have contended that new designs and construction methods will cut costs of future reactors considerably .

however , the energy information administration ( eia ) estimates that new u.s. nuclear plants would cost $5,300 per kilowatt , excluding interest , making them potentially more expensive than the previous generation of reactors .

eia's estimates of the capital costs of several major competing power generation technologies , particularly coal and wind , have also risen sharply .

many other important factors in the future of nuclear power are similarly uncertain .

prices of competing fuels , especially natural gas , have been volatile in the recent past .

if fossil fuel prices become depressed for a sustained period , as in the late 1980s through the 1990s , support for nuclear power as an alternative energy source could again be undermined .

disposal of high - level nuclear waste , which reprocessing or recycling is intended to address , will continue to generate controversy as governments attempt to develop permanent underground repositories — none of which are yet operating .

as noted above , the fukushima dai - ichi accident has clearly dimmed overall public support for nuclear power around the world , as did the earlier accidents at three mile island and chernobyl .

new reactor designs are intended to be less vulnerable to the loss of backup power that crippled the fukushima plant .

but whether such safety features will significantly mitigate the concerns raised by the fukushima accident remains to be seen .

proposals addressing access to the full nuclear fuel cycle have ranged from seeking a formal commitment to forswear enrichment and reprocessing technology , to a de facto approach in which a state does not operate fuel cycle facilities but makes no explicit commitment to give them up , to no restrictions at all .

current proposals generally aim to persuade countries not to develop their own fuel production capabilities by providing economically attractive alternatives that allay concerns about politically motivated interruption to fuel supply .

most proposals focus on this front - end problem , dealing with fuel supply and production issues .

ultimately , these proposals are aimed at preventing an increase in the number of states that would be capable of producing weapons - usable nuclear material .

the main proposals under discussion are outlined here in categories — those addressing the full fuel cycle , those addressing the "front - end" or assurance of fuel supply issues ( including fuel banks and multilateral enrichment services ) , and those focusing on the "back - end" or waste disposal solutions .

 table 4 provides a comparison of the major proposals currently in circulation to restrict sensitive nuclear fuel technology development .

the table is based on one created by chaim braun presented at the september 2006 iaea conference on nuclear fuel supply assurances .

proposals to provide an international and institutional framework for peaceful nuclear activities have abounded since the 1940s , but few have been implemented .

the u.s. - sponsored baruch plan introduced at the united nations in 1946 recommended establishing an international agency with managerial control or ownership of all atomic energy activities .

the international atomic energy agency , established in 1957 , emerged as a paler version of what was suggested in the baruch plan , but still retains authorities in its statute to store fissile material .

concern about proliferation led to a flurry of proposals in the 1970s and 1980s as the united states and others convened groups to study the issues .

one idea studied in the mid - 1970s was regional nuclear fuel cycle centers , focused on reprocessing technologies .

several factors contributed to its lack of success , despite support by the u.s. congress: low uranium prices ( making plutonium recovery relatively unattractive ) , a slump in the nuclear industry in the late 1970s and early 1980s , and u.s. opposition to reprocessing from the late 1970s .

member states of the iaea also convened the international fuel cycle evaluation ( infce ) project , which involved 60 countries and international organizations .

infce working group reports suggested establishing a multi - tiered assurance of supply mechanism similar to the one proposed by the six country concept in 2006 .

states also studied international plutonium storage in the late 1970s and early 1980s , but could not agree on how to define excess material or the requirements for releasing materials .

as in the past , the success of current proposals may depend on whether nuclear energy is truly revived not just in the united states , but globally .

that revival will likely depend on significant support for nuclear energy in the form of policy , price supports , and incentives .

factors that may help improve the position of nuclear energy against alternative sources of electricity include higher prices for other sources ( natural gas and coal through a carbon tax or other restrictions ) , improved reactor designs to reduce capital costs , regulatory improvements , and waste disposal solutions .

the willingness of fuel recipient states to participate in international enrichment centers rather than develop indigenous enrichment capabilities , and confidence in fuel supply assurance mechanisms such as an international fuel bank , will largely determine the success of the overall policy goal — to prevent further spread of enrichment and reprocessing technologies .

so far , proposals addressing this challenge have originated in the supplier states , with many recipient states continuing to voice concern that their right to peaceful nuclear energy technology under the npt is in jeopardy .

increasingly , however , participation is being presented as a market - based decision by countries to refrain , at least for the present , from developing their own fuel enrichment programs .

another factor that will shape the success of these proposals is the possible addition of other incentives .

simply making nuclear energy cost - effective may not induce countries to forgo indigenous enrichment and reprocessing .

such decisions may require other incentives , perhaps even outside the nuclear realm , to make them palatable .

the experience of iran may be instructive here .

russia's offer to provide assured enrichment services on russian soil has gone nowhere ; instead , other , broader trade incentives may be necessary .

while the case of iran may illustrate the extreme end of the spectrum , in terms of a country determined to develop a capability for a weapons program , non - nuclear - weapon states will clearly take notice of how a solution develops for iran .

congress would have a considerable role in at least four areas of oversight related to fuel cycle proposals .

the first is providing funding and oversight of u.s. domestic programs related to expanding nuclear energy in the united states .

key among these programs are nuclear research and development programs and federal incentives for building new commercial reactors .

the second area is policy direction and / or funding for international measures to assure supply .

what guarantees should the united states insist upon in exchange for helping provide fuel assurances ? .

although the six country concept contains an option for a fuel bank , it would not require participants to forswear enrichment and reprocessing .

a third set of policy issues may arise in the context of development of the international framework for nuclear energy cooperation .

observers may question what the nonproliferation benefits of this program are , how it overlaps with other programs such as those under the iaea , and what the united states aims to achieve through ifnec .

the new mission statement emphasizes that members do not give up any rights under the npt to the peaceful use of nuclear energy .

policymakers may explore whether the newly envisioned program goes far enough in encouraging states to refrain from enrichment and reprocessing , a key goal of the original international gnep .

some observers believe that further restrictions on non - nuclear - weapon states party to the npt are untenable in the absence of substantial disarmament commitments by nuclear weapon states .

in particular , a january 4 , 2007 , wall street journal op - ed by george shultz , bill perry , henry kissinger , and sam nunn , entitled "a world free of nuclear weapons," noted that non - nuclear - weapon states have grown increasingly skeptical of the sincerity of nuclear weapon states in this regard .

some observers have asserted that non - nuclear - weapon states will not tolerate limits on npt article iv rights ( right to pursue peaceful uses of nuclear energy ) without progress under article vi of the npt ( disarmament ) .

amending the npt is seen by most observers as unattainable .

president obama called for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons in a speech in the czech republic on april 5 , 2009 .

the iaea experts group report , infcirc / 640 , did point to the political usefulness of achieving a ban on producing fissile material for nuclear weapons ( known as fissile material production cutoff treaty , or fmct ) to provide more balance between the obligations of nuclear and non - nuclear - weapon states .

obama administration officials have indicated that they will pursue negotiations on a fissile material cut - off treaty that includes verification provisions .

ultimately , any such treaty would require senate advice and consent to ratification .

a fourth area in which congress plays a key role is with the approval of nuclear cooperation agreements .

in some cases , the united states may seek additional reassurances regarding fuel cycle facilities during negotiations of civilian nuclear cooperation agreements .

this was a topic of controversy during the approval process for the civilian nuclear cooperation agreement with india in september 2008 .

a civilian cooperation agreement with the united arab emirates was preceded by a signed a memorandum of understanding with the united states saying it would forgo "domestic enrichment and reprocessing capabilities in favor of long - term commitments of the secure external supply of nuclear fuel. .

in addition , the nuclear cooperation agreement's text itself states that the united states can end nuclear cooperation with the uae if it acquires enrichment or reprocessing facilities .

some members of congress introduced legislation ( h.r .

1280 ) in the 112 th congress that would amend the atomic energy act to require this commitment in all nuclear cooperation agreements .

