the creation of post - 9 / 11 intelligence / information fusion centers does not represent a totally new concept , but suggests an extension of pre - 9 / 11 state and local law enforcement intelligence activities .

most state police / bureau of investigation agencies have run intelligence or analytic units for decades .

many of the fusion centers examined for this report were the outgrowth of those units , prompting some to refer to fusion centers as 'state police intelligence units on steroids. .

conceptually , fusion centers differ from their predecessors in that they are intended to broaden sources of data for analysis and integration beyond criminal intelligence , to include federal intelligence as well as public and private sector data .

furthermore , fusion centers broaden the scope of state and local analysis to include homeland security and counterterrorism issues .

despite being an expansion of existing sub - federal intelligence / information activities , fusion centers represent a fundamental change in the philosophy toward homeland defense and law enforcement .

the rise of fusion centers is representative of a recognition that non - traditional actors — state and local law enforcement and public safety agencies — have an important role to play in homeland defense and security .

in addition , there has been a shift towards a more proactive approach to law enforcement in the united states .

numerous national strategies have assessed the primary threat to u.s. national security as terrorism , both at home and abroad .

indeed , the national strategy on homeland security provides that "the american people and way of life are the primary targets of our [terrorist] enemy and our highest protection priority. .

the means for combating this threat are broad and encompass all elements of national power , to include non traditional sectors .

from a law enforcement perspective , it has been argued that state and regional intelligence fusion centers , particularly when networked together nationally , represent a proactive tool to be used to fight a global jihadist adversary which has both centralized and decentralized elements .

this network of fusion centers is envisioned as a central node in sharing terrorism , homeland security , and law enforcement information with state , local , regional , and tribal law enforcement and security officials .

today , there are over 40 intelligence fusion centers across the country ( see appendix b for a map and list of these centers ) .

research suggests that there is no "one - size - fits - all" model for these centers and there are significant differences between them .

there are , however , some common themes , and more importantly , common questions , that arise when examining fusion centers , to include: do fusion centers solve the pre - 9 / 11 information sharing problems , and as such , make americans safer ? .

can fusion centers work if they aren't part of an integrated philosophy of intelligence and security ? .

who "owns" and benefits from fusion centers ? .

who should staff , fund , and oversee them ? .

what role , if any , should fusion centers play in the intelligence community ( ic ) , and what role should federal agencies play in fusion centers , to include funding ? .

do fusion centers represent a shift in the security v. civil liberties pendulum ? .

how active and pro - active , if at all , should fusion centers be in the collection of intelligence that is not directly tied to a specific and identifiable criminal act ? .

there is no single model for how each center is structured or operates .

is some basic level of common standards necessary in order for fusion centers to offer a national benefit ? .

moreover , does the federal government have an integrated national strategy towards fusion centers ? .

is the current configuration of 40 plus fusion centers , with , in some cases , several operating within one state , the most efficient organizational structure ? .

is the current approach to creating , authorizing , funding , and supporting fusion centers sustainable ? .

what are the risks to the fusion center concept and how have those risks been specifically weighed and balanced against the stated goals of fusion center operations ? .

in order to provide context for the analysis of these fundamental questions , this report will highlight how the concept and development of these centers continue to evolve , as well as provide an overview of current national trends in fusion centers , the federal role in supporting such centers , and the role of the private sector .

finally , the report will provide congress with a number of legislative options for consideration .

prior to examining these topics , it is necessary to consider the value proposition these centers pose , as well as potential risks to fusion center development .

there are several potential risks associated with fusion center development .

one risk focuses on the hazards associated with creating fusion centers without the requisite philosophical and organizational changes necessary within the intelligence and law enforcement communities to sustain the work of the centers .

the other risks focus on factors that could ultimately diminish political and popular support for fusion centers , and ultimately result in their demise or marginalized contribution to the national homeland security mission .

as previously mentioned , almost all state and regional fusion centers were created after the september 11 th attacks .

while the attacks were the direct impetus for the creation of most state and regional centers , the fusion center movement did not occur in a vacuum and can be best understood as a continuum of a mounting tide .

important influences include the increasing favor of the intelligence - led policing model , among others ; the perception that the high intensity drug trafficking area ( hidta ) center structure was successfully enhancing coordination ; rising agreement amongst governors that each state should have a fusion center ; and the support of the president and key federal homeland security entities , such as the homeland security advisory council ( hsac ) , and the director of national intelligence ( dni ) — information sharing environment program manager's office .

there appears to have been two waves of post - 9 / 11 fusion center development: the first occurring in 2003 , and the second wave of fusion centers that gained momentum in approximately 2005 .

based on conversations with some fusion centers , this second wave gained momentum following the national governor's association ( nga ) meeting in 2005 .

indeed , the nga published its 2006 survey of state homeland security advisors and found that "developing a state intelligence fusion center" ranked as their third priority .

the importance of fusion centers to "enhance states' ability to collect , analyze and disseminate intelligence [and] intelligence sharing among federal , state , and local government," was a priority in the previous survey nga released in january 2005 .

other catalysts include the homeland security advisory council ( hsac ) meeting in march 2005 , the preliminary conclusions of which included that: each state should establish an information center that serves as a 24 / 7 "all source," multi - disciplinary , information fusion center .

many fusion centers also stated that their elected leaders , law enforcement , and other officials realized that this was a national trend and recognized that the federal government was starting to provide funding to support existing centers .

a defining moment in this realization appears to have been when the national governors association issued its 2007 "a governor's guide to homeland security," which identified intelligence fusion centers as one of 10 "key points" a new governor should examine in an effort to enhance their state's security .

intelligence fusion centers , according to the nga , are: the focal point for information and intelligence sharing among local , state , and federal agencies from a variety of disciplines .

the continued efforts of global justice information sharing initiative ( global ) , the establishment of the ise , and the publication of the fusion center guidelines , amongst other developments , also appear to have validated the growing fusion efforts at the state and local level .

furthermore , several fusion centers suggested hurricane katrina was influential in either solidifying their conviction that coordination of multiple stakeholder agencies via the fusion center was important for their state , and / or influencing their interest in an all - hazards approach .

one of the central , if implicit , themes that runs throughout this report is federalism .

that is , while fusion centers were largely established by states , if the federal intent is to create a network of fusion centers that can be leveraged for both state , local , and federal public safety and homeland security purposes , there are several challenges that must be overcome .

research indicates one of the central challenges of designing a constructive and productive federal role in supporting these state and local fusion centers is working to ensure that the centers retain their state and local - level identity and support from those communities .

according to many homeland security observers , one manifestation of this tension lies in the need to strike a balance between the national needs for a consistent provider of state and local threat information with the state's autonomy to pursue issues deemed of importance to local jurisdictions .

this tension is often notable when reviewing the diverse , and at times incompatible , types of threat and warning products required by state leaders and contrasted to those requested by federal homeland security and law enforcement entities .

part of the challenge from the federal perspective has been how to guide , but not dictate to , the "owners and operators" of these largely state - established entities prior to the provision of any federal financial support .

and , once federal financial and human resources support was provided , how to coordinate and target these resources for maximum overall return on investment .

another example of how federalism flows throughout the fusion center issue is the legal treatment of terrorism .

terrorism is a federal crime .

if it is prosecuted at all , it is usually done at the federal level .

however , since the september 11 th attacks , terrorism has been codified as a crime in many states .

another example of how federalism permeates fusion centers is privacy .

there is one federal privacy act , and numerous state privacy laws .

if fusion centers are serving both state , local , and federal ends , one of the central questions becomes what is the role of the federal government in supporting these centers , and what products and services can the federal government reasonably expect the centers to produce , given federal funding levels .

as elements of the states and regions they serve , fusion centers began to develop critical mass or staying power in the years immediately following the terrorist attacks of 2001 .

as these centers continued to proliferate across the country and garnered state support , federal entities began to take notice .

while some 30 percent of the fusion centers interviewed were established prior to 2004 , concrete federal financial support for the centers did not materialize until fiscal year 2004 , when , according to dhs , it provided $29 million of homeland security grant program funding .

federal guidance to the fusion centers followed shortly thereafter in july 2005 .

finally , in 2006 , human capital support in the form of dhs and fbi detailees to the centers began taking place .

while dhs has provided direct financial support to the fusion centers through the hsgp , the fbi has not provided direct financial support .

the fbi's contributions have come more in the form of support for security clearances , personnel support , and other "in - kind" contributions , such as rent payments when centers are collocated with fbi joint terrorism task forces or field intelligence groups .

the federal government has played several roles in assisting states and regions to develop their fusion centers , including the provision of: recognition , post - 9 / 11 , of the need to have state and local governments and the private sector , non - traditional actors in national security matters , play an increasingly important role in homeland security .

guidance , to be adopted voluntarily by fusion centers , on the central elements of a fusion center and suggested methods for how to establish and operate sound fusion center policies and practices .

technical assistance and training related to issues encountered as fusion centers develop .

financial resources to support fusion center "start up" costs , including system connectivity .

human resources to assist in interaction with federal agencies and analytical fusion .

assistance to support enhanced information sharing between the federal government and state and local entities through the fusion centers .

congressional hearings on fusion centers .

promulgation of federal regulations .

the relationship and role of the private sector is a function that most state fusion centers have yet to fully define and / or embrace .

a number of the fusion centers surveyed have undertaken informational and security - related discussions with some of the major critical infrastructure owners and operators and data - providers within their respective jurisdictions .

however , while acknowledging that a comprehensive understanding of the risks to the state / region is impossible to attain without a viable relationship and consistent information flow between the center and the private sector entities within the center's jurisdiction , the vast majority of centers have yet to put the processes in place to support such an endeavor .

very few of the state and regional fusion centers have an infrastructure sector representative detailed to their organization and rely , in part , on open - source information , data provided by the federal government , or contract data vendors for information about threats to a critical infrastructure facility .

common reasons for the lack of a relationship between the fusion center and private sector entities are prioritizing the infrastructure sectors to be represented in the center based on risk ; a lack of appreciation as to the role and information a sector representative might provide ; and the lack of a federal government strategy or recommendations regarding how the fusion center should incorporate private sector data into the analytic fusion process .

given that fusion centers are entities established by states , localities and regions to serve their own criminal , emergency response , and terrorism prevention needs , and the sensitivities associated with federalism , there may not necessarily be a federal remedy to every fusion center - related issue identified in this report .

moreover , there is a direct correlation between federal remedies to issues affecting fusion center development , and the extent to which congress wishes to condition the funds it authorizes and appropriates for such centers .

as a result , there are at least two categories of challenges and potential options: ( i ) those challenges for which there are unique federal remedies and ( ii ) those challenges for which there are no unique federal remedies , and may be more oriented toward possible state or level governmental intervention .

congressional remedies could potentially involve a broad range of possible actions including , but not limited to , oversight of federal agencies and entities engaged in interaction with fusion centers , requesting executive branch action on any number of fusion center - related issues , establishing a statutory basis for fusion centers , convening additional hearings which include state and local fusion center leaders as expert witnesses , adjusting future funding levels for fusion centers , and / or considering the extent to which , if at all , any future federal funding may be conditioned on certain performance benchmarks being met .

given the stated need to develop a national network of fusion centers , and that a certain amount of financial and human resources have been devoted to assisting the states and regions develop their fusion centers , the following represent challenges and options that the federal government and , specifically , congress may wish to consider .

notwithstanding the fact that individual federal agencies and offices may have their own strategies concerning their interaction with state and regional fusion centers , there remains no definitive national strategy on fusion centers .

one option for congress is to recommend the executive branch draft a cross - agency national strategy with input from the fbi , dhs , odni - pm - ise , dod and other intelligence community , and state and regional fusion center representatives .

should such a strategy be determined desirable , it might address the following issues: ownership and benefits .

who "owns" fusion centers and who benefits from their work ? .

federal versus slt roles and responsibilities , to include funding .

what is an equitable division of labor and costs ? .

permanence — statutory basis and sustainment funding .

if fusion centers play an important homeland security role , should they be provided a statutory basis at the federal level ? .

if continued federal funding is being contemplated , how might it be structured to yield the most productive outcome for federal , state and local fusion center clients ? .

ultimate goals and performance measures .

what gaps do fusion centers fill and how does the federal government measure performance ? .

coordinated federal interaction with fusion centers .

how does the federal government ensure the various agencies engaged in homeland security have a coordinated plan for fusion and efficient interaction with fusion centers ? .

relationship between fusion centers and the federal intelligence center .

how closely , if at all , should fusion centers be integrated into the federal intelligence community ? .

are fusion centers members of the intelligence community , adjuncts or partners with the intelligence community , a proxy information source , or an unrelated and parallel information effort ? .

pros and cons .

there are many arguments in favor of the creation of a national strategy for fusion centers .

such a strategy would likely create coherence to what could be argued is currently a somewhat ad hoc and informal approach to fusion centers .

some might argue that without such a overarching national strategy , fusion centers will only provide limited benefits to limited consumers .

arguments against this option might include disruption to ongoing activities , or that such a strategy , while not formal , already exists in the form of the collective activities of dhs , the fbi , global justice , and the office of the director of national intelligence's program manager for the ise .

furthermore , to be successful in creating a cohesive structure for forty+ fusion centers across the country , a national strategy may need to deal with several politically sensitive issues , such as the need for a joint deployment strategy for the federal agencies that detail personnel to state and regional fusion centers .

however , if this issue and other sensitive topics are not comprehensively addressed and resolved , fusion centers may have limited national impact .

the strategy's potential for success is likely to hinge on the perception of input by all - levels of government and sectors , and the means used to implement the goals and objectives outlined in the strategy .

while respondent fusion center leaders had many high priority items concerning their interaction with the federal government , the question of sustainment funding was foremost in their minds .

should federal funding to fusion efforts be continued ? .

to what end ? .

and how conditional does congress want federal aid to fusion centers to be ? .

the current regime of hsgp funding includes some limited conditions for funding fusion centers .

however , the fusion center guidelines remain entirely voluntary even for recipients of federal hsgp funds .

as a result , for example , the federal government has no formal and systematic means of auditing whether each center is appropriately protecting civil liberties , or using federally funded intelligence analysts in a manner that is consistent with national goals and objectives for fusion centers , should they be explicitly defined .

as outlined above , should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available , as discussed below .

the most obvious option is to continue the current manner of funding — that is , using the hsgp grants as the federal mechanism to make funding available for states and localities for potential allocation to state and regional fusion centers .

this process is reliant on state grant applications , and the flow of federal funds to state / regional fusion centers is largely determined by the sub - federal designees that make homeland security grant allocation decisions within each state and / or municipality .

furthermore , fusion centers compete with a wide range of homeland security initiatives for funding .

while certain elements of hsgp funding are geared toward supporting fusion center development , there is no targeted funding stream directly allocated to fusion centers themselves .

if the approach to funding fusion centers remains the status quo , then secretary chertoff's statement that dhs has not "... signed on to fund fusion centers in perpetuity...." will remain true .

without a dedicated funding stream , and / or another large - scale terrorist attack within the united states , it is unclear whether fusion centers will continue to receive federal funding , as well as sub - federal resources , to continue their current functions as outlined in this report .

pros and cons .

arguments in favor of maintaining the status quo include those who suggest such an option would result in a natural progression of the current funding model .

it would allow for a certain amount of continuity in funding streams and methods of allocating funds .

such an option would likely result in minimal hsgp program disruption .

arguments against this option might include that the status quo would continue to leave the fundamental sustainability question — one that is foremost in the collective mind of fusion centers — unanswered .

maintaining the status quo may have a drawback as it might perpetuate uncertainty about sustainable federal aid .

this uncertainty might continue to hamper how fusion centers plan their information technology and human resource needs for the future .

under this potential option , the current grant program could be slightly altered to address some of the oft cited hurdles that state and local officials believe impede the flow of federal grant funds to fusion center projects .

two such alterations to be considered include increasing the duration of grant cycles in order to allow for enhanced continuity and human resource planning , particularly for contract - supported intelligence analysts .

building some level of autonomy into the hsgp "80 / 20" localities / state split of hsgp funding to allow state political leadership some autonomy to re - allocate a portion of overall hsgp funds to a single , designated state - wide fusion center .

such flexibility could be conditioned on formal hsgp audits to ensure accountability and that funds re - allocated within state hsgp awards are consistent with the state's fusion center mission and federal fusion center guidelines .

these audits would include input from fusion center leaders , state administrative agents , and the state's homeland security advisor .

a more significant adjustment to the existing hsgp that could potentially alleviate some of the difficulty associated with facilitating the flow of federal homeland security funds to fusion centers is the creation of a narrowly targeted "fusion center" grant category , similar to the port security grant program ( psgp ) and the other four sub - categories included under the infrastructure protection program ( ipp ) .

if such a program were established and funded , arguably , it could provide the federal government with increasing leverage to condition the funding on a number of factors , not the least of which may be compliance with fusion center guidelines , or other , more specific fusion center performance metrics .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option might include the position that such a program might set a precedent for other more narrowly tailored homeland security oriented programs to advocate for a similar approach .

it could also be argued that such a program might undermine the current federal approach to fund the functions which underlie homeland security — such as information sharing and analysis .

alternatively , it could also be argued that there are several existing programs that are narrowly tailored to ensure that risks and capabilities determined by the federal government to be nationally critical are already funded in this manner ( such as the buffer zone protection program ( bzpp ) , and other infrastructure protection program ( ipp ) grants ) .

if the federal government determined that state and regional fusion centers provide a critical homeland security function , both protecting critical national infrastructure and transportation security , might it not be prudent to have a fusion center grant program ? .

if it is determined that establishing a national network of fusion centers serves long - term , national homeland security interests , it may be reasonable to design a system which provides resources to state and local fusion centers commensurate with the national benefit derived .

this presupposes the development of ( 1 ) a cogent set of concrete national interests served by fusion centers , ( 2 ) a set of metrics that can quantitatively capture how well fusion centers are meeting these interests and goals , ( 3 ) standards for "minimum levels of capability" and fusion center "maturity,"and ( 4 ) thresholds linking levels of maturity to levels of federal funding .

these standards and metrics could be developed as part of a cooperative endeavor between federal , state , and local representatives , possibly under the "global" program .

as with other options above , the extent to which congress could condition such an approach is an open question .

pros and cons .

one of the primary arguments that could be made against this option is that it is too complex and , as a result , would be difficult to implement and may encourage states to "game the system" so as to remain immature enough to retain federal funding .

alternatively , arguments in favor could be that congress is responding to fusion center requests for a long - term and explicit federal approach to sustainable funding .

while the states may not like the performance metrics developed and / or the thresholds for funding phase - outs , these metrics and standards would at least create an environment of certainty in which states could better plan and target state and local funding streams to meet their ongoing funding needs that the federal government has clearly informed them it will not meet .

if this option is pursued , metrics development and center evaluation would likely be most effective if designed and undertaken with fusion centers and slt agency sponsors to ensure they are not resisted or rejected .

alternatively , congress alone , or with input from dhs , the fbi , and the odni's pm - ise , could determine that there are certain fusion center functions that provide direct value and benefits to the federal government , and as such , warrant sustainable federal financial support .

for example , it might be determined the development of state - wide intelligence systems , and information and intelligence analysis , are two core fusion center functions that are clearly linked to the federal benefit derived from fusion centers .

as such , the federal government could determine that it would support these functions directly and possibly in a sustainable manner .

if such a decision were made , a pilot program might be established and implemented at certain fusion centers over a specified time period to ascertain empirical federal benefits derived from direct support of such functions .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option might include that such an approach goes beyond what some in the federal government have stated the government will support , and could increase federal outlays beyond levels currently being supported , and might create a sense of entitlement among fusion centers .

arguments in favor of this option are that such an approach would provide fusion centers with a sense of certainty about federal funding .

if , for example , fusion centers knew congress would support funding for intelligence analysts , they would no longer need to budget for such personnel .

it could also be argued that such an approach would be relatively simple — after a period in which seed funding is provided and centers reach maturity ( as judged by the federal government ) , centers would get some level of sustainment funding for a relatively specific function or set of functions subject to a pilot program's assessment of output that benefits national interests .

some lessons could be learned from the federal government's other grant program experiences , including the community oriented policing program model .

it could be argued that federal support and cultivation of the relevant skills and capabilities within fusion centers that provide direct benefit to the federal government may result in state and regional fusion centers acting as a "force multiplier" for federal efforts .

given that effective information / intelligence fusion and proactive approaches to all - hazard prevention and preparedness depends on a common understanding of intelligence and information and the potential uses thereof , an argument can be made for enhanced and uniform fusion center training .

research indicates that the diversity of types of professionals serving in fusion centers can lead to differing perspectives , or possibly , competing visions for the fusion center .

retired military intelligence officers may approach intelligence differently from , for example , state first responder personnel .

while neither approach may be "best" and the center might benefit from diversity of opinions , a common understanding of and lexicon for intelligence and its benefits and limits amongst all level of fusion center personnel can go a long way toward ensuring cohesiveness , clarity of vision , and productivity of a fusion center .

in addition to intelligence training , some homeland security observers note that fusion centers may benefit from additional and standardized civil liberties training .

most fusion centers surveyed claim to have institution - wide civil liberty training and awareness activities that ensure all employees are aware of how personal and corporate information can be collected , received , stored , and combined with traditional intelligence community information toward producing a risk assessment for a given issue of concern .

however , this training is often agency - specific and there may be differences between state activities and federal expectations .

as such , the federal government may wish to require a part of all funding allocated toward a state fusion center be used for nationally consistent civil liberties training with special attention to concerns surrounding the use of private sector data .

another option would make such training a precondition for receiving federal grants .

should congress wish to pursue this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available , including designating a federal government entity ( see option 4f ) to provide oversight of these efforts , amongst others , as discussed below .

congress may consider requiring the intelligence community to work with law enforcement ( state , local , and tribal ( slt ) and federal ) to develop a common lexicon and definitions for intelligence , information , situational awareness , and other key concepts to ensure all entities , at all levels of government , that are engaged in homeland security are working from the same play book .

these basic definitions and standards may be applicable whether the information / intelligence is national security - related or criminal in nature .

the pm - ise , which is currently working to reconcile different sensitive but unclassified security designations and handling instructions , might be a natural coordinator for such an effort .

the creation of enhanced and standardized , national fusion center training could help promote this common "dictionary of intelligence. .

pros and cons .

arguments in favor of this option might include that the lack of clarity between a "pure" intelligence and criminal intelligence role leads to over - aggressive or under - aggressive intelligence postures in fusion centers .

in short , clarity would lead to greatly enhanced information sharing .

arguments against this option could include a fundamental disagreement with the belief that there is a difference between "pure" intelligence and criminal intelligence — both seek to prevent man - made threats , including crime and terrorism .

therefore , no additional training is needed — fusion centers understand the legal regimes under which they operate .

another argument against creating these standards and common definitions is that it is likely to be a difficult undertaking given the sheer number of agencies involved and remnants of ownership culture that still persist within the federal intelligence community .

given the potential for privacy and civil liberties violations to substantially undermine the public support for fusion centers , enhanced and periodic re - fresher training in civil liberties may be a valuable tool for fusion center personnel .

while all respondent fusion centers were cognizant of the need to protect civil liberties and provided initial training on privacy and civil liberties protection , in general , this was one time , static training .

enhanced training might include in - state or national instances in which violations of privacy and / or civil liberties occurred and possible lessons learned from those instances .

moreover , annual re - fresher training that emphasizes how first amendment protected activities differ from speech which incites violence or sedition , may be useful .

in addition , the adoption of national standards and / or guidelines in this area would support this effort .

there have been some efforts in this area - pm - ise issued privacy guidelines for the information sharing environment in december 2006 , which are available to the public and could be utilized by fusion centers .

it could be argued , however , that these guidelines aren't likely to have a significant impact on state and regional fusion centers in their current form , as they are too vague , only focused on federal agencies , and entirely voluntary .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option may be resource - based — that is , training resources may not allow for such training .

arguments in favor of this option may include an understanding of history .

the lessons of cointelpro , the period of domestic intelligence abuses in the late 1960s and early 1970s , necessitate such training .

it may also be worth examining the training related to 28 cfr , part 23 , which was adopted in response to cointelpro abuses .

with regard to training on 28 cfr , part 23 , the federal regulation governing multi - jurisdictional intelligence systems , many law enforcement agencies involved in fusion centers ( often because the latter were an outgrowth of the former ) reported that they had received some training from doj and / or other contractors on the regulation when they first began operating an intelligence management system .

in many cases , that training took place many years ago and the agencies in question have had little to no follow up training .

many didn't know who at doj to contact in the event that the fusion center had a 28 cfr part 23-related question or what office fielded additional training requests .

almost all fusion centers interviewed for this report facilitated 28 cfr part 23 training for their staff either through the center directly or via the state police or bureau of investigation .

as this is taking place at the state and local level , it is unclear if there is a consistent application of 28 cfr .

currently , fusion centers are in the difficult position of being urged to be proactive to help prevent future attacks , while simultaneously being warned about being too aggressive .

additional and periodic training to fusion centers might be considered , even if their parent state police / bureau of investigation agency and other law enforcement participants have already received such training at some point in their development .

consideration may also be given to providing legal resources for fusion centers that want an external legal opinion on their collection , storage , and dissemination activities .

pros and cons .

some might argue that the advantage to this type of additional and periodic training is that it might help eliminate questionable intelligence practices , clarify legitimate activity , and ensure the protection of civil liberties .

the availability of additional legal resources to fusion centers and slt law enforcement agencies may result in better and consistent legal advice and assist resource - strapped entities that are currently suffering a fiscal crisis .

arguments against such training might be resource - based .

furthermore , if 28 cfr is going to be revised ( option 6a , page 69 ) , training on what could be viewed by some as the "old regime" may not seem productive .

as mentioned above , when fusion centers have had an opportunity to avail themselves of the dhs / doj technical assistance program attest , the program seems quite beneficial .

however , the support is provided over the course of a few days and many fusion center respondents desire longer - term and sustainable assistance , the type characteristic of traditional mentoring programs .

while some fusion centers have created informal mentoring programs of their own , a more formal program could be designed that would flexibly pair centers of varying levels of maturity with one another to share best practices and means of surmounting what may be common obstacles to fusion center development .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option may be that it is essentially superfluous as informal mentor relationships are already being established by the proactive outreach of fusion center leaders either informally within their region , or at fusion center conferences .

moreover , fusion center conferences and the dhs "lesson learned" website provide an opportunity for centers to conduct liaison and share best practices formally and informally .

arguments in favor of this option include the position that such a program would constitute a relatively minor addition to the technical assistance program in terms of resources .

the program could facilitate the pairing up fusion centers they believe could learn from one another .

while official guidelines for the mentor relationships may not be necessary , the federal government might require any new lessons learned be added to the dhs lessons learned information sharing database .

some homeland security observers view the relationship between state fusion centers and the private sector as one of both unlimited potential and great concern .

currently , most fusion centers describe an interest in expanding their relationship with the private sector in their jurisdiction , but consistently , most fusion centers were admittedly behind in developing those relationships .

information sharing with the private sector was often ad hoc and inconsistent .

furthermore , it is important to note that fusion centers did not appear to be systematically importing and incorporating private sector data into their information / intelligence fusion efforts , although some expressed an interest in better utilizing private sector data in some form .

it is important , however , to identify the opportunity to introduce new types of data , including those from private sector sources , into the intelligence fusion process to allow for a comprehensive risk assessment to a given geographic environment or infrastructure facility .

it may be that the data pointing to a pending attack cannot be understood in context unless all knowable information is available for assessing .

on the other hand , absent strenuous civil liberty protections and safeguards the possibility for misuse of personal or corporate data looms over many fusion center activities the state may undertake in partnership with or support of private sector organizations .

furthermore , it could be argued that massive private data collection and analysis efforts are wasteful and a better use of resources would be to follow known criminal leads rather than sifting through an enormous amount of data looking for possible signs of terrorism .

pros and cons .

arguments in favor of increasing interaction between fusion centers and the private sector focus mostly on increasing the availability of possible terrorism - related information .

should the federal government and private sector routinely share information some believe this will lead to a better understanding of the threat environment which in turn may deter or defeat future terrorists attacks .

others argue that the sharing of significant amounts of private sector data with the nation's fusion centers will do little to increase security as crucial pieces of terrorism - related information will not be discernible due to being included in databases containing large quantities of irrelevant information .

these homeland security observers suggest that the possibility of civil liberty abuses of private sector data residing in a state's fusion center far outweighs the possible benefits that may occur when combining private sector data with other suspected terrorism - related information .

some respondent fusion centers had a relatively pro - active public outreach strategy that included a website , brochures and billboards , and / or a 1-800 "tip" line that encouraged the public to call into the center directly .

more often , fusion centers had minimal level of interaction with the public by design and due largely to resource constraints .

while not violating the precept that "one size does not fit all fusion centers," it could be argued that , if resources allow , centers should be encouraged to have a public message and image consistent with their public mission .

public support and understanding of what these centers can and cannot do may be essential to their long - term viability .

moreover , the law enforcement elements of fusion centers are responsible for knowing their communities and being able to spot anomalies .

public outreach can facilitate calls into fusion center tip lines when they witness behavior that "just does not seem right. .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option are likely to be largely resource - based .

centers with fewer personnel do not have the necessary staff to operate these programs , for example , a phone bank necessary for a tip line .

if the federal government is considering requiring such outreach as a condition of accepting funds , it may need to provide additional funds , and / or re - programming of existing funds .

arguments in favor of this option include a fundamental belief that these centers serve a public mission and should be not perceived as secret or clandestine entities that are spying on law - abiding citizens .

if the centers do not define themselves to the public , they may be defined by other groups who may not necessarily have primary source knowledge about the center and its activities .

some may argue that clearing slt personnel , which remains an obstacle to effective information sharing , ( option 6e ) without providing them training on how to handle classified intelligence and how to use it without disclosing sensitive information to their staffs may be unfair and ill - advised .

congress may wish to consider funding additional intelligence training for the slt personnel assigned to fusion centers .

it may also be possible for the federal agency detailees at fusion centers to assist with this process .

congress may wish to consider urging dhs , the fbi , and other agencies with detailees at fusion centers to train their staff to assist fusion center leadership with using classified intelligence and tasking personnel based on threat information , without divulging classified information .

pros and cons .

arguments in favor of such a training program include that it may help facilitate necessary information sharing , while ensuring classified information remains secure .

however , federal agencies may reject the idea of having field personnel assisting in such an effort and may wish to retain such authority at headquarters .

dni michael mcconnell's "focus area 5: accelerate information sharing," in the 100 day plan for integration and collaboration , stipulated , "the plan includes objectives related to enhancing information sharing within the ic as well as the formalization of fusion centers that are in the process of being developed. .

formalization and linkages between the fusion centers and the federal intelligence community could have many interpretations and concrete manifestations .

as outlined above , should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available , as discussed below .

the concept of the interagency threat assessment coordination group ( itacg ) was first raised in november 2006 in the pm - ise implementation plan , and then subsequently in january 2007 in s. 4 . , the "improving america's security by implementing unfinished recommendations of the 9 / 11commission act" of 2007 .

under the terms of the act , the itacg , which has been alternatively called the federal coordination group , is intended to "... facilitate the production of federally coordinated products derived from the information within the scope of the ( ise ) . .

since the establishment of the intelligence community there has been little reason or mandate for federal intelligence community agencies to have direct or sustained interaction with state and local law enforcement and public safety personnel .

what little interaction there was , generally took place between the fbi , a statutory member of the intelligence community , and state and local law enforcement entities .

it could be argued that the nature of the threat today requires a broader range of interaction .

in 2007 , the executive branch established the itacg and the organization was placed a the national counter terrorism center ( nctc ) .

to date few state employees are assigned to the center and most fusion center leaders were unaware of the organization or its mission to provide timely and relevant information to state and local homeland security entities .

pros and cons .

the arguments against the itacg , as currently envisioned in s. 4 , might include ( 1 ) the name itself is misleading , as the group will be unlikely to engage in formal "threat assessment" analysis while at the nctc , ( 2 ) security concerns — back channel and un - authorized communications between state and local representatives to the itacg could undermine existing intelligence dissemination channels and further complicate the cohesiveness of federal threat assessments to state and local consumers , and ( 3 ) the detailing of a handful of state and local personnel to the burgeoning nctc , while useful , may not be enough personnel to have a substantial impact .

alternatively , one of the primary arguments in favor of such a center include a recognition of the importance of cross - training and mutual learning .

it is sometimes the case that federal intelligence officials and state intelligence officials speak past one another because they each have a limited understanding of respective consumer demands , use different terms and standards , and the don't always recognize the inherent limitations of intelligence .

by participating in the production of federally coordinated products at the national level , it could be argued , state and local fusion center personnel will learn about the volumes , specificity , and inherent limitations of the numerous "ints" collected by the intelligence community .

moreover , through interaction with state and local fusion center personnel , federal intelligence community officials will learn what is most valuable to state and local personnel , and as such , will be better prepared to create products tailored to their needs .

while the proposed itacg would work on developing federally coordinated intelligence products for dissemination to state and local fusion centers for further dissemination , itacg members are unlikely to be engaged in formal analytical threat assessments .

it could be argued that further analytical cross - training could be achieved through significantly increasing state fusion center intelligence analysts who are not federal employees to the nctc's itacg or directorate of intelligence , and offering nctc analysts an opportunity to work at a fusion center .

congress may wish to consider enhancing support for the itacg's efforts to enhance information exchange with state and regional fusion centers and facilitate analytical cross - training with state and local representatives detailed to the organization .

pros and cons .

one central argument against such an exchange is that there may be limited utility .

if analysis is a discipline that has at its core a fundamental set of skills , including , but limited to , critical thinking , hypothesis generation and testing , written and oral communication skills , and an ability to ascertain salient trends from voluminous data sets , why does it matter if these skills are exercised at the state or federal level ? .

furthermore , there are very few fusion centers and / or public safety agencies at the state and local level with the resources and existing capacity for this type of strategic analytical assessment .

another argument against such an option is that fusion center analysts and nctc terrorism threat analysts , arguably , serve different consumers and , as result , do not necessarily need to understand one another's positions .

arguments in favor of such an option might include that the nctc is a client of the fusion centers , and the fusion centers are a client for the nctc's directorate of intelligence .

as a result , "walking a mile" in your client's shoes can help you understand what is valuable to them .

another argument in favor of such integration could be that threat analysis at the federal level may be more well - developed than at some fusion centers , and cross - training may be very instructive for fusion center intelligence analysts who could also take advantage of other federal intelligence community analytical training session while detailed to washington , dc .

it is an underlying assumption , supported by some terrorist cases within the united states , that some terrorists have engaged in criminal activity or terrorism precursor crimes , to support their activities .

one way to prevent terrorism is , therefore , to use all existing law enforcement tools aggressively .

fusion centers can assist law enforcement agencies in directing their resources to areas of greatest threat .

however , as mentioned above , one can reasonably question if sophisticated terrorists , those who have received formal terrorism training from established international groups and may be planning catastrophic attacks , engage in criminal activity prior to , and in support of , a terrorist attack .

will following all criminal leads and terrorism tips lead to the disruption of sophisticated terrorist plots ? .

should such an nie not exist , it may be useful to draft one focused on the nexus between terrorism and crime .

the dni's national intelligence council could draft it and potential clients might include the homeland security advisory council , national security council , all members of the intelligence community , and state and regional fusion center leaders .

importantly , research and analysis for the report might incorporate input from the fusion centers to determine the extent to which criminal cases in the united states demonstrate meaningful linkage between precursor criminal activity and terrorist activity .

such data sets could be compared and contrasted to the activities of terrorist groups overseas to determine any commonalities .

any such findings or trends overseas could be applied to the domestic arena , through fusion centers , to align protective resources accordingly .

pros and cons .

arguments against such an option might include the hypothesis that existing cases in the united states have already demonstrated a link between terrorism , at least with respect to "aspirational" terrorist groups , and crime .

therefore , there is no need for a specific nie on the subject , as it would require extensive resources needed elsewhere .

arguments in favor of such an option might include the reasoning that if such a study has not been done , it represents an example of how international trends may inform our national counterterrorism efforts , which include , in part , the contributions of a national network of fusion centers .

furthermore , such an nie would provide fusion centers with specific trends and potential threats that they could be used to create their own collection requirements as well as enhance their strategic understanding of potential terrorism precursor crimes .

currently , fusion centers are limited to going through a relatively slow "request for information" process in order to acquire information tailored to their needs from the federal intelligence community .

if there is a movement , as dni mcconnell stated , to formalize information sharing with fusion centers , which implies a bi - directional flow of information , there will be a need to develop a robust feedback loop where information shared is assessed and requests for information are handled expeditiously .

while not all respondent fusion centers had developed intelligence collection requirements , some not only developed requirements but had collection plans designed to fill those requirements .

for example , some fusion centers might ask , how might a simultaneous al qaeda attack manifest itself in fusion center areas of responsibility , or why might fusion centers be more concerned with thefts of chlorine gas than diesel fuel ? .

some of this general information reaches fusion centers now , although many argue that federal agencies are still not as proactive and sufficiently wide in scope in what they choose to share with slt agencies , but it is the follow - up requests that are not met in a timely fashion .

respondent fusion centers often indicated that information they provided to the federal intelligence community , largely through the fbi or dhs went into a "black box," with little feedback as to the value of the information or how it may have been used .

frequently , fusion centers are told that they can't receive follow up information because it is part of an open investigation .

fusion centers are often in a position of not knowing if the information they passed was noteworthy or worthless .

they don't know if they should be actively looking for similar information to pass onto the federal community .

moreover , the lack of feedback creates resentment towards federal agencies .

state and regional officials reported being further disheartened to learn that locally gathered information they provided to dhs for risk assessment and subsequent grant allocations , was not used in any systematic and meaningful manner .

it is important to note that the lack of feedback and forthcoming information from the federal government is frequently cited as one of the predominate reasons many fusion centers were established initially .

critics might ask , if fusion centers do not have access to feedback , can they ever expect to fully participate in the intelligence cycle and achieve true fusion ? .

two bills pending before congress , s. 4 and h.r .

1 , include language , under the sub - title "homeland security information sharing — establishment of business practices," that would require the secretary of dhs to "...develop mechanisms to provide ( analytical and operational ) feedback regarding the analysis and utility of information provided by any entity of state , local or tribal governments or the private sector that gathers such information and provides such information to the department. .

pros and cons .

an argument against enhancing the feedback loop would include what some might view as a reasonable amount of time for the federal government to respond to fusion center requests .

some fusion centers , as a result of collocation with the fbi or having federal detailess integrated into their centers , might get fairly rapid responses to certain requests for information .

however , even some fusion centers with established relationships with fbi jttfs and figs found the fbi still held tightly to certain sets of ongoing case data .

an argument in support of such an option , would be if the nation is truly going to use fusion centers as a national network to prevent and respond to man - made and natural disasters , without a timely and effective information sharing and feedback mechanism practiced daily , in times of crisis , the network may prove ineffective .

the national intelligence priorities framework ( nipf ) outlines the process and results for determining where intelligence assets are directed against prioritized threats .

as one would expect , intelligence priorities are linked to assessments of threats to national and homeland security .

yet , today there are few direct mechanisms which allow fusion centers , individually or collectively , to provide their assessments of threats facing their communities into the nipf .

pros and cons .

arguments against this might include the perspective that unless it is a national trend which presupposes a collective sense of existing fusion centers , a threat does not belong in the national ( emphasis added ) intelligence priorities framework .

one argument in favor of such input could be that the trends being seen at the state and local fusion center level may represent national trends , and / or may include trends not yet identified by federal agencies , even if there is no "national fusion center" currently in existence that integrates all the trends being seen by individuals centers .

while fusion centers were created by state and local governments , with participation and support from federal entities , at what point , if at all , does the federal government become responsible for privacy and civil liberties issues associated with fusion center activities within the states ? .

where does the federal responsibility to protect civil liberties and privacy stop and where does state responsibility to protect these social goods begin ? .

it could be argued the more federal financial and human resources provided to the centers , the more the centers are perceived as hybrid federal - state entities .

therefore , the federal government could be perceived as being partly responsible for any potential violations of privacy or civil liberties .

when congress passed the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) , it established the privacy and civil liberties oversight board to , among other functions , "...review the implementation of laws , regulations and executive branch policies related to efforts to protect the nation from terrorism including the implementation of information sharing guidelines...." if fusion centers are to become true partnerships , it could be argued , that there is shared responsibility to protect civil liberties .

in terms of the modalities of the oversight board's role , it might work with state agency general counsels to ensure that the fusion centers have requisite policies and practices in place consistent with the fusion center guidelines .

moreover , the oversight board might assist in designing an oversight or inspection regime for privacy and civil liberties protection at fusion centers .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option might include a belief that as fusion centers are creations of state and regional communities , the federal government has minimal responsibility to exercise oversight with respect to them .

some might argue that legally , the federal government has no right to direct fusion centers on protection of privacy and civil liberties .

with respect to privacy rights , it might also be argued that the differing standards for privacy across states would complicate any effort to implement a consistent approach in this area .

arguments in favor of this option might include the claim that even if the federal role in exercising oversight of fusion centers is limited , federal financial and human resources support , as well as support for formalization of the fusion center , requires some level of civil liberties oversight .

some might argue , the current voluntary implementation of civil liberties and privacy protection may be insufficient .

has the federal government conducted audits of fusion centers to determine if they are in compliance with even the voluntary standards as set out in the fusion center guidelines ? .

moreover , it might be argued that without federal oversight , litigation is likely to serve as the only significant oversight mechanism .

litigation , however , may not necessarily be the most effective oversight tool , due to the length of time it takes for the judicial system to adjudicate such cases .

moreover , by the time an issue has made its way into the courts , there is likely to be considerable skepticism amongst the public regarding fusion center activities .

in at least two reported instances , federal threat information reportedly provided to state and local fusion centers and / or state / local officials manifested competing assessments of source reliability and validity and , by extension , the nature of the threat .

in the two incidents , which took place in boston in january 2005 and in new york city in october 2005 , the fbi and dhs provided local officials with competing assessments of source reliability and / or the urgency of the threat .

federal officials have since testified that coordination mechanisms have been put in place to prevent such future occurrences .

however , in order to assist state and local fusion centers to determine how imminent and / or valid a potential threat may be , congress may wish to consider the creation of a universal confidence ranking for federally produced intelligence products that would rank an agency's confidence in the reliability of the sources — reflecting the source's reporting history and corroboration with other intelligence sources , etc .

to some extent , the failures associated with certain elements of pre - war intelligence on iraq have served as a catalyst for an intelligence confidence and transparency initiative underway at the national level and with respect to national intelligence estimates .

thomas fingar , deputy dni for analysis , stated a recognition of the need to "show ( ing ) our homework — greater transparency about sources , which allow analysts to better assess the quality of intelligence reporting. .

former deputy director of the cia's directorate of intelligence stated in a speech to all cia analysts "... that when you are 'calling it as you see it' , you must give the policymaker full transparency into your confidence in the judgments you are making. .

an important question concerning these recognitions , however , is the extent to which this confidence system is formal , and is being extended into products and judgements regularly provided to fusion centers .

congress may wish to consider oversight hearings to determine the progress of this initiative as it pertains to fusion centers .

pros and cons .

a credibility ranking system might reduce the need to include sources and methods information in intelligence products , thus making the creation of declassified and "less classified" versions of intelligence products easier .

such a ranking would provide state and regional fusion centers better information to use in making informed decisions about the threat to their communities and related responses .

an argument against this option suggests it may be difficult to get multiple federal intelligence and law enforcement agencies to agree on common "credibility" criteria .

getting consensus on assigning a particular ranking to a intelligence product could potentially be a lengthy process that could potentially delay intelligence dissemination .

on the occasion that one or more agencies disagree with the majority consensus , a system for "line - item" analytic comments may be necessary ( as is currently utilized for national intelligence estimates ) .

it should also be noted , that the credibility ranking system described above is unlikely to have a positive impact on state and regional fusion center analysis and assessment unless it is preceded by training on intelligence , related terminology , the intelligence cycle , etc .

to give context to the system .

as mentioned throughout this report , there is no "cookie cutter" approach to fusion centers .

although the centers may all have some core functions , the financial and personnel resources they have to dedicate to those functions differ widely .

structurally , the continued development of the fusion center concept could progress along any of the following , albeit non - exhaustive , paths .

should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available that might influence that path of development , as discussed below .

under the current path of development , states and localities continue to make decisions about the number of fusion centers .

there is little to no federal input into these independent decisions , as the centers are created and largely funded by the states and localities .

this has reportedly resulted in several seemingly unusual homeland security purchases and funding decisions according to fusion center officials who noted the creation of competing fusion centers in some states .

pros and cons .

an argument in favor of this option is the position that it would respect states rights and the ability of states and localities to make independent determinations about the structure of fusion centers that best fits their needs .

an argument against this option suggests the increasingly complexity , from a federal perspective , of funding numerous fusion centers within one state .

a proliferating amount of fusion centers in a single state can lead to competition for resources that may lead to an allocation of existing funds that does not necessarily best advance the fusion function .

under this option , the state's homeland security advisor , acting on behalf of the governor , might dedicate one fusion center as being the lead center for the state .

federal financial resources could be provided to that center , which would have the ability , acting through the state administrative agency , to re - allocate a portion of those funds to "satellite" fusion centers across the state .

as mentioned earlier in the report , dhs and doj have requested that each state governor designate one state fusion center as the main interface for exchanging terrorism and homeland security information .

pros and cons .

arguments in favor of this option might include the belief held by some fusion center respondents that the competition for limited federal resources does not serve fusion centers well .

that is , particularly if there are relatively few highly qualified intelligence analysts , having them at one central location where they have easiest access to the flow of information coming into the center may best serve the interests of fusion centers .

arguments against this option may include that fusion centers are essentially state and local entities , and as such , they should be designed in whatever configuration , to include multiple centers if desired , if that is determined to serve the state or locality's interests .

for example , some large states have several large cities and having one central fusion center serve as the recipient of federal grants might undermine "satellite" fusion center operations .

although provocative and radical , fusion center critics might argue that fusion centers are superfluous insofar as the primary federal benefit they seek to provide is prevention of manmade ( terrorist ) attacks ( a traditional federal agency role ) and / or destabilizing crime ( gangs , narcotics , etc. — both a federal and slt responsibility ) .

those who subscribe to this school might argue that state and regional fusion centers could be eliminated and federal agencies take over all the functions those centers once performed , with intelligence and counterterrorism - related work going to the fbi , and the all - hazards functions adopted by some fusion centers turned over to fema or the state / local agencies that traditionally handle natural disasters .

the counter to this argument is that a changed threat environment requires non - traditional thinking — designed to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks and respond efficiently and effectively to substantial natural disasters .

nevertheless , the argument that fusion centers may represent an organizational solution to a functional information sharing and analysis problem can still be made .

a less radical , albeit still drastic , version of this option would suggest that the fbi take over all strategic analysis and assessment roles and that state and regional fusion centers focus solely on tactical analysis of criminal intelligence .

under this option , the fbi's field intelligence groups ( figs ) , whose primary purpose is to manage the fbi's intelligence process at each of the 56 fbi field offices , would assume a broader set of responsibilities .

one version of this option would have the figs conducting this analysis , using fbi analysts , to be shared with slt agencies .

another approach would have slt personnel previously assigned to fusion centers be re - detailed to the figs to assist with the analytic process , although that process would be run and directed by the fig .

either way , the fbi might be able to conduct the types of analyses that could assist state and local law enforcement , public safety , and private sector potentially to direct their protective resources into the areas of greatest criminal and homeland security threats if the fbi had: direct access to all the state and local criminal intelligence and information that fusion centers have .

established relationships with even rural law enforcement personnel , private sector personnel , and other related homeland security stakeholders .

information systems which could facilitate the sharing and analysis of unclassified and classified information across all homeland security stakeholders in the country in a timely and effective manner .

this option does not presuppose that existing state and local fusion centers would be supplanted .

however , federal financial resources could be re - directed toward the establishment of state - wide intelligence systems that are interoperable and to which the fbi figs would have direct access as an input into strategic analysis .

relieved of the strategic analysis burden , fusion centers could focus on tactical analysis in support of constituent member or fusion center cases and / or situational awareness .

pros and cons .

arguments against expanding the role of the fig relative to fusion centers might find that it represents a thought process that is part of the problem — that is , that homeland security is essentially a federal function , with a minimalist role for state and local law enforcement and public safety personnel .

such an approach might marginalize the important role that state and local homeland security stakeholders can play .

it may also result in the failure to fully utilize the resources and institutional knowledge of slt agencies , the stakeholders who know their own communities more intimately than any federal agency .

moreover , it could also be argued that the fbi is being asked to do so much in the post - 9 / 11 world — to be the foremost counterterrorism and counter - criminal organization in the united states — that this somewhat expanded role may be asking too much .

lastly , from an analytic perspective , tactical and strategic analysis are mutually supportive and it may not be prudent to separate the two .

arguments in favor of this option might find that such a role for the fbi does not involve supplanting existing fusion centers .

it would merely federalize the strategic analytic function , one that many fusion centers have difficulty dedicating personnel to because their clients do not necessarily demand these types of products .

lastly , it is not a great expansion of fbi responsibilities , it only involves analysis of an enhanced set of raw data that is relatively under developed due to the nascency of state - wide criminal intelligence systems .

state - run emergency management agencies or the fusion centers in cooperation with these agencies would continue to respond to natural disasters as the fbi fulfills its traditional investigative mission .

today , there are more than 40 plus fusion centers operating , largely independently , around the country .

it can be argued that the next fusion - related development should be "2 nd generation fusion" or "fusion of the fusion centers. .

informally , this has started to happen to some degree .

post - 9 / 11 demands for increased domestic security served as a catalyst for some state fusion centers to collaborate with each other to facilitate the flow of information and intelligence .

the means and the ends of that collaboration are important .

first , the means - at times , these informal center - to - center or more formalized regional group relationships have been used to share threat information specific to investigating a past or ongoing incident of concern .

to achieve the next step in fusion center collaboration , from ad hoc relationships to a more formalized , structured relationship between fusion centers that would create a representative voice to address mission and resource related issues with the federal government , there are several organizational network models that could emerge , as well as a hybrid of several models: it is important to note that the depictions in figure 1 represent "pure" theoretical models .

elements of these aggregate models exist today , although the models could be formally adopted in an effort to bring more structure to the existing fusion center network structure .

for example , all the fusion centers interviewed for this report have some direct linkages with other fusion centers , although an individual center may not have established links with every other center in the country , nor are those links of the same strength .

it is also common for fusion centers to have stronger links and more constant contact with nearby fusion centers or those centers at similar levels of maturation .

to the former point , there are examples where fusion centers in a particular area have set up regional fusion center coalitions , like southern shield in the southeast , to facilitate information sharing .

each option has its own advantages and disadvantages .

moreover , like fusion centers themselves , it is not clear that one model would work for all stakeholders involved in the network .

in reality , any fusion center configuration is likely to be a hybrid of some or all of the models represented above .

however , some homeland security observers argue that significant success in maturing a national fusion center constellation may be assisted by the creation of nation fusion center representative entity that provides the federal government prioritized mission and resource issues of interest .

second , the ends — an often stated concern by state homeland security leaders is a lack of understanding how the federal government prioritizes funding , personnel , and technical support provided to the nation's fusion centers .

conversely , many homeland security observers note that federal government leadership has difficulty in responding to the needs of the fifty state fusion centers in a prioritized and logical manner .

to facilitate a more comprehensive approach to putting forth the needs of state fusion centers in a given region , some state leaders have established regional fusion center representative organizations .

at present individual state fusion centers request services and support from dhs that are relevant only to the organization's operations .

it is the perception of fusion center leaders that dhs responds to the needs of a single center without the consideration of the priority of the request with respect to the needs of others centers that may be in locations deemed higher at risk , or the needs of all of the nation's fusion centers .

a coordinated national or regional representative fusion center organization that can propose to the federal government prioritized common issues of concern may assist dhs and fbi submit , manage , and allocate fusion centers budgets based on strategy rather than the perceived need by a single center .

pros and cons .

an argument in favor of the establishment of national fusion center representative organization entails increasing the nation's contextual understanding of threats and vulnerabilities through increased collaboration by state fusion centers .

such an organization may assist the federal government in ascertaining the risks to the nation and understanding the resources needed to support the federal - state information sharing environment .

an argument against such a structure is the possibility of the inadvertent creation of a "group - think" environment whereby centers , in an effort to support unity of effort and collaboration , may compromise their independent analysis of risks to the region in favor of supporting the representative organization .

a second option for addressing the need for 2 nd generation fusion is the creation of regional fusion centers to coordinate disparate fusion efforts at the state and regional level .

this option is likely to be supported by those homeland security observers who question the viability of each state having its own homeland security fusion center ( or several in some cases ) .

there are some indications that federal intelligence community agencies are already considering developing a regional architecture to promote information sharing .

under this option , fusion centers could move to a regional model based on any number of federal regional designations ( hidta , fbi fig , fema , drug enforcement agency organized crime drug enforcement task forces etc ) .

increasing center - to - center and regional collaboration on issues of common concern may help garner support for such a proposal .

a regional approach — in the several forms it could take — may help facilitate information sharing , effective resource dispersal , and help transform the current localized , reactive , and tactical approaches to threat analysis to a more proactive and strategic posture .

one possible approach to regionalization could be the combining of numerous state fusion centers into a regional homeland security center .

such a strategy may become more popular if there are no large - scale terrorist attacks or disasters in the united states , which result in less homeland security - related funding and a lack of political support to sustain fusion efforts .

such an occurrence may be predicated by the following situations: existing state fusion centers detailing personnel to bordering state organizations thus developing a notional regional network within existing organizations .

barring a future terrorist attack or catastrophic natural disaster , the elimination of state fusion centers may lead to the establishment of large regional centers staffed by surrounding state personnel .

modeled after numerous existing organizations located throughout the nation ( hidtas fbi figs [see option 5c above] , fema ) , a federal government - led regional fusion center is established in partnership with state employees focused on strategic analysis and / or response efforts in support of federal , state , and local missions .

pros and cons .

an argument against this option includes the reasoning that by adopting regional fusion centers , the new fusion entities will no longer provide as many benefits to local communities and as such , they will have difficulty maintaining buy - in and detailees from local agencies .

an argument for regionalization is the claim that by pooling resources , expanding their scope , and establishing regional spokespersons , regionalization may assist with the resource dilemma and facilitate both more strategic approaches to analysis and effective communication with the federal government .

there are numerous measures which congress might consider in this area to assist fusion centers .

should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available that might influence that path of development , as discussed below .

as highlighted above , 28 cfr part 23 , the federal regulation which governs state and local criminal intelligence systems , was written , in part , as a response to the domestic intelligence abuses of the late 1960s and early 1970s related to cointelpro .

while the concerns raised then about civil liberties violations remain demonstrably present today and must be vigilantly guarded against , so too has the threat environment changed .

along with changes in the threat have come substantial technological changes , including the ability to exploit voluminous amounts of commercially available data .

as a result , it could be argued that 28 cfr , part 23 might be revised to include updated information retention time frames and mechanisms to include available technologies .

pros and cons .

arguments in favor of such a revision include that a reexamination of 28 cfr part 23 would potentially result in a new balance being struck between protecting civil liberties and effective and proactive security efforts .

such a revision might also contribute to the creation of national standards for information collection and exchange .

furthermore , changes that address technological advances and the realities of the current threat environment may clarify the limits of how such technologies can be used by fusion centers .

an argument against such a revision might include civil liberties advocates being critical of any alterations to 28 cfr part 23 that may be seen as loosening requirements and / or expanding existing law enforcement powers .

any changes made without slt consultation and / or that narrow slt - level leverage are likely to be met with resistence from fusion centers and slt law enforcement .

peer - to - peer communication has been a priority for the administration and congress as demonstrated in the irtpa instructions to the ise .

congress may wish to consider further steps to enhance such communication between fusion centers — dubbed by some in the fusion business to be "2 nd generation fusion. .

congress could consider several initiatives in this area , to include requiring fusion centers and states that wish to use federal funds to purchase information management systems to ensure their systems are able to "speak" to other systems .

this would enhance the potential to make connections between disparate data points and reduce information silos at state and / or regional levels .

this may limit the number of systems fusion centers can purchases in the short term , but in the long term , such a move is likely to force the companies that sell these systems to work in xml or create the appropriate loaders to translate between xml and its proprietary language .

pros and cons .

there are several arguments for implementing this option , including the need to ensure federal funds don't contribute to further "silo - ization" of information streams , as well as the potential to encourage more effective information sharing and better data analysis .

arguments against this option may highlight concerns about the immediate limiting impact on systems choices and potential financial costs for state and regional fusion centers and related agencies .

another option that may enhance peer - to - peer communication among fusion centers and between fusion centers and the federal community is standardized reporting formats .

currently , while there are common "top - down" standardized federal reports , including intelligence information reports ( iirs ) , intelligence bulletins , and intelligence assessments , no such standard set of products exists for "bottom - up" reporting from fusion centers to the federal community .

the creation of common lexicon and standards is likely to contribute to this end .

dhs has given its roughly 15 fusion center detailees reports officer training to facilitate this effort , but it is clear it needs to be done on a grander scale and in coordination with the fbi and other federal recipients .

if this is to be successful , coordination with fusion center staff is likely to be essential to ensure that fusion centers are not overburdened with a multiple reporting formats , required to fill out duplicate copies , and upload through various information systems ( option 6d ) , thus thwarting effective information sharing .

a standardized format will also reinforce efforts to instill the use of a common lexicon and definitions nationally .

such formats should likely include input from state and local law enforcement and fusion centers to ensure consistency and buy - in , and find ways this requirement can fit within existing standard operating procedures rather than creating additional work .

pros and cons .

a potential impediment associated with this option is the likely difficulty of getting federal and slt agencies to agree on a standardized report format .

furthermore , it will likely be equally difficult to devise a way to create a common report form and process that does not create additional work for fusion centers .

it can be argued that to be effective and efficient , such an option is inextricably tied to the consolidation of federally run information systems ( option 6d , below ) and without a serious effort to consolidate information flow between federal and fusion center entities , a standardized reporting format may still be unwieldy .

an argument for this option is the assertion that without standardized reporting , the current range of standards and formats being used is likely to impede effective information sharing and analysis , which has been deemed crucial for our nation's homeland security efforts .

congress might consider compelling federal intelligence and law enforcement agencies to consolidate existing federally owned and operated information sharing systems .

designating a single system as the primary system through which all information from the federal government would be sent to state , local , and tribal agencies may also be an option to consider .

congress may wish to continue to exercise rigorous oversight of the progress the ise has made toward creating the necessary "policies , procedures , and technologies linking the resources ( people , systems , databases , and information ) of federal , state , local , and tribal entities and the private sector to facilitate terrorism information sharing , access , and collaboration. .

pros and cons .

prioritization and / or consolidation of federally run information systems would likely reduce the stress on fusion centers and enhance the flow of intelligence between slt and federal agencies .

however , it could also be argued that such changes are likely to be opposed by the federal agencies whose respective systems are not promoted as the single information sharing architecture .

"ownership" of intelligence and information systems appears to remain an obstacle in sharing information with sub - federal entities .

congress may wish to consider urging the fbi and dhs to increase the number of clearances they provide for state and local personnel , especially those currently assigned to and / or slated to work at state and regional fusion centers .

congress may also wish to examine the classified intelligence reciprocity issue which prevents a holder of a dhs - cleared fusion center , for example , from accessing dod - origin classified systems and intelligence .

while a perennial issue within the federal community , the continued lack of reciprocity creates needless bureaucratic and logistical hurdles that continue to thwart effective information sharing .

pros and cons .

an argument in favor of this option would be that it allows additional personnel at the centers to receive threat information and direct it to appropriate personnel for action .

this may reduce some of the obstacles that currently inhibit the flow of federal intelligence assessments that fusion center analysts can "fuse" with locally focused , grassroots - collected information .

with better access to classified information , fusion centers may increase their capacity for "true fusion" by marrying strategic and long - term threat assessments generated by federal agencies with locally focused , grassroots - collected information .

an argument against this option could include the contention that , while seemingly positive , it does nothing to address the over - classification of intelligence , and in fact , could further promulgate a culture of classification .

clearing fusion center personnel , especially management , and not the "boots on the ground" personnel puts the former in a difficult position .

they are usually incapable of deploying resources or directing collection based on the classified intelligence they have received .

as such , it may be more beneficial to enhance the declassification process — and the capability to create slt - relevant intelligence products ( option 4a , page 59 ) — at the federal level then overemphasizing the importance of clearing additional slt personnel .

furthermore , an increased number of cleared personnel at the state and local level will not be beneficial to fusion centers unless it is accompanied by equipment to receive and store such information , training on how to use intelligence , and guidance on how to identify gaps or generate collection requirements from that intelligence .

congress may wish to examine classification issues and urge more progress on efforts to declassify existing products , as well as produce less sensitive or tear - line versions of classified intelligence reports .

this could be done by urging the compliance with the requirements and deadlines laid out in the irtpa ( p.l .

108-458 ) , many of which have not been met .

congress may also wish to consider this and other incentives for facilitating the creation of declassified or "less - classified" versions of intelligence threat reports to ensure fusion centers can receive , store , and utilize threat reporting .

pros and cons .

a federal government - wide effort to declassify relevant intelligence products could potentially assist slt agencies and fusion centers to identify potential threats and trends within their respective jurisdictions .

alone , some critics might argue , declassified products based on federal intelligence will not meet the information needs of fusion centers and slt agencies .

rather , intelligence products need to be created based on slt information requirements and operational considerations to ensure they are relevant to the recipients .

a potential negative tradeoff of a concerted effort to declassify intelligence for fusion centers and slt agencies might be an increase in the amount of time it takes to get important information from federal agencies to the slt - level .

in recent years , much has been said about the partnership between slt agencies , state and regional fusion centers , and federal agencies to tackle homeland security challenges .

while there are many agencies , initiatives , and individual leaders who are working to advance the level of cooperation between a wide spectrum of public sector agencies at all levels of government , there are indications that the "partnership" between them is not as strong and dynamic as it is frequently described .

it could be argued that the federal government will be hard - pressed to view slt agencies and entities , like fusion centers , as true partners .

rather , the federal government will likely approach the later as a "consumer" of their work , but not necessarily a common and equal "partner. .

it is also important to recognize that this tension goes beyond the level of government divide — there is also a significant gap between traditional intelligence and law enforcement agencies ( see appendix a ) , and between first responders and law enforcement .

the relationship between slt and federal agencies can be tension - filled ; they each operate from different historic roles and responsibilities , resources , and jurisdictions .

in some locations there appears to be some residual resentment of the fbi and some other federal agencies amongst slt entities after years of being treated as inferior and an information source — not necessarily as a consumer .

on the federal side , there is often a distrust of slt entities , a concern about the erosion of federal jurisdiction , and , in some cases , a resistence to accepting an enhanced slt role in some homeland security areas .

although relationships vary across the country , in some locations the two groups do not have the necessary understanding and familiarity with each other , despite some continued contact ( i.e .

state and local interaction with the fbi via jttfs ) .

several fusion center officials cited their perception about the failure of federal agencies to understand their needs .

in january 2007 , washington , dc , police chief kathy lanier testified to the cultural differences and lack of understanding between slt and federal communities: the department of homeland security is not a law enforcement agency like the fbi ... is a law enforcement agency... .

so it's very difficult for them to understand what my need to know is , if they don't know what it is that i do .

if they're not familiar with what i do on a daily basis , what resources i have , and how i can reduce vulnerabilities through the daily activities of more than 4,500 employees here in washington , d.c. .. .

so a lot of information doesn't get to me , because they don't believe i have a need to know... .

i think it's just a lack of understanding .

and this is not in all dhs's fault ... local law enforcement's just as much at fault .

the department of homeland security is not completely aware of what our operational capabilities are and how the information , if passed on to us , could be used to reduce the vulnerability... .

so information that may be shared with us is not shared with us because they don't think it's something that we can do anything with or that we can use to help reduce that vulnerability .

as mentioned above , this lack of understanding can lead to unrealistic expectations .

in talking with state and local officials who are relatively new to the intelligence discipline , it is often apparent that they believe that the federal government knows far more than it tells them , and that the intelligence the "feds" have is usually clear and specific regarding the "who , what , where and when" of a threat .

this is often not the case , but it leads to latent distrust instead of open discussion .

as previously stated , the two sides operate using different language and standards .

the lanes in the road are often unclear and in some cases there remains a degree of competition between various agencies and levels of government .

in short , while there is an enhanced level of trust between the federal and state and local communities , according to some fusion center respondents , they would not necessarily characterize the relationship as a true partnership .

pros and cons .

arguments against this option are likely to focus on the difficulty of creating a plan and implementing a strategy for enhancing slt - federal partnership , something that can be difficult to define and measure in tangible terms .

those who wish to maintain the status quo are unlikely to support such an option .

on the other hand , supporters of this option may opine that regardless of logistical challenges , the importance of enhancing the relationships between levels of government and various homeland security stakeholder communities is so essential to post - 9 / 11 u.s. security , that it cannot be ignored .

as outlined above , should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available .

one concrete manner of working toward this true partnership and mutual understanding is through personnel exchanges .

it could be argued that the more interaction and detailing of personnel between state and local fusion centers and federal agencies , the better .

while periodic conferences are helpful in building relationships , living in your partners environment and understanding the demands and limitations of that environment is essential to building mutual trust and understanding .

potential details of personnel to a interagency threat assessment coordination group ( option 4a , page 59 ) and to the nctc ( option 4b , page 60 ) , options mentioned above , may be concrete measures which could enhance partnerships and mutual understanding .

pros and cons .

additional clarity about each communities' roles , responsibilities , and resources is likely to reduce duplication , clarify the "lanes in the road," influence intelligence sharing selections , and potentially could lead to enhanced coordination .

in some cases these issues have been avoided because of sensitivities regarding jurisdictional issues , which could come to a head during such an exercise .

there are some issues associated with fusion centers for which there are no unique federal remedies .

this is largely due to issues associated with federalism .

there were a number of legal issues discovered in the course of research .

because they involve state law , there is likely no federal remedy , unless constitutional issues are involved , a situation that would have to be assessed on a case - by - case basis .

while acknowledging that the majority of state programs are not recognized by legislation or a governor's executive order , many homeland security observers are concerned that an uncertain funding line coupled with unreasonable mission expectations may lead to the elimination of fusion centers in the future .

one near - term priority of fusion center leadership might be to coordinate efforts with the state's homeland security advisor , the governor's office , and state legislators to recognize the center , define its mission , and devote suitable long - term state funding to its operations .

with future federal funding levels uncertain , a situation may be developing that could be detrimental to the future needs of the state .

should a state not recognize or devote dedicated funding to its fusion center , the ability to provide strategic forward - looking threat assessments or tactical operational prevention and response activities may suffer .

there are concerns that if the federal government increases funding to fusion centers , mission and administrative conditions may accompany these resources .

such a situation might detract from the state - focused mission and possibly result in the center failing to meet the expectations of state leadership .

a number of fusion centers had state laws which had the unintended effect of impeding information sharing .

in one instance , a state law made it a class a misdemeanor if any person knowingly released criminal intelligence information ( as defined in statute ) to an agency or person other than a criminal justice agency .

according to one fusion center leader , one of the unintended consequences of this law was that any intelligence the fusion center received from the federal community could not be shared directly with any non criminal justice entity or person that may be a target of the threat and / or have resources essential to preventing or preparing for an event .

research also indicated a number of potentially problematic issues related to state fusion center personnel which , again , do not necessarily have any unique federal remedy .

these issues include .

as the fusion centers continue to mature and the security role and functions of the organization attempt to align with the realities of the threat environment , some homeland security observers hypothesize that state leadership may wish to reconsider the attributes required of fusion center leaders .

in response to the evolving homeland security environment some centers have started ensuring that the core leadership team of the organization have representative experience and knowledge of the four phases of homeland security: preparation , prevention , response , and recovery .

for example , fusion centers that focus on all - hazards may look for leadership that have both criminal and emergency responder experience .

some state homeland security observers are concerned that one implication of a possible significant increase in federal funding to state fusion centers might entail the federal government's desire to be consulted regarding personnel selected by state leadership for positions that are responsible for managing state fusion center funds .

one concern often voiced during the interviews with fusion center leadership was the ability to select and manage the personnel assigned to the center .

there is a general concern about the quality of detailess .

given resource constraints within partner agencies , fusion center leadership are concerned that those agencies may seek to detail personnel who fail to perform .

considering the immaturity of many of the nation's fusion centers and their need for personnel , centers often unknowingly accept individuals with skills that do not support the mission .

there are also issues regarding clarity of roles and responsibilities .

despite memorandums of understanding ( mou ) signed by the fusion centers and the detailing organization , there is often a lack of definitive understanding of the roles and functions the detailee is to undertake in support of the fusion center .

with regard to federal agency detailees , this lack of clarity could result in unmet expectations , reduced federal - state coordination , and agency representatives departing the center prior to the conclusion of the assignment .

unlike the lack of specifics of the functions to be performed and the role of the individual in the organization , the mous often specify that salary , training , and annual performance reviews will continue to be provided by the parent organization .

it is often argued this programmatic arrangement is necessary to quickly detail individuals to the organization ; however , such a process does not appear conducive to the effective management of individuals detailed to the fusion center .

while it is true that fusion center leaders are on occasion asked about the performance of detailees , many suspect the arrangement does not have a lasting impact on detailee work productivity .

barring dismissal from the center , the organizational relationship limits the leverage a center leader may have in increasing the performance of detailees that may have suspect qualifications or lack of knowledge of the assigned mission .

such an organizational dynamic may negatively affect the center's mission effectiveness and compel center leadership to question the parent organizations commitment to the fusion center .

several fusion center officials mentioned concerns regarding the lack of tools to measure personnel performance .

during times of fiscal crisis , which is especially acute in some states , fusion center officials are being pressured to justify their existence in light of other cuts to law enforcement and public services .

without well established entity - wide and personnel specific metrics , fusion centers reported difficulty demonstrating their importance to those officials responsible to budgets and grant allocations .

to address this situation , one fusion center was creating their own metrics to evaluate individual performance , based largely on the military performance evaluation system .

as previously mentioned , many states and municipalities are currently in fiscal crisis .

there are numerous agencies and projects competing for limited state budget dollars as well as federal grant resources .

numerous fusion center officials cited the lack of strategic planning for resource distribution within their state .

in some states , non - intelligence focused agencies and personnel are responsible for dividing federal grant funds among state / local initiatives .

some fusion center leaders believe a lack of understanding of the role of fusion centers has put the centers at a disadvantage for receiving federal grants from the decision making bodies .

in at least one case , a fusion center was told by those making grant distribution decisions that "fusion centers benefitted the federal government , so the federal government should fund them directly" — an indication they did not think the homeland security grant funds should be used to fund that state's fusion center .

another complaint focuses on the lack of strategic coordination .

in some states , regional councils or municipalities themselves can determine what to spend federal homeland security grants on , without proving that such expenditures fit within a strategic state - wide effort to reduce risk .

in one state , regional councils that distribute funding choose to fund local fusion centers , even though there was already one established for the state , potentially creating duplication of effort , wasting resources , and stirring competition .

one example of poor planning included the authorization by one council for 500 megahertz radios , while another council approved and funded ones that were 800 megahertz , thereby perpetuating a lack of interoperability .

another potential hurdle to fusion center development is creating buy - in at the sub - state level .

in many states there are indications that small police departments and public sector agencies are not thoroughly convinced of their fusion center's worth , and if and how the center will benefit them .

creating buy - in is a difficult process .

expanding from a solely counterterrorism focus to an all - crimes approach appears to have helped some fusion centers create buy - in .

as previously mentioned , providing investigative resources to small agencies that need them has assisted another in this regard .

however , these services are not often "fusion" - related , and thus it begs the question , how can fusion centers convince local law enforcement agencies that they should expend resources and time to working to enhance the fusion process ? .

moreover , non - law enforcement agencies are often skeptical about fusion centers .

first , all - crimes and counterterrorism - focused centers have a more difficult time than all - hazards centers marketing themselves to public health , environmental protection , fire fighters , etc .

these entities tend to have had far less intelligence experience and enjoy a reduced level of comfort with the intelligence cycle than law enforcement .

in addition to apprehension with the subject , non - law enforcement public sector agencies are unclear about what role they should play and how to play it .

furthermore , some non - law enforcement fusion center officials complained about what they perceive as conflicting messages from the federal government about the role of agencies like theirs in the fusion process .

appendix a. philosophies of intelligence to better understand the potential philosophical , cultural , and logistical barriers to effective integration of intelligence and information fusion centers with existing federal intelligence and terrorism / crime prevention efforts , it is helpful to examine the different conceptions of intelligence within the federal intelligence community and the law enforcement community .

intelligence community and law enforcement community approaches to intelligence .

the absence of a common lexicon between the federal intelligence community and law enforcement intelligence is one area in need of further explanation , as it is manifested in approaches fusion centers take to their work .

the majority of fusion centers examined for this report deal with a combination of intelligence , information , and situational awareness .

most centers that described themselves as having a response role or support function for another response - oriented entity were more concerned with situational awareness .

however , in a few cases , it was not clear if the fusion center leadership had a thorough understanding of the differences between intelligence and information .

this is somewhat understandable: people often use the term intelligence interchangeably with information , but there is an important distinction .

intelligence community conception of intelligence .

mark lowenthal , an expert on intelligence issues , differentiates intelligence from information in the following way: information is anything that can be known , regardless of how it is discovered .

intelligence refers to information that meets the stated or understood needs of policy makers and has been collected , processed , and narrowed to meet those needs .

intelligence is a subset of the broader category of information .

intelligence and the entire process by which it is identified , obtained , and analyzed respond to the needs of policy makers .

all intelligence is information ; not all information is intelligence .

intelligence is the product of the intelligence cycle ( see figure a - 1 below ) , a process that begins with step 1 - planning and direction , which leads to step 2 - the setting of collection requirements based on threats in the form of questions and identified gaps in existing knowledge , and which is followed by step 3 - the collection of intelligence based on known gaps .

step 4 includes synthesis and analysis of collected intelligence and results in the creation of an intelligence product , which in step 5 , is disseminated to policymakers and those responsible for taking action based on that analysis .

step 6 is the feedback loop from the customer to evaluate the utility of the product and facilitate another round of the cycle by assisting with step 1 - planning and direction .

it is important to explain that there are different definitions of "intelligence," and those used by the fusion centers often differ from the more "pure," conception of "intelligence" outlined immediately above .

law enforcement conception of intelligence .

in law enforcement , the term intelligence has been defined slightly differently than within the halls of federal intelligence agencies engaged in all - source , strategic intelligence .

david carter , a criminal intelligence expert states: in the purest sense , intelligence is the product of an analytic process that evaluates information collected from diverse sources , integrates the relevant information into a cohesive package , and produces a conclusion or estimate about a criminal phenomenon by using the scientific approach to problem solving ( i.e. , analysis ) .

intelligence , therefore , is a synergistic product intended to provide meaningful and trustworthy direction to law enforcement decision makers about complex criminality , criminal enterprises , criminal extremists , and terrorists .

law enforcement intelligence ( leint ) is thus "the product of an analytic process that provides an integrated perspective to disparate information about crime , crime trends , crime and security threats , and conditions associated with criminality. .

carter's definition appears akin to what the intelligence community would consider "finished" intelligence — intelligence that has been synthesized and analyzed .

one might argue that criminal intelligence , as conceptualized above , is reactive — information becomes intelligence after it is analyzed , as compared to more pure concepts of intelligence , which are more proactive , in that pre - identified intelligence gaps based on policymaker needs are the starting point for intelligence collection .

this would be in line with traditional approaches .

it could be argued that the intelligence community tends to be proactive in dealing with national security matters , while law enforcement in the united states has traditionally been reactive , post - event , and prosecution focused .

some might argue that the use of law enforcement tools such as the enterprise theory of investigation have indeed been proactive in the collection of intelligence , although not necessarily through the formal implementation of the intelligence cycle .

carter believes intelligence can be used for both prevention and planning / resource allocation within law enforcement .

the primary differences , then , between pure or traditional conceptions of intelligence and law enforcement intelligence lie in the following three areas: ( 1 ) the predicate for the intelligence activity itself , ( 2 ) intelligence clients and consumers , and ( 3 ) the legal regimes under which intelligence is collected .

whereas the pure intelligence community uses a known intelligence gap as the starting point for collection , it is less likely that a law enforcement intelligence group will have a developed set of intelligence collection requirements and , as a result , a criminal event or case is the starting point for intelligence collection .

with respect to consumers , while the intelligence community serves action - oriented officials within the military and federal intelligence communities , it largely serves the needs of national policymakers .

in the law enforcement community , the consumers are largely law enforcement officers investigating a crime or criminal groups , prosecuting attorneys and law enforcement executives seeking to align protective resources .

from a legal regime perspective , national intelligence collection , arguably operates under a less restrictive legal regime than law enforcement intelligence , an issues which is largely driven by the subjects of intelligence collection — u.s .

persons or non - u.s. persons .

the conceptual differences between these two closely related communities and disciplines has implications for fusion centers .

under which model and legal regime are they operating ? .

as mentioned above , how proactive can the centers be in intelligence collection without violating civil liberties ? .

a lack of clarity on these issues can lead to fusion centers either taking a too conservative or too aggressive approach , either of which undermines their full productivity , and serves as an overall risk to the fusion center concept .

appendix b. map of current and planned fusion centers a methodological note research for this report included a review of literature related to state and regional fusion centers , primary source interviews with the majority of state fusion center leaders and operational directors , as well as with stakeholders within the federal government , including intelligence community ( ic ) organizations , department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) officials .

in the interest of engaging in open dialogue with the centers , the conversations were conducted on a "not for attribution basis. .

the inherent limitations of the survey method are acknowledged , but were adopted in the interest of efficiency and effectiveness .

other stakeholders and interested observers of state fusion centers outside the government , including individuals in academia , the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) , and state and local law enforcement were also consulted .

primary source interviews were conducted by the authors and were based on a survey they developed .

