the termination of over 40 years of quotas on january 1 , 2005 , ushered in a new era for the global trade in clothing and textiles .

an ad hoc multilateral system of quotas — originally established as a short - term measure to allow the united states and western europe to adjust to emerging competition from other parts of the world — was finally coming to an end .

after 10 years of transition under the world trade organization's ( wto ) agreement on textiles and clothing ( atc ) , international trade for clothing and textiles among wto members was to be no longer subject to quantity restrictions .

precisely how the end of quotas would affect u.s. clothing and textile trade was the subject of extensive research and some uncertainty .

while many studies predicted a shift in clothing and textile production to quota - constrained nations ( i.e. , those which reached or came close to their quotas ) , there was disagreement on the size and pace of the production shift .

nor was there consensus on which nations would suffer a decline in their clothing and textile exports as a consequence of the end of the atc .

despite their differences in opinion on the overall impact of the end of the atc , most studies concurred that one of the biggest beneficiaries would be the people's republic of china ( china ) .

with its large pool of low - cost skilled workers and abundant industrial capacity , china would be able to take advantage of the clothing and textile trade opportunities created by the removal of quotas .

however , the ability of china to expand its clothing and textile exports to the united states faced some constraints .

under the terms of china's wto accession , the united states and other wto members retained the option to impose safeguard measures on chinese clothing and textiles exports if they were proving "disruptive" to the domestic u.s. clothing and textile markets .

plus , if the united states could demonstrate that china's clothing and textiles exports were being subsidized in an inappropriate manner or sold below cost , the united states could impose countervailing or antidumping duties under existing u.s. trade remedy laws on chinese exports .

this report examines recent trade statistics to ascertain the initial effects of the end of quotas on u.s. clothing and textile trade with china and the rest of the world .

the international trade in textiles and clothing has long been subject to various forms of trade restrictions , including quotas .

over the last 40 years , there has been a gradual reduction of these trade barriers , generally under the auspices of either the wto , or its predecessor , the general agreement on trade and tariffs ( gatt ) .

not surprisingly , there were a number of studies done to predict what would happen to the international trade in clothing and textiles after the elimination of quotas prior to the termination of the atc on january 1 , 2005 .

these studies generally agreed that there would be shift in production to quota - constrained countries , but differed on the amount and speed of the shift .

china was repeatedly cited in these studies as a major beneficiary of the termination of quotas .

in summary , there was a fairly broad consensus on several aspects of clothing and textile trade after the termination of the atc .

analysts generally agreed that: global trade in clothing and textiles would grow more quickly after the removal of quotas ; china and india would increase their market shares for both clothing and textile exports , but there was no consensus on the amount of this increase , estimates for china varied from 3% to 10% ; the united states would import more of its clothing and textiles from china , ranging from one - third two - thirds of its imports ; u.s. clothing and textile manufacturers would reduce their operations , shut down factories and lay off workers due to increased competition from china , india and other suppliers ; one study estimated up to 630,00 job losses due to chinese imports ; preferential trade arrangements may buffer the impact of the quota removal for clothing and textile manufacturers in the caribbean , south and central america , the middle east , and africa ; there is a possibility that the united states , the eu , and other wto members may impose trade remedies in response to the increase in imports from china , india and other asian suppliers .

global trade figures for clothing provide partial confirmation of the experts' predictions for gains for china and india in post - atc trade ( see table 3 ) .

between 2004 and 2005 , total clothing exports increased by almost $16.5 billion , or 6.4% .

china's clothing exports , however , rose by $12.3 billion — an increase of 19.9% .

india's clothing exports in 2005 also rose substantially , up $1.7 billion , or 25.0% over the year before .

no other major clothing exporter experienced growth of over $1 billion between 2004 and 2005 .

together , china and india captured nearly 85% of the increase in clothing trade between 2004 and 2005 .

among the major clothing exporters , the losers were hong kong , mexico , romania and the united states .

hong kong's domestic exports of clothing decreased by just over $900 million between 2004 and 2005 , a decline of 11.1% .

mexico's clothing exports slipped 2.9% .

romania experienced a slight decline of a little over $90 million , while u.s. clothing exports dipped by about $61 million .

for the initial year of the post - atc era , global trade in clothing appears to be less a story of shifting production as one of emerging centers of growth .

while south korea and taiwan , both modest exporters of clothing when the atc was in effect , experienced export declines of 23.9% and 20.0% respectively , most of the major clothing exporters did not see a sharp drop in their exports .

instead , they witnessed modest export increases , while most of the growth in clothing trade was concentrated in china and to a lesser extent , india .

global textile trade experienced a similar change as clothing , but with more major winners and a different group of losers ( see table 4 ) .

china's year - on - year increase in textiles exports is nearly exactly as much as the global growth in textiles trade for 2005 .

pakistan and india also enjoyed double - digit growth in their textile exports , and turkey and united states experienced more modest gains that kept them in pace with global textile trade growth .

however , several traditional textile exporting nations saw significant declines in their export totals in 2005 .

germany , the second largest textile exporter in 2004 , saw their exports decline by 11.1% in 2005 , barely holding onto its number two status .

south korea's textiles exports slipped by 4.1% between 2004 and 2005 , while japan and taiwan had their exports diminish by 3.3% .

belgium and france also experienced minor falloffs in their textile exports in 2005 .

in summary , although both clothing and textile production did shift to china and india in 2005 , it was not as dramatic a shift as some experts had predicted .

instead , the data appears to indicate that existing clothing and textile operations continued to produce and export in 2005 at about the same levels that they did in 2004 .

however , increases in production tended to occur in china and in india .

as indicated in table 3 and table 4 , the united states remains a major exporter of both clothing and textiles .

it is also a major importer of both clothing and textiles ( see table 5 ) .

according to the world trade organization ( wto ) , the united states imported over $80 billion in clothing and nearly $23 billion in textiles in 2005 , more than any other wto member in both categories .

one significant difference between the global and u.s. clothing and textile trade is the relative size of the two markets .

for the global market , the trade in textiles is roughly three - quarters the size of trade in clothing .

however , in the u.s. market , total trade in textiles is about two - fifths the size of total trade in clothing , and the value of u.s. clothing imports is about four times the size of textile imports .

in addition , the united states runs a trade flow deficit for both textiles and clothing , despite being a major exporter for both product categories .

in 2004 , the u.s. trade deficit for clothing and textiles combined was over $79 billion , or 10.3% of its total trade deficit for the year .

in 2005 , the clothing and textile deficit exceeded $85 billion , or 10.4% of the year's merchandise trade deficit .

table 5 also implies that the united states did not experience a major surge in clothing and textile imports as a consequence of the termination of the atc quotas .

clothing imports increased 5.7% between 2004 and 2005 , and textile imports rose by 9.1% .

by comparison , total u.s. merchandise imports increased by 13.9% .

instead , as is shown below , there was a pronounced shift in the source of clothing and textiles imports between 2004 and 2005 , and an apparent carry - over effect between 2005 and 2006 .

for clothing , there was a sharp increase in clothing imports from china in 2005 , seemingly at the expense of mexico .

for textiles , china was again the main beneficiary in 2005 , and italy and pakistan were the main losers .

besides the potential effect on the u.s. international trade balance , any increase in clothing and textiles imports brought about by the termination of the atc could have an impact on the u.s. clothing and textile industry .

faced with an increase in the import of clothing and textile products , some u.s. manufacturers may no longer be as competitive as before and cut back or cease operations and dismiss some or all of their workers .

while it is relatively early , statistics for the u.s. clothing and textile industry provide mixed evidence on the impact of the atc quota elimination on domestic clothing and textile manufacturing and employment .

the sharp rise in clothing and textile imports from china after 2001 led to the united states invoking a safeguard provision included in china's wto accession agreement .

according to the accession agreement , the united states may impose import quotas of textiles and clothing from china if the increase in the value of shipments from china causes "market disruption" in the united states .

the terms of the agreement allow the united states to act unilaterally for one year , after which it must consult with the china in order to continue the quotas .

this special safeguard provision for chinese clothing and textile imports expires on december 31 , 2008 .

the legal authority to regulate the import of clothing and textiles is provided for in section 204 of the agriculture act of 1956 , as amended ( 7 u.s.c .

§ 1854 ) .

the administration of safeguard measures was delegated to the committee for the implementation of textile agreements ( cita ) by presidential executive order 11651 , as amended ( 37 f.r .

4699 ) .

cita set forth its procedures for considering safeguard requests for chinese clothing and textile imports in the federal register on may 19 , 2003 .

twice in 2003 , and again in 2004 , coalitions of u.s. clothing and textile manufacturers petitioned the cita requesting the imposition of quotas on the import of selected chinese clothing and textile products , arguing that a rapid increase in imports had led to the required "market disruption. .

in all three cases , the cita found on behalf of the petitioners and imposed quotas .

quotas were set for 10 separate clothing and textile categories in 2005 ( see table 9 ) .

the 100% utilization of 8 of the 10 quotas was generally seen as support for the idea that safeguards were preventing a more rapid increase in chinese imports .

however , the safeguards also forestalled the full effect of the termination of the atc .

some observers were concerned that there would be a second "surge" in chinese clothing and textile exports to the united states after these safeguards were removed .

based in part on this fear of a "second surge," in october and november 2004 , even before the atc quotas were lifted , another coalition of u.s. clothing manufacturers and labor unions petitioned the cita arguing that the anticipated increase in chinese imports would cause a market disruption and that the cita should impose preemptive quotas on certain clothing and textile products .

in a move that surprised some observers , the cita agreed to consider the so - called "threat - based" petitions .

while cita was considering the various petitions , china and the united states began negotiations on the possibility of restricting the rate of increase of clothing and textile exports to the united states .

on november 6 , 2005 , china and the united states signed the "memorandum of understanding between the governments of the united states of america and the people's republic of china concerning trade in textile and apparel products," or the "u.s. - china mou. .

the u.s. - china mou covers most , but not all , categories of clothing and textiles for the years 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 .

for clothing , the rate of increase of imports was set at 10% in 2006 , 12.5% in 2007 , and 15% in 2008 .

for textiles , the annual allowable rate of increase was set at 12.5% in 2006 and 2007 , and 15% in 2008 .

the enforcement of the safeguards was to be done cooperatively , using an electronic visa information system ( elvis ) .

following the announcement of the signing of the u.s. - china mou , cita terminated its consideration of the pending petitions .

administrative oversight of the u.s. - china mou is handled by u.s. customs and border protection in the united states , and the ministry of commerce in china .

under china's provisional "measures for administration on textile export," export visas are allocated among chinese exporters via an electronic bidding process .

as a result , chinese exporters must pay for the opportunity to export restricted clothing and textiles to the united states .

in 2006 , none of the 22 separate quotas established in the mou were fully utilized , according to u.s. customs and border protection ( see table 10 ) .

only four categories were more than 80% utilized and one — category 666 , that includes bed linens , table linens , and curtains — used less than 4% of its quotas .

the under - utilization of the 2006 safeguard quotas raises questions about the impact of the protective measure .

some analysts have interpreted the excess quota as evidence that the fear of a "second surge" was misplaced , and that the market adjustments to the termination of the atc took place in 2005 .

others , however , believe that u.s. importers became very risk adverse in 2006 , and intentionally avoiding purchasing constrained products from chinese suppliers in 2006 .

in general , the trade data confirm many of the predictions by the market analysts prior to the termination of the atc quotas .

global clothing and textile trade is growing more rapidly after 2005 than it did before 2005 and china is a major beneficiary of the greater growth .

china secured nearly three - quarters of the year - on - year increase in clothing trade between 2004 and 2005 , and its increase in textiles exports between 2004 and 2005 was slightly greater than the total rise on global textiles trade .

plus , as predicted , the united states is importing more of its clothing and textiles from china .

however , when examined more closely , there are patterns in the trade data that either were not anticipated or are not consistent with some of the analysts' predictions .

for example , while there has been the expected market growth , both in the global and u.s. market , the foreseen major shifts in production have not occurred .

instead , the data suggests that most nations were able to maintain the value of their clothing and textiles exports after the termination of the atc quotas , possibly indicating that the preferential trade programs were helping some nations' clothing and textile trade .

however , most countries were unable to significantly increase their exports , while china — and to a lesser extent , india — were able to expand their exports .

in other words , china was able to increase its share of the global and u.s. clothing and textile markets by capturing most of the market growth .

also , the "surge" in chinese clothing and textile exports in 2005 was smaller than many analysts suggested it would be .

for example , china's shares of the u.s. clothing and textile markets in 2006 — 29.1% for clothing and 14.9% for textiles — is well below the levels projected by the atmi study .

this in part may be due to the imposition of safeguard measures in 2005 and 2006 .

however , the under utilization of the u.s. - china mou quotas in 2006 may indicate that much of the increase in chinese clothing and textile exports has passed .

similarly , u.s. clothing and trade data and industry figures for the u.s. clothing and textile industry present a mixed picture of the impact of the end of the atc quotas on u.s. clothing and textile production and employment .

the value of u.s. clothing textile production rose during the initial stages of the atc quota phase out , with the major declines starting after china's wto accession .

by contrast , employment for both the clothing and textile industry declined steadily from 1990 to 2005 , but not necessarily concurrently with the elimination of quotas .

as previously discussed , the u.s. utilization of safeguard measures may have mitigated some of the negative impact of the termination of the atc quotas .

however , the fact that the 2006 quotas were not fully used would seem to indicate that the safeguards are not necessarily preventing chinese imports from sub - planting u.s. manufacturers and workers .

an unanticipated — and perhaps , unpredictable — trend in the u.s. trade data was the substantial rise in clothing and textile imports starting prior to the end of the atc quotas .

in the clothing market , u.s. total imports jumped by $5.8 billion in 2003 , touching off a four - year run of rapid increases .

in the textile market , the big increase in total imports occurred in 2004 — not in 2005 or 2006 .

besides the possible effects of the safeguard measures , another possible explanation for the pre - atc termination growth was china's accession to the wto in december 2001 .

one final prediction that proved to be comparatively accurate was the use of trade remedies by the united states .

yet , there are two aspects of the use of trade remedies that the analysts did not foretell .

first , the "pre - emptive" petitioning of the cita for safeguard measures prior to january 1 , 2005 was unprecedented .

second , following the announced preliminary countervailing duty decision by the u.s. department of commerce on chinese coated paper , there are reports that a coalition of u.s. clothing and textile companies is consulting with lawyers about initiating a claim against chinese clothing and textile imports .

the termination of atc quotas in 2005 and the ensuing growth of clothing and textile imports , regardless of any causal relationship between the two events , have added clothing and textile trade to growing list of bilateral trade issues between the united states and china .

to a limited degree , the accelerated growth in chinese clothing and textiles exports to the united states over the last few years has contributed to mounting u.s. bilateral trade deficit .

one of the unanswered questions raised by the imposition of quotas under the u.s. - china mou is if there will be a "surge" in chinese imports if the quotas lapse at the end of 2008 .

if there is such a surge , it is also uncertain if u.s. manufacturers will choose to respond by petitioning the cita for the imposition of safeguard measures under the general safeguard mechanism ( available until 2013 ) or pursue the matter with the u.s. international trade commission by requesting countervailing duties .

in either case , current trends in the u.s. clothing and textile markets dovetail with several legal issues that congress may choose to address .

several bills have already been introduced — h.r .

708 , h.r .

1229 , and s. 974 — that address the application of countervailing duties to non - market economies , such as china .

other legislation — h.r .

321 , h.r .

782 , h.r .

1002 , s. 364 , and s. 796 — seek to reduce the rise in chinese imports by addressing china's alleged policy of intentionally undervaluing its currency. .

in addition , the continued decline in clothing and textile employment in the united states raises the possibility that u.s. clothing and textile manufacturers and workers may seek trade adjustment assistance .

on march 28 , 2007 , the trade adjustment assistance reform act of 2007 ( h.r .

1729 ) was introduced , seeking to amend the trade act of 1974 to provide greater eligibility for clothing and textile workers for assistance , as well as to increase federal funding for the assistance program .

finally , the apparent ability of most nations to preserve their clothing and textile export volumes to the united states despite the rise in chinese goods may signal that the various trade promotion programs are proving beneficial .

programs such as gsp , the andean trade preference act , and the caribbean basin initiative may protect and promote the development of competitive industries in less industrialized nations .

similarly , free trade agreements — such as the north american free trade agreement — may help provide the edge clothing and textile manufacturers in beneficiary countries need to compete against chinese suppliers .

with several of these trade preference programs coming up for renewal — and a number of free trade agreements possibly coming up for ratification — congress may wish to consider the case of the clothing and textile industry in the post - atc era as part of their deliberations .

