in the united states , being born to an unmarried mother is more likely to lead to less favorable outcomes than is being born to a married mother .

in the u.s. , births to unmarried women ( i.e. , nonmarital births ) are widespread , touching families of varying income class , race , ethnicity , and geographic area .

many analysts attribute this to changed attitudes about fertility and marriage .

they find that many adult women and teenage girls no longer feel obliged to marry before , or as a consequence of , having children .

during the 66-year period from 1940 to 2006 , the percentage of births to unmarried women increased by a multiple of nine , from 3.8% in 1940 to 38.5% in 2006 .

this represented about 1.6 million children in 2006 .

"nonmarital births" can be first births , second births , or higher - order births ; they can precede a marriage or occur to a woman who has never married .

"nonmarital births" can occur to divorced or widowed women .

moreover , a woman with several children may have had one or more births within marriage and one or more births outside of marriage .

many of the children born outside of marriage are raised by a single parent ( who may or may not have a "significant other" ) .

parents and family life are the foundation that influences a child's well - being throughout the child's development and into adulthood .

the family also is the economic unit that obtains and manages the resources that meet a child's basic needs while also playing an instrumental role in stimulating the child's cognitive , social , and emotional development .

children born outside of marriage often are raised solely by their mothers , but sometimes live in other types of family situations .

some are raised solely by their fathers , some are raised by both biological parents who are not married to each other ( i.e. , cohabiting ) .

others may be raised by a mother who is living with a male partner .

still others may be living with a mother who is divorced from someone other than their father .

additionally , some may be living with a mother whose husband died ( i.e. , the mother is a widow but the child was not fathered by the deceased husband ) .

although most children who grow up in mother - only families , father - only families , step - parent families , or families in which the mother is cohabiting with a male partner become well - adjusted , productive adults , a large body of research indicates that children who grow up with only one biological parent in the home are more likely to be financially worse off and have worse socioeconomic outcomes ( even after income differences are taken into account ) compared to children who grow up with both biological parents in the home .

to emphasize , this research indicates that all family situations in which both biological parents are not living together ( regardless of whether the mother is divorced , separated , widowed , or was never married ) are more likely to result in less favorable outcomes for children than a family situation in which the child is living in a household with both biological parents .

it is also noteworthy that some researchers conclude that even among children living with both biological parents , living with married parents generally results in better outcomes for children than living with cohabiting parents mainly because marriage is a more stable and longer lasting situation than cohabitation .

the federal concern about nonmarital childbearing centers on its costs via claims on public assistance .

these federal costs primarily reflect the fact that many of these "nonmarital children" are raised in single - parent families that are financially disadvantaged .

federal concern also arises because of the aforementioned research indicating that children living in single - parent families are more likely to face negative outcomes ( financially , socially , and emotionally ) than children who grow up with both of their biological parents in the home .

as mentioned earlier , many children born outside of marriage are raised in single - parent families .

this report analyzes the trends in nonmarital childbearing in the u.s. , discusses some of the characteristics of unwed mothers , addresses some issues involving the fathers of children born outside of marriage , covers many of the reasons for nonmarital childbearing , examines the impact of nonmarital births on families and on the nation , and presents the public policy interventions that have been used to prevent nonmarital births or alleviate some of the problems that are associated with nonmarital childbearing .

this report concludes with commentary on public policy interventions — healthy marriage programs , responsible fatherhood programs , and teen pregnancy prevention strategies — that may receive renewed attention and debate in the 111 th congress .

nonmarital childbearing sometimes results in negative outcomes for children mainly because children born outside of marriage are generally not raised by both of their biological parents but rather by single mothers .

 ( children living in a household maintained by a never - married mother are among the poorest population groups in the u.s. ) even in cases in which cohabiting parents start off raising their children together , it is often of short duration .

this section presents some of the major findings of the report .

after stabilizing in the 1990s , nonmarital births are again increasing .

in 2006 , 38.5% of all births were nonmarital births .

this surpasses the percentage in 1960 that prompted some policymakers to claim that the black family was disintegrating because a large share of nonmarital births were to black women .

in 2006 , 70.7% of african american births were nonmarital births compared with 64.6% of american indian births , 49.9% of hispanic births , 26.6% of white births , and 16.3% of asian births .

nonmarital births can be first births , second births , or higher - order births ; they can precede a marriage or occur to a woman who has never married .

nonmarital births can occur to divorced or widowed women .

moreover , a woman with several children may have had one or more births within marriage and one or more births outside of marriage .

after declining for 14 straight years , all teen births increased in 2006 .

contrary to public perception , women in their early twenties , not teens , have the highest percentage of births outside of marriage .

in 2005 , women ages 20 through 24 accounted for 38% of the 1.5 million nonmarital births .

the comparable statistic for females under age 20 was 23% .

however , many women who have nonmarital births in their twenties were also teen moms .

births to teenagers are an important component of nonmarital births because more than 80% of births to teenagers are nonmarital births .

although women have been postponing marriage , women of all ages do not view marriage as a requirement for sexual activity .

with the longer time span between the onset of sexual activity and marriage , the trend of high numbers of nonmarital births may / could continue .

although nonmarital births are increasing , many more children than in previous decades live with both biological parents in cohabiting situations for some period of time .

according to analysts , marriage is considered a better option for children than cohabitation because marriage is more stable ( i.e. , lasts longer ) than cohabiting situations .

growing up in a single - parent family is one of many factors that put children at risk of less favorable outcomes .

the economic , social , psychological , and emotional costs associated with children with absent noncustodial parents are significant .

nevertheless , most children who grow up in single - parent families become productive adults .

children living in a single - parent home are more likely to do poorly in school , have emotional and behavioral problems , become teenage parents , and have poverty - level income ( as children and adults ) compared to children living with married biological parents .

in 2007 , 67.8% of the 73.7 million u.s. children ( under age 18 ) lived with both of their married parents , 2.9% lived with both parents who were not married , 17.9% lived with their mother , and 2.6% lived with their father .

the advent of multiple relationships that produce children adds complexity to the problem .

these relationships , often referred to as multiple partner fertility ( i.e. , when mothers and fathers have had children with more than one partner ) , generally complicate the family situation of children .

compared to women without nonmarital children , women with children who were born outside of marriage are less like to marry ; if they do marry , their spouses are more likely to be economically disadvantaged .

demographically , without nonmarital births , the u.s. would be far below population replacement levels .

having the birth rate reach the replacement rate is generally considered desirable by demographers and sociologists because it means a country is producing enough young people to replace and support aging workers without population growth being so high that it taxes national resources .

nonmarital births are expected to increase over time because of a projected population shift toward more minorities .

the census bureau projects that by 2050 , 54% of the u.s. population will consist of minority groups ( i.e. , hispanics , blacks , indians , and asians ) .

minorities , now roughly one - third of the u.s. population , are expected to become the majority in 2042 , with the nation projected to be 54% minority in 2050 .

by 2023 , minorities will represent more than half of all children .

the hispanic population is projected to nearly triple , and its share of the nation's total population is projected to double , from 15% to 30% .

thus , nearly one in three u.s. residents will be hispanic .

in 2005 , 48% of hispanic births were nonmarital births .

in this report , births to unmarried women are termed nonmarital births .

data on nonmarital births are usually expressed by three measures: the number of nonmarital births , the percent of births that are nonmarital , and the rate of nonmarital births per 1,000 unmarried women .

the number of nonmarital births provides the absolute count of babies who are born to women ( including adolescents ) , who are not married .

the percent of all births that are nonmarital is the number of all nonmarital births divided by all births ( both nonmarital births and marital births ) .

the nonmarital birth rate is defined as the number of nonmarital births per 1,000 unmarried women .

during the 66-year period from 1940 through 2006 , there was a 17-fold increase in the number of babies born to unmarried women living in the united states .

the number of babies born to unmarried women increased from 89,500 in 1940 to 1,641,700 in 2006 .

in 2006 , 38.5% of all u.s. births were to unmarried women , up from 3.8% in 1940 — a nine - fold increase .

this section discusses some of the characteristics of unmarried mothers .

it includes some of the demographic characteristics like race , ethnicity , and age as well as other features like whether the unwed mother has additional children , her income status , whether or not she marries , and whether or not she is in a cohabiting relationship .

some of the highlights include the following: black women are more likely to have children outside of marriage than other racial or ethnic groups ; it is not teenagers but rather women in their early twenties who have the highest percentage of births outside of marriage ; single motherhood is more common among women with less education than among well - educated women ; a substantial share of nonmarital births ( 44% ) were to women who had already given birth to one or more children ; a significant number of unwed mothers are in cohabiting relationships ; and women who have a nonmarital birth are less likely than other women to eventually marry .

it has been pointed out that fathers are far too often left out of discussions about nonmarital childbearing .

it goes without saying that fathers are an integral factor in nonmarital childbearing .

it appears that one result of the so - called sexual revolution was that many men increasingly believed that women could and should control their fertility via contraception and abortion .

as a result , many men have become less willing to marry the women they impregnate .

there are myriad reasons why so many children live in homes without their fathers .

some reasons are related to choices people make about fertility , marriage , and cohabitation .

but others are the result of unexpected events , such as illness , or incarceration .

some noncustodial fathers are active in the lives of their children , whereas others are either unable or unwilling to be involved in their children's lives .

whatever the reason , a father's absence from the home results in social , psychological , emotional , and financial costs to children and economic costs to the nation .

a 2008 report maintains that the federal government spends about $99.8 billion per year in providing financial and other support ( via fourteen federal social welfare programs ) to father - absent families .

this section of the report discusses the race and ethnicity of fathers to children born outside of marriage , age of fathers , and the importance of establishing paternity for children born outside of marriage .

one of the prominent , but perhaps not unexpected , findings related to fathers and nonmarital births is that when older men have sexual relationships with young women it often results in nonmarital births .

declining marriage rates , increased childbearing among unmarried women , increased number of unmarried women in the childbearing ages ( i.e. , 15-44 ) , and decreased childbearing among married women have contributed to the rising share of children being born to unwed women .

many social science analysts attribute the increase in nonmarital births to the decades - long decline of "shotgun marriages," rather than to an increased incidence of nonmarital conceptions .

they contend that when the social pressure to get married once pregnancy became obvious ended , the likelihood that women would marry between conception and birth decreased substantially .

the entry of more and more women into the paid labor force also made childbearing outside of marriage more economically feasible .

through the 1960s , most americans believed that parents should stay in an unhappy marriage for the sake of the children .

by the 1970s , this view was not as prominent .

divorce and not getting married to the father of a child — which were generally considered to not be in the best interest of the child — were acceptable if it resulted in the happiness of the adult .

thus , many observers and analysts agree that marriage is now more likely to be viewed through a framework of adult fulfillment rather than through a framework of childbearing and childrearing .

factors that have contributed to an unprecedented level of nonmarital childbearing include an increase in the median age of first marriage ( i.e. , marriage postponement ) , delays in childbearing of married couples , increased marital dissolution , an increase in the number of cohabiting couples , increased sexual activity outside of marriage , participation in risky behaviors that often lead to sex , improper use of contraceptive methods , and lack of marriageable partners .

this section of the report does not try to verify , refute , or support any of the reasons commonly cited for nonmarital births .

instead , its purpose is to give the reader a better understanding of the nonmarital birth phenomenon by synthesizing and simplifying the large body of research on the subject and presenting the views of analysts and other observers in a way that helps to clarify the complexity of the topic .

although 38.5% of all u.s. births in 2006 were to women who were not married , 23.3% of the 73.7 million u.s. children under age 18 lived in mother - only families in 2006 .

the difference occurs because the proportion of births to unmarried women has increased over the past several decades and because some of these women married and some were in cohabiting relationships .

a wide body of research indicates that children who grow up with only one biological parent in the home are more likely to be financially worse off and have worse socioeconomic outcomes ( even after income differences are taken into account ) compared to children who grow up with both biological parents in the home .

specifically , children living in a single - parent home are more likely to do poorly in school , have emotional and behavioral problems , become teenage parents , and have poverty - level incomes ( as children and adults ) than children living with married biological parents .

further , children in single - parent families are six times more likely to be poor than children in two - parent families .

it has been reported that 22% of children in one - parent families will experience poverty during childhood for seven years or more , as compared to only 2% of children in two - parent families .

in 2007 , 7.5% of children under age 18 living in married - couple families were living below the poverty level compared to 38.3% of children living with mother - only families .

one analyst makes the following assertion regarding two - parent families: social science research is almost never conclusive .

there are always methodological difficulties and stones left unturned .

yet in three decades of work as a social scientist , i know of few other bodies of data in which the weight of evidence is so decisively on one side of the issue: on the whole , for children , two - parent families are preferable to single - parent and stepfamilies .

others assert that although marriage of biological parents is associated with greater child well - being , little is known about why or how much of the relationship is caused by marriage and how much by other factors .

in other words , it could be that the effect of marriage on child well - being is derived not from marriage itself , but rather from the distinctive characteristics of the individuals who marry and stay married ( sometimes referred to as the "selection effect" ) .

it is sometimes argued that some of the problems associated with non - intact families may be the effect of poverty rather than the father's absence .

further , most children who grow up in mother - only families or step - parent families become well - adjusted , productive adults .

for some children , the absence of the father may result in freedom from an abusive or otherwise difficult situation and may result in a more supportive loving mother - child relationship .

this section reviews assertions that it is not just the family that is negatively affected by nonmarital childbearing , but the taxpayer as well .

it discusses some of the impacts of financial and demographic factors associated with nonmarital births on the population as a whole .

in recognition of the potential long - term consequences of nonmarital births , the federal government's strategy to nonmarital childbearing has been varied .

the federal government acknowledges that an effective approach for teenagers may be inappropriate for older women .

some observers criticize women much farther along the age spectrum who have nonmarital births as being selfish and not looking long - range to what would be in the best interest of their offspring .

other observers counter , pointing out that it is not the unmarried , college - educated , thirty - something - year - olds with well - paying jobs who are worried that their time for having a child is running out that should be a concern .

rather it is the millions of women for whom single motherhood is the norm , who entrench themselves and their children in a less favorable economic lifestyle by having a child outside of a healthy marriage .

many of these women become mothers in their teenage years .

in order to address these two distinct groups of females , federal policy toward teens has primarily focused on pregnancy prevention programs , whereas federal policy toward older women has focused on healthy marriage programs .

income support programs , such as the child support enforcement program and the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant program , that attempt to reduce or ameliorate negative financial consequences that are sometimes associated with nonmarital childbearing are available to mothers of all age groups .

this section discusses the public policy interventions ( 1 ) directed at teens , such as abstinence education programs , comprehensive sex education programs , and youth programs ; ( 2 ) focused on adults , namely the healthy marriage programs and the responsible fatherhood programs ( that usually include several components dealing with improving communication skills with respect to the other parent ) ; and ( 3 ) provided to all persons regardless of age such as family planning programs , adoption services , and federal income support programs — the child support enforcement and temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) programs .

the language regarding births to unmarried women has changed in significant ways .

what once were referred to as "bastard" or "illegitimate" children are now termed "out - of - wedlock," "outside of marriage," or "nonmarital" births .

the stigma and shame that had once been attached to these children is no longer recognized by the public .

further , some commentators argue that the facts have been twisted in such a way that mothers are justified in having a nonmarital birth and that having a baby without a husband represents a higher level of maternal devotion and sacrifice than having a baby with a husband .

they assert that it is often the case that adults pursue individual happiness in their private relationships , which is in direct conflict with the needs of children for stability , security , and permanence in their family lives .

some observers contend that the problem is not the weakening of marriage ( about 75% of all women ages 15 and older eventually marry ) , but rather the de - linking of marriage and having children and the abdication of the traditional view of marriage as a life - long commitment .

some researchers and policymakers argue that although couple relationships are a private matter , an overwhelming body of evidence suggests that not all family structures produce equal outcomes for children .

they maintain that there is widespread agreement that a healthy , stable ( i.e. , low - conflict ) family with two biological parents is the best environment for children .

finally , some observers assert that we as a society have not strayed too far , and that it is not too late to return to the somewhat old - fashioned , but not simplistic , precept of falling in love , getting married , and having a baby , in that order .

although marriage and family life are generally considered private issues , they have become part of the public arena primarily because of public policies that help families affected by negative outcomes associated with nonmarital births to maintain a minimum level of economic sufficiency .

the abundance of research on the subject of the impact on children of various living environments also raises the stakes — in that it is now almost unanimously agreed that children living with both biological parents fare better on a host of measures — economic , social , psychological , and emotional — than children living with a single parent or in a step - parent or cohabiting situation .

one of the things that this report highlights is that although there has been a rise in nonmarital births , it does not mean that there has been a subsequent rise in mother - only families .

instead , it reflects the rise in the number of couples who are in cohabiting relationships .

because the number of women living in a cohabiting situation has increased substantially over the last several decades , many children start off in households in which both of their biological parents reside .

nonetheless , cohabiting family situations are disrupted or dissolved much more frequently than married - couple families .

as discussed in an earlier section , the federal government funds a number of programs that seek to ( 1 ) reduce or eliminate nonmarital childbearing or ( 2 ) ameliorate some of the negative outcomes often associated with children of unmarried parents .

the rest of this section highlights several interventions that may receive further attention and more debate in congress .

although this report does not base the analysis of increased nonmarital childbearing by segmenting teen births from other births , it is important to note that more than half of first nonmarital births are to teens .

this means that policies that are successful in reducing births to teenagers would significantly lessen the problem of nonmarital childbearing .

the difference between the average age of first intercourse ( seventeen ) and the age at first marriage ( twenty - five ) for women is eight years .

for the majority of adult women , living without a married spouse does not mean living without sex , nor in many cases does it mean living without having children .

in 2005 , almost 20% of the women ages 40 and older who gave birth had a child born outside of marriage .

for women ages 20 through 24 , the percentage was almost 60% .

these figures reflect the new paradigm of women in all age groups , not just teenagers , having children outside of marriage .

some observers and analysts assert that new strategies that account for this new paradigm must be developed to significantly reduce nonmarital births .

others argue that the nation must decide whether to try to change the fertility behavior of women in their thirties and forties .

they contend that given the new economic framework and the scarcity of resources in most areas of public finance , it may be wiser to pursue a strategy that focuses primarily on adolescents and women in their early twenties .

given the patterns of swift transitions into and out of marriage and the high rate of single parenthood , a family policy that relies too heavily on marriage will not help the many children who will live in single - parent and cohabiting families — many of them poor — during most of their formative years .

moreover , national data from the 2002 panel of the national survey of family growth indicate that 14% of white men , 32% of black men , and 15% of hispanic men had children with more than one woman .

thus , children in the same family may potentially face different outcomes .

for example , children with the same mother and different fathers may potentially face less desirable outcomes if their mother marries the biological father of their half - brothers or half - sisters .

the advantages married couples and their children have over those in other living arrangements led the bush administration and congress to propose marriage promotion initiatives .

the knowledge that american society has changed in ways that will no longer permit all children to live with their biological parents led the bush administration and congress to support responsible fatherhood programs .

both the healthy marriage programs and the responsible fatherhood programs were funded by the same legislation ( i.e. , p.l .

109-171 under the auspices of the tanf block grant program ) .

the rationale for implementing these two approaches in a complementary manner was to promote the best interest of children .

although there was some animosity between proponents of healthy marriage programs and proponents of responsible fatherhood programs when they were debated during the period from 2001 through 2005 , there is a growing consensus that the two programs can be implemented in a complementary manner to promote the best interest of children .

some of the impact analysis on the two programs , based on scientifically designed evaluations with experimental and control groups , is to be completed during the next congress .

this may help the 111 th congress and the new administration to determine whether or not they need to shift priorities between the programs , redistribute funding , or make other changes that will improve the effectiveness of both programs .

similarly , there is now some discussion about a middle ground between abstinence education and comprehensive sex education .

some call this approach abstinence - plus .

under the abstinence - plus education approach , participants are given a hierarchy of safe - sex strategies .

at the top of the hierarchy is the promotion of sexual abstinence as the safest route to pregnancy prevention and hiv and std prevention .

recognizing that some participants will not be abstinent , the abstinence - plus approach encourages individuals to use condoms and to adopt other safer - sex strategies .

proponents of the abstinence - plus approach contend that it does not encourage teens or young adults to have more sex , it just encourages them to do so safely if they do have sex .

some policymakers maintain that this middle ground approach accepts the reality that sexual activity among older teens and young adults is an entrenched by - product of today's society .

they argue that it is not bad policy but rather good planning to educate persons who thought they would remain abstinent until marriage , but do not , with the appropriate information regarding contraceptive methods .

they contend that an abstinence - plus education approach is in the best interest of young people and in the best interest of the nation .

as mentioned earlier , no federal funding is specifically earmarked for comprehensive sex education .

some observers contend that the debate over abstinence - only education versus comprehensive sex education will likely continue for several more years .

they surmise that the issue of which approach is more appropriate and more effective for adolescents and older teens may receive renewed attention by the 111 th congress and the new administration .

they also note that the abstinence - plus approach may be further scrutinized within the context of the debate on abstinence - only versus comprehensive sex education .

