chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy code is used by financially troubled business debtors that want to reorganize their financial affairs so that they may remain in business rather than liquidate .

although a trustee is appointed in chapter 7 liquidations , in a business reorganization under chapter 11 , the debtor generally remains in possession and no trustee is appointed , thus allowing those most familiar with the business to continue managing it .

the bankruptcy code generally provides debtors the opportunity to either assume or reject executory contracts in existence at the time the bankruptcy petition is filed .

one sort of executory contract , collective bargaining agreements ( cbas ) , is treated somewhat differently .

although rejection of any executory contract is subject to the approval of the court , for most contracts , the business judgment rule applies and courts generally approve rejections that the debtor deems to be in its business interest .

rejection of cbas must meet a higher standard .

section 1113 of the bankruptcy code provides the procedures that must be followed to reject a cba .

recently introduced legislation would modify several sections of the bankruptcy code , including â§ 1113 .

h.r .

3652 and its companion bill , s. 2092 , were introduced by representative conyers and senator kennedy and are entitled the "protecting employees and retirees in business bankruptcies act of 2007. .

in this report , the two bills will be referred to as either h.r .

3652 or "the bill. .

this report's analysis of the bill will be limited to the modifications it proposes for â§ 1113 of the bankruptcy code .

these modifications are found in â§ 8 of the bill .

in its findings section , the bill asserts that despite recently enacted provisions to limit executive compensation , executive pay enhancements flourish in business bankruptcies at the expense of workers and retirees .

according to the bill , workers and retirees are being disproportionately burdened in business bankruptcies .

these workers and retirees have no way to diversify the risk of an employer's bankruptcy and are least able to absorb the losses imposed .

h.r .

3652 urges "[c]omprehensive reform ... to remedy these fundamental inequities in the bankruptcy process and to recognize the unique firm - specific investment by employees and retirees in their employers' business through their labor. .

in 1984 , the bankruptcy code was amended to add 11 u.s.c .

â§ 1113 , which outlines the requirements that must be met before a court can approve rejection of a collective bargaining agreement ( cba ) by a debtor company using chapter 11 to reorganize .

the section applies only to chapter 11 bankruptcies .

although there are no committee reports to explain the reason for adding 11 u.s.c .

â§ 1113 , its addition followed the u.s. supreme court's holding in national labor relations board v. bildisco and bildisco .

it is generally believed that congress added the section in response to bildisco .

bildisco was decided in february 1984 , resolving a split between the circuits regarding the standard for rejection of a cba .

the court held that rejection required that the agreement be burdensome to the debtor company and that rejection was favored after balancing the equities of the specific case .

the court also held that the debtor in possession did not automatically assume the cba post - petition and would not violate â§ 8 ( a ) ( 5 ) of the national labor relations act ( nlra ) if it unilaterally changed the terms of a cba prior to the bankruptcy court's approval of rejection of that agreement .

by adding â§ 1113 , congress provided both a procedure and a standard for rejection of cbas and clarified that they could not be rejected under 11 u.s.c .

â§ 365 as are other executory contracts .

furthermore , unilateral changes to the cba were addressed and generally prohibited .

h.r .

3652 proposes a number of changes to existing subsections of 11 u.s.c .

â§ 1113 as well as adding six new subsections .

as written , the bill would entirely replace the text of the first three subsections ; however , the actual change to the text of the first subsection is minimal .

at first glance , the bill appears to make dramatic changes in the bankruptcy code , but in some cases , the bill's language may be clarifying the code rather than substantively changing it .

in other cases , the language in the bill may be intended to either legislate resolution of some point of law that has been disputed in the courts or legislatively overrule existing case law .

however , since there are no committee reports as yet , crs cannot discern with certainty the sponsors' intent in proposing the changes .

the proposed changes will be discussed in order , subsection by subsection , with accompanying discussion about the current state of the law , including ambiguities in the current code , various courts' interpretations , and scholarly writings about 11 u.s.c .

â§ 1113 .

all headings referencing a subsection of 11 u.s.c .

â§ 1113 refer to the subsections as proposed by this bill .

in its findings , the bill states that congress finds that chapter 11 was enacted "to protect jobs and enhance enterprise value for all stakeholders," but is , instead , being used to "caus[e] the burdens of bankruptcy to fall disproportionately and overwhelmingly on employees and retirees. .

revising the process for rejection of cbas is one of the ways this bill proposes to rectify the inequities it asserts .

for many companies in bankruptcy , expense for employees is the largest expense in the budget , and some modification of that expense may be essential to their successful reorganization .

section 1113 , as it currently exists , has provided labor groups with protection from debtor companies' unfettered rejections of cbas , but has also provided a method for debtor companies to reject cbas when they could not reach a compromise with the authorized representatives of the labor groups .

the proposed revisions to section 1113 would constrain both debtor companies and the courts when debtors file under chapter 11 .

the bill clearly contemplates allowing labor groups to have a greater , possibly definitive , role in determining the feasibility of reorganization .

labor groups , but not debtors , would be allowed to request arbitration rather than a court hearing to determine approval of a debtor's request to reject a cba .

in certain circumstances , the bill would allow labor groups to obtain future relief due to changed circumstances without having to bargain with the company .

the bill would also extend the right to strike to all labor groups whenever a cba was modified or rejected without their consent .

finally , the bill provides labor groups with a defined remedy for rejection of a cba , though courts might differ in their interpretation of that remedy .

companies in financial distress may argue that the bill's proposed changes to chapter 11 are insufficiently flexible to allow successful reorganization .

if that is their conclusion , they might try to resolve their financial difficulties outside of bankruptcy or choose to liquidate rather than reorganize .

