among the creative works that u.s. copyright law protects are sound recordings , which the copyright act defines as "works that result from the fixation of a series of musical , spoken , or other sounds. .

owners of copyrighted sound recordings have exclusive rights to reproduce , adapt , or distribute their works , or to perform them publicly by digital means .

normally , anyone who wants to exercise any of the copyright owner's exclusive rights must obtain the copyright owner's permission to do so , typically by direct negotiations between copyright owners and users .

however , the copyright law also provides several types of statutory , or compulsory , licenses for sound recordings .

these licenses allow third parties who pay statutorily prescribed fees to use copyrighted sound recordings under certain conditions and according to specific requirements , without having to negotiate private licensing agreements .

in 1998 , in the digital millennium copyright act ( dmca ) , congress amended several statutory licensing statutes to provide for and clarify the treatment of different types of internet broadcasting , or "webcasting. .

some transmissions of sound recordings are exempt from the public performance right , for example , a nonsubscription broadcast transmission ; a retransmission of a radio station's broadcast within 150 miles of its transmitter ; and a transmission to a business establishment for use in the ordinary course of its business .

in contrast , a digital transmission by an "interactive service" is not exempt from the public performance right , nor does it qualify for a statutory license .

the owner of an interactive service — one that enables a member of the public to request or customize the music that he or she receives — must negotiate a license , including royalty rates , directly with copyright owners .

but , two categories of webcasting that do qualify for a compulsory license are specified "preexisting" subscription services ( existing at the time of the dmca's enactment ) and "an eligible nonsubscription transmission. .

a subscription service is one that is limited to paying customers .

the broader category of webcasters who may qualify for the statutory license under 17 u.s.c .

§ 114 ( d ) are those who transmit music over the internet on a nonsubscription , noninteractive basis .

a licensee under § 114 may also qualify for a statutory license under 17 u.s.c .

§ 112 ( e ) to make multiple "ephemeral" — or temporary — copies of sound recordings solely for the purpose of transmitting the work by an entity legally entitled to publicly perform it .

the initial ratemaking proceeding for statutory royalty rates for webcasters for the period 1998 through 2005 ( referred to as "webcaster i" ) proved to be controversial , perhaps reflecting in some degree the relative newness of both the dmca and webcasting activity .

a copyright arbitration royalty panel ( carp ) issued a recommendation for the initial statutory royalty rate for eligible nonsubscription webcasters on february 20 , 2002 .

small - scale webcasters objected to the proposed rates .

in accordance with then - existing procedures , the librarian of congress , on the recommendation of the u.s .

copyright office , rejected the carp's recommendation and revised rates downward .

congress interceded as well with enactment of the small webcasters settlement act ( swsa ) of 2002 , p.l .

107-321 .

although very complex , the law permitted more options than the royalty rates established by the librarian's order .

qualifying small webcasters , for example , could elect to pay royalties based on a percentage of revenue or expenses rather than on a per - song per - listener basis .

the rate agreement made pursuant to swsa was published in the federal register but not codified in the code of federal regulations .

however , by swsa's own terms , its provisions were not to be considered in subsequent ratemaking proceedings .

subsequent to passage of the swsa and the initial ratemaking proceeding , congress substantially revised the underlying adjudicative process .

enactment of the copyright royalty and distribution reform act of 2004 , p.l .

108-419 , abolished the carp system and substituted a copyright royalty board composed of three standing copyright royalty judges .

rates established pursuant to the original ratemaking determination and swsa were to remain in effect through 2005 .

as required by law , in march 2007 the copyright royalty board announced royalty rates for the period that commenced ( retroactively ) from january 1 , 2006 , through december 31 , 2010 .

the general process for statutory license ratemaking factors in a three - month period , during which interested parties are encouraged to negotiate a settlement agreement .

in the absence of an agreement , written statements and testimony are gathered , discovery takes place , hearings are held , and the copyright royalty board issues a ruling .

notice announcing commencement of the "webcaster ii" proceedings was published on february 16 , 2005 .

on march 9 , 2007 , the copyright royalty board issued its decision , which was published as a final rule and order on may 1 , 2007 .

the final determination of the crb establishes new rates for commercial and noncommercial webcasters who qualify for the § 114 compulsory license ; the decision is effective on july 15 , 2007 .

rates are as follows: for commercial webcasters: $.0008 per performance for 2006 , $.0011 per performance for 2007 , $.0014 per performance for 2008 , $.0018 per performance for 2009 , and $.0019 per performance for 2010 .

this includes fees for making an ephemeral recording under 17 u.s.c .

§ 112 .

for noncommercial webcasters: ( i ) for internet transmissions totaling less than 159,140 aggregate tuning hours ( ath ) a month , an annual per channel or per station performance royalty of $500 in 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 .

 ( ii ) for internet transmissions totaling more than 159,140 aggregate tuning hours ( ath ) a month , a performance royalty of $.0008 per performance for 2006 , $.0011 per performance for 2007 , $.0014 per performance for 2008 , $.0018 per performance for 2009 , and $.0019 per performance for 2010 .

these rates include fees for making an ephemeral recording under 17 u.s.c .

§ 112 .

minimum fee .

commercial and noncommercial webcasters will pay an annual , nonrefundable minimum fee of $500 for each calendar year or part thereof .

this rate structure does not make special provision for "small" webcasters , who were addressed in the swsa by reference to revenues .

the standard for establishing rates , set forth by statute , is known as the "willing buyer / willing seller" standard .

the determination is informed by the "webcaster i" initial royalty proceedings of the carp .

in essence , both the previous carp and the current copyright royalty board attempt to implement the statutorily mandated standard to reach a royalty rate .

explaining its interpretation of the governing language , the crb wrote the following: webcaster i clarified the relationship of the statutory factors to the willing buyer / willing seller standard .

the standard requires a determination of the rates that a willing buyer and willing seller would agree upon in the marketplace .

in making this determination , the two factors in section 114 ( f ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( i ) and ( ii ) must be considered , but neither factor defines the standard .

they do not constitute additional standards , nor should they be used to adjust the rates determined by the willing buyer / willing seller standard .

the statutory factors are merely to be considered , along with other relevant factors , to determine the rates under the willing buyer / willing seller standard .

the board considered the proposals of representatives for "small" webcasters that rates be structured as a percentage of revenue , but ultimately rejected them: in short , among the parties on both sides who have proposed rates covering commercial webcasters , only small commercial webcasters propose a fee structure based solely on revenue .

however , in making their proposal , this group of five webcasters clearly is unconcerned with the actual structure of the fee , except to the extent that a revenue - based fee structure — especially one in which the percent of revenue fee is a single digit number ( i.e. , 5% ) — can protect them against the possibility that their costs would ever exceed their revenues.... small commercial webcasters' focus on the amount of the fee , rather than how it should be structured , is further underlined by the absence of evidence submitted by this group to identify a basis for applying a pure revenue - based structure to them .

while , at times , they suggest that their situation as small commercial webcasters requires this type of structure , there is no evidence in the record about how the copyright royalty judges would delineate between small webcasters and large webcasters .

and , in a substantive footnote , the board expressed its view that it lacks statutory authority to carve out royalty rate niches for the emergent business models promoted by small commercial webcasters: it must be emphasized that , in reaching a determination , the copyright royalty judges cannot guarantee a profitable business to every market entrant .

indeed , the normal free market processes typically weed out those entities that have poor business models or are inefficient .

to allow inefficient market participants to continue to use as much music as they want and for as long a time period as they want without compensating copyright owners on the same basis as more efficient market participants trivializes the property rights of copyright owners .

furthermore , it would involve the copyright royalty judges in making a policy decision rather than applying the willing buyer / willing seller standard of the copyright act .

in setting the rates , the board looked to proposed "benchmark" agreements to determine what a hypothetical buyer and seller would agree to in the marketplace .

it rejected the proposals advanced by the radio broadcasters and small commercial webcasters that the appropriate benchmark was the fee paid to performing rights organizations ( pros ) , such as ascap , bmi and sesac , for the digital public performance of the underlying musical composition .

it also rejected a proposal that analog over - the - air broadcast music radio be used as a benchmark , with reference to musical composition royalties paid by such broadcasters to the pros .

based on the evidence before it , the copyright royalty board found that the most appropriate benchmark agreements are those in the market for interactive webcasting covering the digital performance of sound recordings , with appropriate adjustments .

in summary , the copyright royalty board's decision , like that of its predecessor , the carp , declines to delineate a separate class or to integrate a separate market analysis on behalf of "small" webcasters .

the expiration of the option to pay a percentage of revenues , to be replaced by a minimum payment , per - song per - listener formula , was , predictably , not well received in the small webcasting business community , among others .

some members of congress voiced concern as well .

what follows below are descriptions of the responses to the crb decision in different settings: the negotiating table , the federal courts , and the congress .

although the past two years have been consumed with the reactions to the copyright royalty board's may 2007 decision , time marches on , and the crb announced on january 5 , 2009 , that it would begin the third proceeding ( "webcaster iii" ) to determine the royalty rates for the statutory license covering internet transmissions of sound recordings , applicable to the next royalty period that runs from january 1 , 2011 , through december 31 , 2015 .

any webcaster that chooses not to opt - in to one of the settlement agreements described above may participate in this proceeding and would be bound by the rates and terms that the crb shall determine .

