ten years have passed since the establishment of the hong kong special administrative region , or the hksar , on july 1 , 1997 .

the event , commonly referred to as the handover , marked the end of 155 years of british colonial rule and china's resumption of full sovereignty over hong kong .

during the last 10 years , there have been modest changes in hong kong's political situation and more significant changes in its economy .

these political and economic changes have had an impact on hong kong's social and cultural identity .

despite some political and economic setbacks , the hksar remains a vibrant international trade hub in asia .

the actual transferral of sovereignty over hong kong was governed by the "joint declaration of the government of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland and the government of the people's republic of china on the question of hong kong" ( commonly referred to simply as the "joint declaration" ) signed on december 19 , 1984 in beijing .

under the terms of the joint declaration , china promised that hong kong would "enjoy a high degree of autonomy" and "the current social and economic systems in hong kong will remain unchanged" for 50 years .

the joint declaration also required china's national people's congress ( npc ) to pass "a basic law of the hong kong special administrative region" ( generally referred to as the "basic law" ) stipulating china's policies on hong kong that are consistent with the terms of the joint declaration .

the national people's congress passed the basic law on april 4 , 1990 .

hong kong has long been important to the united states in several ways .

first , hong kong is a major entrepôt in asia , especially for trade with china .

second , hong kong's longstanding open trade policy has made it a major ally for u.s. efforts to liberalize international trade .

third , hong kong's common law legal system and its respect for civil liberties are a bellwether in asia for human rights .

congressional interest in hong kong was demonstrated by the passage the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-383 ) .

the act commits the united states to treating the hksar as a separate entity from the rest of china in a variety of political , economic , trade and other areas so long as the hksar remains "sufficiently autonomous" to warrant special treatment .

section 202 of the united states - hong kong policy act empowers the president to make the determination of the status of hong kong's autonomy , specifying the factors for consideration to be "the terms , obligations , and expectations expressed in the joint declaration with respect to hong kong. .

the united states - hong kong policy act makes no mention of the basic law .

in addition , the united states - hong kong policy act states that "hong kong plays an important role in today's regional and world economy" and that the united states has a strong interest in the continued "vitality , prosperity , and stability of hong kong. .

the act also stipulates that the "support for democratization is a fundamental principle of united states foreign policy," which "naturally applies to united states policy toward hong kong. .

plus , the act states that "the human rights of the people of hong kong are of great importance to the united states" and "also serve as a basis for hong kong's continued economic prosperity. .

title iii of the united states - hong kong policy act required the secretary of state to transmit to the speaker of the house of representatives and the chairman of the committee on foreign relations of the senate an annual report by march 31 ( through the year 2000 ) on the conditions in hong kong "of interest to the united states. .

the act was amended in subsequent years to require this report each year through 2006 .

no report is required from 2007 onward .

the hksar is an executive - led government , with much of the power in the hands of the chief executive and his or her appointed department secretaries .

the two most important department secretaries are the chief secretary for administration and the financial secretary .

hong kong's legislature , legco , has comparatively limited powers ; it can effectively veto legislation proposed by the chief executive , approves or disapproves of the annual budget , and has some oversight over the operations of the executive branch .

hong kong's courts have the exclusive power to adjudicate hksar legal cases , with the exception of matters related to national defense , foreign policy and the interpretation of the basic law .

legal cases involving these three topics are handled by the standing committee of china's npc .

since the handover , there has been serious political debate over the details of hong kong's independent executive , legislative , and judicial powers .

there have been controversies over the selection process for the chief executive , as well as the chief executive's term in office .

regarding the hksar's legislative powers , the key issues have centered about the composition of legco and the manner by which its members are selected .

as for hong kong's judicial powers , the main area of concern has been the scope of its powers , particularly with respect to the interpretation of the basic law , hong kong's de facto constitution .

besides these general "constitutional" issues , there also has been a notable change in hong kong's political parties and the level of political involvement of the hong kong people .

hong kong's political parties have changed in both name and character over the last 10 years , indicating the possible development of broad - based parties .

concurrent with the change in the political parties , the people of hong kong appear more interested , informed and involved in politics than before the handover .

the politicization of the hong kong population in part can be attributed to an increase in their opportunities to be involved in political activities , such as elections .

it is also in part due to a widely - held perception that the hksar government was somewhat dysfunctional during the first few years after the handover , forcing people to pay more attention to political issues than they did when hong kong was a british colony .

under the terms of both the joint declaration and the basic law , hong kong residents are supposed to continue to enjoy the same civil liberties they did prior to the handover .

according to the joint declaration , "rights and freedoms , including those of the person , of speech , of the press , of assembly , of association , of travel , of movement , of correspondence , of strike , of choice of occupation , of academic research and of religious belief will be ensured by law in the hong kong special administrative region. .

in turn , these rights are enumerated in detail in chapter iii ( articles 25 to 42 ) of the basic law .

since the handover , there have been relatively few instances where either the chinese or hong kong governments have threatened or undermined the civil liberties of hong kong residents .

however , there have been perceived threats of the freedom of speech and assembly , and erosion of press freedoms from non - governmental sources .

the history of hong kong's economy is replete with examples of major restructuring and transformation , especially in the face of unanticipated challenges .

the last 10 years are yet another example of hong kong's ability to recreate itself following severe economic shocks .

as a result , hong kong's economy in 2007 is significantly different than it was in 1997 .

while most of the changes appear to be for the better , there are some developments that may portend future problems .

at present , most analysts believe there are very few issues that indicate a need for significant changes in u.s. policies about hong kong .

by and large , the provisions of the u.s. - hong kong policy act are being met , and hong kong is fulfilling its obligations to the united states under the existing bilateral and multilateral treaties and agreements .

there are , however , several areas that congress may chose to consider that could have an impact on u.s. - hong kong relations .

the support for the democratization of hong kong is written directly into the u.s. - hong kong policy act , and there appears to be strong and widespread support for democracy among the people of hong kong .

in public opinion polls , hong kong residents routinely support the direct election of the chief executive by universal suffrage and to almost an equal extent , support the election of the members of legco by universal suffrage .

for example , in surveys conducted prior the standing committee of the npc announcement of april 2004 , between 70% and 80% of the respondents supported the direct election of chief executive in 2007 .

a similar set of surveys found that nearly three - quarters of the people supported direct election of legco before the standing committee of the npc stated its opposition to the direct elections , and nearly two - thirds continued to support direct elections afterwards .

two possible ways for congress to promote hong kong's progress towards universal suffrage and democracy are: ( 1 ) closely monitor the work of the committee on governance and political development as it develops the "green paper" on "models , roadmaps and timetables for electing the chief executive by universal suffrage," as well as its legco reform proposals ; and ( 2 ) provide assistance to the current legco in its ongoing research into the policies and practices of the u.s. congress .

in fy2006 , the state department's human rights and democracy fund allocated $450,000 to a project in hong kong designed to strengthen political parties and civil society organizations .

also , the state department's country report on human rights practices for china contains a separate section on hong kong , including analysis of its progress towards democracy .

in addition to these programs , congress may wish to provide information and resources to hong kong's political parties as they explore the possible creation of broader , grassroots - based parties .

outward indications seem to support the view that the civil liberties of the people of hong kong remain relatively unchanged since the handover .

public opinion polls conducted regularly since the handover reveal no perceived erosion in the freedoms of speech , press , or assembly among hong kong residents .

at present , the only issue that clearly raised concerns about civil liberties in hong kong — the article 23 proposals — is on hold until chief executive tsang or the chinese government decide to press the matter again with legco and the people of hong kong .

beyond continuing to monitor civil liberties in hong kong , congress might contemplate consultations with legco about alternative legal options in drafting legislation on issues such as treason , sedition , and subversion .

economic and trade relations between hong kong and the united state are by most accounts strong , positive , and friendly .

both parties are reportedly fulfilling their bilateral and multilateral obligations under existing treaties and agreements .

trade and investment flows between the two economies have recovered from a recent downturn , but do not exhibit the same level of growth seen in trade relations with other economies .

also , the decline of u.s. nationals in hong kong , may indicate a reduction in u.s. influence in hong kong .

based on the comments of u.s. business representatives in hong kong , there are some actions congress could consider taking to counter the possible decline in u.s. influence .

not surprisingly , the u.s. business community in hong kong favors a congressional re - examination of u.s. laws governing the taxation of foreign earned income and consideration of ways of balancing the revenue generated by the tax against the implicit cost it creates for u.s. companies wishing to hire u.s. nationals overseas .

in addition , congress may wish to support technical assistance to hong kong in its efforts to reduce air pollution .

also , congress might choose to explore direct and indirect ways of fostering the creation of more international schools in hong kong with curriculum consistent with the u.s. educational system .

finally , congress may include language in suitable legislation to reactivate the section 301 provision of the u.s. - hong kong policy act that requires an annual report from the state department to congress on the status of hong kong .

much of the information and analysis contained in this report is based on a series of interviews conducted by the author in hong kong during the week of may 28 - june 1 , 2007 .

below is a list of the people interviewed ( in alphabetical order ) ; some of whom wished to remain anonymous .

anonymous hong kong business consultant anonymous hong kong customs official anonymous hong kong physician anonymous hong kong retiree fred armentrout , communications director , american chamber of commerce in hong kong nicholas chan chun tak , senior administrative officer , central planning unit , hong kong government philip chan kwan yee , research director , central planning unit , hong kong government watson chan li wah , research department , legislative council michael degolyer , professor of government and international studies , hong kong baptist university michael enright , professor of business administration , university of hong kong he dong , head of economic research division , hong kong monetary authority anthony hutchinson , director of public affairs , u.s. consulate general in hong kong linda lai wai ming , deputy secretary , hong kong department of commerce , industry , and technology emily lau wai hing , member of the legislative council alan leong kah kit , member of the legislative council leung kwok hung , member of the legislative council nancy w. leou , consul , economic / political section , u.s. consulate general in hong kong edward leung hoi kwok , chief economist , hong kong trade development council amelia luk siu ping , s. p. , deputy law officer , hong kong department of justice jack maisano , president , american chamber of commerce in hong kong julie mu fee man , assistant director of community relations , independent commission against corruption ng chun hung , professor of sociology , university of hong kong james tang t. h. , professor of politics and public administration , university of hong kong cherry tse kit ching ling , permanent secretary , hong kong department of constitutional affairs david webb , economist pansy yau lai ping , assistant chief economist , hong kong trade development council yeung yue man , director of hong kong institute of asia - pacific studies , chinese university of hong kon .

