the national science and technology policy , organization , and priorities act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-282 ) established the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , including the position of its director , within the executive office of the president ( eop ) to provide scientific and technological analysis and advice to the president .

this codified and institutionalized a presidential science advice function that previously existed at each president's discretion .

this report provides an overview of the history of science and technology ( s&t ) advice to the president and discusses selected issues and options for congress regarding ostp's director , ostp management and operations , the president's council of advisors on science and technology ( pcast ) , and the national science and technology council ( nstc ) .

science and technology policy issues tend to reach the presidential level if they involve multiple agencies ; have substantial budgetary , economic , national security , or foreign policy dimensions ; are highly controversial ( especially when science and technology intersect with values , ethics , and morality ) ; or are highly visible to the public .

when these matters reach the oval office , presidents generally seek information and advice from trusted sources as to the options available and their implications .

throughout u.s. history , presidents have obtained s&t advice from federal scientists and engineers and informal personal contacts .

since the early 1930s , presidents have attempted to expand their sources of s&t advice through advisory boards and committees .

lacking a statutory foundation , these boards and committees tended to lack permanency , as successive presidents often disbanded them .

when again faced with the need for s&t advice , presidents would form new advisory boards or committees , sometimes reconstituted from previously disbanded ones .

in the years leading up to world war ii , the importance of research and development ( r&d ) to the nation's economic and military strength became increasingly evident .

as a result , president franklin d. roosevelt established the office of scientific research and development ( osrd ) in 1941 .

historians widely credit the federal r&d enterprise with contributing substantially to the allied victory in world war ii , as well as to the development of subsequent u.s. industrial strength .

in november 1944 , president roosevelt wrote a letter to osrd director vannevar bush seeking recommendations on how research and the research infrastructure established to support america's war effort could be "profitably employed in times of peace. .

osrd director bush's response , science: the endless frontier , laid out a framework that asserted the essential role of scientific progress in meeting the nation's economic , national security , and social needs .

experts widely view the bush report as foundational to today's u.s. science and technology policy .

among its recommendations , the report asserted: the federal government should accept new responsibilities for promoting the creation of new scientific knowledge and the development of scientific talent in our youth .

the next several presidents used a variety of mechanisms to obtain s&t advice within the eop , to enhance interagency coordination , and to receive counsel from outside advisors .

organizations within the eop included the office of the special assistant to the president for science and technology ( eisenhower ) and the office of science and technology ( ost ; kennedy , johnson ) .

organizations focused on interagency coordination included the president's scientific research board ( truman ) , the federal council for science and technology ( fcst ; eisenhower , kennedy , johnson , nixon ) , and the federal coordinating council for science , engineering , and technology ( fccset ; ford , carter , reagan , george h. w. bush ) .

external advisory committees included the science advisory committee ( truman , eisenhower ) , and the president's science advisory committee ( psac ; eisenhower , kennedy , johnson ) .

president nixon abolished the office of science and technology — the s&t policy office then extant in the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

the national science foundation ( nsf ) assumed its civilian functions and the national security council ( nsc ) its security functions .

in addition , president nixon opted not to appoint new members to psac after accepting the pro forma resignation of its members .

president ford supported the return of a science advisory mechanism to the white house , but he wished to establish it through legislation , not executive order .

he signed the national science and technology policy , organization , and priorities act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-282 ) into law on may 11 , 1976 .

this act established ostp and the position of ostp director .

policy tensions and power struggles between ostp and other eop offices and between presidential administrations and the science community are not new .

carter administration ostp director frank press , for example , battled the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) , opposing the ceq - advocated use of federal subsidies to the then - infant solar power industry and instead supporting a balanced pace between market demand and scientific discovery .

in july 1981 , george keyworth , reagan administration ostp director , stirred controversy in the science community on his first speech to the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) by asserting "nowhere is it indicated that the ostp or its director is to represent the interests of the scientific community as a constituency. .

further , he added that serving as an "inside lobbyist" for the science community would work against the community's interest by reducing his influence within the white house .

keyworth's view of the role of the president's science advisor was at odds with many in the science community at that time .

during the george h. w. bush administration , tension existed between ostp director d. allan bromley and other high - ranking white house officials over the extent of administration support for federal funding of commercial technology development .

these tensions became public when the wall street journal published articles asserting bromley's success in advancing an industrial policy in the administration , including "picking technological winners and losers. .

following criticism from chairman of the council of economic advisors ( cea ) michael boskin , white house chief of staff john sununu , and omb director richard darman , bromley issued a statement clarifying that the administration's "principles are inconsistent with an industrial policy of targeting particular industries for support or particular technologies for commercialization. .

appendix a provides a historical compilation of presidential s&t policy advisors with their titles , eop s&t agencies / offices , interagency coordination organizations , and advisory committees .

as illustrated in table a - 1 , the presidents subsequent to president ford continued to adapt ostp and related organizations to suit their needs .

for example , p.l .

94-282 established a president's committee on science and technology ( pcst ) with the ostp director as a member .

pcast largely assumed the role of pcst with the ostp director serving as a co - chair along with one or two nonfederal pcast members .

more recently , p.l .

112-282 included provisions for the ostp director to chair an intergovernmental science , engineering , and technology advisory panel ( isetap ) .

an executive branch , cabinet - level council established by presidential executive order , the national science and technology council , which is chaired by the president and managed by the ostp director , has subsumed isetap's responsibilities .

congress established the office of science and technology policy as an office within the eop to , among other things , "serve as a source of scientific and technological analysis and judgment for the president with respect to major policies , plans , and programs of the federal government. .

within the context of its organic statute , ostp currently defines its mission as having three components: provide the president and his senior staff with accurate , relevant , and timely scientific and technical advice on all matters of consequence .

ensure that the policies of the executive branch are informed by sound science .

ensure that the scientific and technical work of the executive branch is properly coordinated so as to provide the greatest benefit to society .

to this end , ostp has established the following strategic goals and objectives: ensure that federal investments in science and technology are making the greatest possible contribution to economic prosperity , public health , environmental quality , and national security .

energize and nurture the processes by which government programs in science and technology are resourced , evaluated , and coordinated .

sustain the core professional and scientific relationships with government officials , academics , and industry representatives that are required to understand the depth and breadth of the nation's scientific and technical enterprise , evaluate scientific advances , and identify potential policy proposals .

generate a core workforce of world - class expertise capable of providing policy - relevant advice , analysis , and judgment for the president and his senior staff regarding the scientific and technical aspects of the major policies , plans , and programs of the federal government .

the ostp also has several roles not articulated in these formal statements .

these include serving as a sounding board and conduit of information for agency executives seeking to understand , clarify , and help shape science and technology - related policy objectives and priorities ; helping agencies to coordinate and integrate their s&t strategies and activities ; and helping to resolve interagency conflicts over areas of s&t responsibility and leadership .

the role and influence of ostp , nstc , pcast , and their predecessor organizations have varied among administrations , depending on the president , the individual serving as ostp director , and the rapport between them .

the following sections provide an overview of the current responsibilities and roles of the ostp director and associate directors , nstc , and pcast , followed by information on ostp's budget and staffing .

congress may opt to consider a variety of issues and legislative options related to ostp .

these include: the need for science advice within the executive office of the president ; the title , rank , roles , and responsibilities of the ostp director ; the number and policy foci of ostp associate directors ; the funding and staffing levels provided for ostp ; the compliance of ostp with statutory restrictions on the use of appropriated funds ; the participation of ostp and nstc in federal agency coordination , priority - setting , and budget allocation ; the role of ostp in ensuring scientific integrity in federally funded and supported research , including the communication of scientific and technical information by federal agency scientists and engineers ; the efforts by ostp to effect change in federal policies regarding public access to the results of federally funded research and development ; the attempt by ostp to consolidate federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education programs ; and the stature and influence of pcast .

the following sections address each of these issues , along with obama administration efforts and policy options for congress .

the 113 th congress has taken several legislative actions regarding ostp and nstc .

some of these actions have resulted in passage of public law , while others remain as proposed legislation .

p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , provided fy2014 appropriations of $5.6 million for ostp ( along with appropriations for the rest of the federal government ) .

it also contained statutory language prohibiting the expenditure of the ostp funds develop , design , plan , promulgate , implement , or execute a bilateral policy , program , order , or contract of any kind to participate , collaborate , or coordinate bilaterally in any way with china or any chinese - owned company unless such activities are specifically authorized by a law enacted after the date of enactment of this act .

this prohibition does not apply to activities that ostp certifies pose no risk of resulting in the transfer of technology , data , or other information with national security or economic security implications to china or a chinese - owned company ; and do not involve knowing interactions with officials who have been determined by the united states to have direct involvement with violations of human rights .

the ostp must submit any such certification to congress at least 30 days prior to the activity .

this prohibition was also present in fy2013 through p.l .

113-6 as described below .

the reports accompanying p.l .

113-76 directed ostp to reexamine possible reorganizations of federal stem programs for consideration in a future fiscal year after engaging in an inclusive development process involving the interagency community and external stakeholders and taking into consideration program evaluations and other evidence of program success ; report on the funding , authorities , and other resources necessary to support dissemination of federal stem education research findings ; report on federal agency progress in developing plans for public access to federally funded research findings ; and report on the assessment of rare earth mineral criticality .

in addition , ostp is encouraged to report on collaborative relationships and activities and directed identify international collaborative opportunities is the area of neuroscience .

p.l .

113-73 , which made further continuing appropriations for fy2014 , was a continuing resolution providing funding through january 18 , 2014 , for ostp operations ( along with the rest of the federal government ) at a rate equal to fy2013 .

p.l .

113-46 , the continuing appropriations act , 2014 , was a continuing resolution providing funding through january 15 , 2014 , for ostp operations ( along with the rest of the federal government ) at a rate equal to fy2013 .

p.l .

113-6 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , provided fy2013 appropriations of $5.7 million , following rescission , for ostp ( along with appropriations for the rest of the federal government ) .

it also contained statutory language prohibiting expenditure of the ostp funds to develop , design , plan , promulgate , implement , or execute a bilateral policy , program , order , or contract of any kind to participate , collaborate , or coordinate bilaterally in any way with china or any chinese - owned company unless such activities are specifically authorized by a law enacted after the date of enactment of this act .

this prohibition extended the original prohibition established for fy2011 .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , further clarified that this prohibition shall not apply to activities that ostp certifies ( 1 ) pose no risk of resulting in the transfer of technology , data , or other information with national security or economic security implications to china or a chinese - owned company ; and ( 2 ) will not involve knowing interactions with officials who have been determined by the united states to have direct involvement with violations of human rights .

the ostp must submit any such certification to congress at least 30 days prior to the activity .

while the former requirement was also present in the fy2012 appropriations act , the latter requirement is new to fy2013 and reportedly reflects an existing agreement between congress and ostp .

the reports accompanying p.l .

113-6 also express support for science , technology , engineering , and math ( stem ) education , directing ostp to provide to the appropriations committees a stem education strategic plan within 45 days ; inform the committees of ostp's continued development of a strategy to disseminate the results of k - 16 stem education research ; and provide a detailed report containing actions of ostp and other federal agencies to avoid duplication in stem education programs , including a list of programs targeted for elimination , consolidation , or joint administration within 60 days .

in addition , the house report directs ostp to report semiannually on nstc's progress in coordinating agency policies relating to the dissemination of unclassified scientific research , and encourages ostp to ensure that sufficient investment is made in studying the potential environmental , health , and safety risks of engineered nanomaterials .

the cybersecurity enhancement act of 2013 ( h.r .

756 ) would direct certain federal agencies to work through the nstc to transmit and triennially maintain a strategic plan for federal cybersecurity and information assurance research and development .

this bill would also require the ostp director to convene a university - industry task force to explore mechanisms for carrying out collaborative r&d , education , and training activities for cybersecurity and report to congress on its findings and recommendations .

the advancing america's networking and information technology research and development act of 2013 ( h.r .

967 ) would amend the high - performance computing act of 1991 to rename the national high - performance computing program as the nitrd program and direct the federal agencies participating in the program to ( 1 ) periodically assess the contents and funding levels of program component areas and restructure the program when warranted ; and ( 2 ) ensure that the program includes large - scale , long - term , interdisciplinary r&d activities .

it would also require the participating federal agencies to develop , and update every three years , a five - year strategic plan to guide program activities ; require the ostp director to encourage and monitor the efforts of participating agencies to allocate the resources and management attention necessary to ensure that the strategic plan is executed effectively and that program objectives are met ; require the program , in addition to its current requirements , to provide for ( 1 ) increased understanding of the scientific principles of cyber - physical systems and improve the methods available for the design , development , and operation of such systems , and ( 2 ) research and development on human - computer interactions , visualization , and big data , and require continuation of a national coordinating office ; and require the director of ostp to convene ( 1 ) a task force to explore mechanisms for carrying out collaborative r&d activities on cyber - physical systems , and ( 2 ) through the nstc , an interagency working group to examine issues around funding mechanisms and policies for the use of cloud computing services for federally funded science and engineering research .

the securing energy critical elements and american jobs act of 2013 ( h.r .

1022 ) would , among other provisions , require the president , acting through ostp , to coordinate the actions of federal agencies to promote an adequate and stable supply of energy critical elements ; identify energy critical elements and establish early warning systems for supply problems of energy critical elements ; establish a mechanism for the coordination and evaluation of federal programs with energy critical element needs ; promote and encourage private sector development of a domestic energy critical elements supply chain ; promote and encourage the recycling of energy critical elements ; assess the need for and make recommendations concerning the availability and adequacy of the supply of necessary technically trained personnel ; and report to congress on these activities .

the sound science act of 2013 ( h.r .

1287 ) would require federal agencies to develop guidelines for ensuring and maximizing the quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity of scientific information relied upon by such agency .

the ostp director would approve such guidelines .

a policy decision that did not comply with such approved guidelines would be deemed not in accordance with the law .

the stem opportunities act of 2013 ( h.r .

1358 ) would , among other provisions , require the ostp director to carry out programs and activities to ensure that federal science agencies and institutions of higher education receiving federal r&d funding are fully engaging their entire talent pool .

the strengthening the resiliency of our nation on the ground act ( h.r .

2322 / s. 904 ) would , among other provisions , require the ostp director to establish an interagency working group to establish a strategic vision for extreme weather resilience , conduct a gap and overlap analysis of federal activities , and develop a national extreme weather resilience plan .

the american manufacturing competiveness act of 2013 ( h.r .

2447 / s. 1709 ) would direct the committee on technology under the national science and technology council to develop a national manufacturing competitiveness strategic plan .

the quadrennial energy review act of 2013 ( s. 552 ) would , among other provisions , direct the secretary of the energy and the ostp director to co - chair an interagency energy coordination council .

this council would meet every four years in order to coordinate a quadrennial energy review to be submitted to congress .

the cybersecurity act of 2013 ( s. 1353 ) would , among other provisions , direct the ostp director , in coordination with the head of any relevant federal agency , to develop a federal cybersecurity research and development plan .

the ostp director would submit this plan to congress .

in addition , the ostp director would coordinate ongoing cybersecurity research and development with other activities and , in coordination with the director of the national science foundation , conduct a review of existing cybersecurity test beds .

appendix a .

president's science and technology policy advisors appendix b .

historical ostp fundin .

