title i of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , as amended , recognizes that individuals with disabilities face high levels of unemployment and poverty and authorizes the federal government to make grants available to states and territories for the purpose of providing vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) services to persons with disabilities to prepare for and engage in gainful employment .

vr grants are administered by the rehabilitation services administration ( rsa ) , an agency of the department of education ( ed ) , and can be used by designated state or territorial agencies to provide customized supports and services to persons with disabilities with the goal of providing these persons increased opportunities to secure competitive employment and self - sufficiency .

states and territories may establish a single vr agency ( referred to as a combined agency ) or establish separate agencies to handle persons with general disabilities and persons with blindness .

states and territories are required to match a portion of their federal grants and contribute 21.3% of the total cost of providing vr services .

in fy2005 , states and territories spent more than $1.7 billion on vr services .

in 2005 , state and territorial vr agencies worked with nearly 1.4 million clients and helped more than 206,000 persons with disabilities achieve employment .

the authorization for vr grants to states and territories expired at the end of fy2003 and congress has continued to make capped appropriations to fund the program under the provisions of an extension clause in the law .

the house of representatives and senate each passed bills to reauthorize the vr program in both the 108 th and 109 th congresses , however , these efforts did not become law .

there was no action taken on the reauthorization of the vr program in the 110 th congress , but a supplemental appropriation for the program was included in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 in the 111 th congress .

this report provides an overview of the vr program , including discussions on the eligibility for vr services , the types of services provided by state and territorial vr agencies , and the requirements concerning state plans and fund - matching requirements that states and territories must meet in order to qualify for federal grants .

this report also discusses the current authorization for vr grants and recent legislative attempts to extend this authorization .

in addition , it describes the formula used to determine each state and territory's allotment of vr funds .

also included is a discussion of a recent government accountability office ( gao ) study that highlights several problems stemming from the current formula , including its lack of accounting for ( 1 ) populations of individuals with disabilities , ( 2 ) differences in the costs of administering vr services , ( 3 ) the ability of states and territories to meet fund - matching requirements , and ( 4 ) issues related to the use of fy1978 allotments as a baseline .

finally , potential issues for the 112 th congress are discussed .

section 102 ( a ) of the rehabilitation act of 1973 establishes the requirements a person must meet in order to be eligible to receive vr services from a state or territorial agency .

the requirements state that a person must be an individual with a disability and must also need vr services to become employed , stay employed , or return to previous employment .

vr agencies provide a wide range of customized services to their clients .

agency staff work with each client individually to design a package of services that are intended to help the client achieve his or her employment goal .

there is no master list of services that can or cannot be provided by vr agencies and no package of services that are provided to every client .

section 100 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the rehabilitation act of 1973 authorizes congress to make appropriations to de for the purposes of providing vr grants to states and territories .

for each year authorized , the appropriation for vr grants must be no lower than the previous year's appropriation increased by the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

this authorization expired at the end of fy2003 .

the mandatory minimum increase in appropriations is based on the change in the cpi - u reported in october of each year .

the october cpi - u report is released in november of each year , a month after the beginning of the federal fiscal year .

therefore , the appropriation for a given fiscal year is based on the appropriation for the previous fiscal year increased by the change in the cpi - u reported for october of the second previous fiscal year .

for example , the mandatory minimum appropriation for fy2003 was based on the appropriation for fy2002 increased by the change in the cpi - u between october 2000 and october 2001 .

sections 8 and 110 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 provide a formula to be used by the rsa in determining each state and territory's allotment of appropriated vr funds .

this allotment formula does not take into account a state or territory's population of individuals with disabilities , or the employment rate of a state or territory's vr clients .

rather , the formula is based on the following three factors: the state or territory's vr allotment in fy1978 ; the state's current per capita income as compared to the national per capita income ; and , the state or territory's current population .

a two - step process is used to determine each state and territory's vr allotment .

in the first step , the allotment percentage is determined using the formula specified in section 8 of the act .

in the second step , this allotment percentage is used in a formula specified in section 110 of the act to determine the final allotment for each state and territory .

a state or territory's vr allotment is based on its allotment in 1978 , its per capita income , and its population .

the size of a state or territory's population of individuals with disabilities , the varying costs of providing vr services , the ability of a state or territory to match allotted funds , and high population growth in certain states and territories are not fully factored into determining how much money a state or territory will have available for vr services .

efforts to reauthorize the vr program without significant changes to the allotment formula or other aspects of the program were unsuccessful in the 108 th congress .

the workforce investment act amendments of 2003 ( h.r .

1261 ) — which would have extended the authorization for vr grants through fy2009 — was passed by the house and senate , but could not be reconciled in a conference committee , and a final version was not passed into law .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

27 , the job training act of 2005 , which would have extended the authorization for the vr program through fy2011 , was passed by the house .

a subsequent senate bill ( s. 1021 , the workforce investment act amendments of 2005 ) was incorporated into h.r .

27 and passed by the senate .

the bills differed for reasons unrelated to the vr program and no conference committee was ever formed .

a final version of these bills was never passed .

reauthorization of the program was not considered in the 110 th congress , although supplemental vr grants were appropriated as part of the recovery act .

if congress does consider reauthorization in 2010 , it may want to consider making changes to several parts of the vr program .

possible areas for reform include the definition of disability used and the order of selection rules that give preference to persons with the most severe disabilities even though this group may be the least likely to return to work .

in addition , congress may wish to consider some method for increasing the overall success rate of the vr program .

currently , the rsa has very little ability to give states and territories incentives to improve the return to work rate of their vr clients or to punish states that fail to meet established expectations for vr agencies .

the senate's reauthorization bill in the 109 th congress did include a program of authorization grants that could be used to reward states that demonstrate success at returning clients to the workforce , and the recovery act supplemental appropriation passed in the 111 th congress required agencies to report on program performance as a condition for receiving a portion of the funds .

as discussed in this report , the current formula fails to account for a state or territory's actual population of individuals with disabilities and a state or territory's ability to pay its share of the costs of vr services .

in addition , this report has shown that the current formula does not ensure that funding increases due to changes in the cost of living are passed along to individual states and territories .

the formula also does not take into account a state or territory's success at returning vr clients to work .

finally , this report has also shown the impact of the allotment formula on the vr funding levels of states that have seen significant population growth since the 1970s .

states with the largest increase in population since the mid - 1970s have also had the largest reduction in vr funding due to the use of the fy1978 funding baseline in the allotment formula .

these concerns with the allotment formula are areas that the house and senate may consider if reauthorization of the vr program is proposed in the 112 th congress .

appendix a .

order of selection status for state and territorial vocational rehabilitation agencies appendix b .

vocational rehabilitation appropriations and state allotment data appendix c. vocational rehabilitation funds returned for reallotment appendix d. state vocational rehabilitation allotments , modified allotments , and population dat .

