in response to a petition filed by the electronic privacy information center ( epic ) concerning numerous websites advertising the sale of personal telephone records , the federal communications commission conducted a rulemaking to determine the extent of the problem and construct regulations in response to consumer concerns .

specifically , epic and other commenters pointed out that data brokers advertise the availability of cell phone records , which include calls to and from a particular cell phone number , the duration of such calls , and may include the physical location of the cell phone .

in addition to selling cell phone call records , many data brokers also claimed to provide calling records for landline and voice over internet protocol ( voip ) phones , as well as nonpublished phone numbers .

data brokers claimed to be able to provide this information fairly quickly , in a few hours to a few days .

although personal information such as social security numbers can be found on public documents , phone records are stored only by phone companies .

for this reason , data brokers are alleged to have obtained phone records from the phone companies themselves , albeit without their approval .

it is also believed that data brokers had taken advantage of inadequate company security standards to gain access to customer telephone information .

data brokers are thought to employ three different practices to obtain customer telephone records without the approval of the customer .

the first method occurs when an employee of one of the phone companies sells the records to the data broker .

the second method occurs through a practice called "pretexting," where a data broker pretends to be the owner of the phone and obtains the records from the telephone company under false pretenses .

the third method is employed when a data broker obtains the customer's telephone records by accessing the customer's account on the internet .

pretext calling for customer telephone records occurs when the data broker or investigator pretends to be the cell phone account holder and persuades phone company employees to release the information .

the public availability of personal identifiers , like the social security number , made it easier for someone to impersonate the account holder to convince the employee that they were the account holder .

for this reason , it was suggested that phone companies cease the use of readily available biographical information , like the social security number , for identity authentication .

telephone companies are encouraging customers to receive electronic statements and to access customer accounts online .

typically , online accounts are set up in advance , to be activated at a later date by the customer .

if someone can figure out how to activate and access the online account of the customer , the call records can be obtained .

in response to these concerns , congress , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) have acted to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of phone records .

the federal government has moved to directly address the problem of "pretexting" and to more clearly define the protective framework that telecommunications carriers must implement .

certain sectors are currently subject to legal obligations to protect sensitive personal information .

these obligations were created , in large part , through the enactment of federal privacy legislation in the financial services , health care , government , and internet sectors .

federal regulations issued to carry out requirements of federal privacy laws impose obligations on covered entities to implement information security programs to protect personal information .

for further information , see crs report rl34120 , federal information security and data breach notification laws , by [author name scrubbed] .

pretext calling for financial information has long been illegal .

in 2006 , congress enacted the telephone records and privacy protection act , which makes pretexting for the acquisition of telephone records a federal offense .

furthermore , several other federal statutes address illegal conduct associated with identity theft and pretext calling .

the national cable and telecommunications association ( ncta ) challenged the requirement for carriers to obtain opt - in consent when sharing cpni with joint venture partners and independent contractors on both constitutional and procedural grounds .

on february 13 , 2009 , the u.s. court of appeals for the dc circuit upheld the fcc's order .

ncta did not challenge the constitutionality of section 222 of the communications act , therefore , it was assumed by both parties that some form of disclosure prevention is constitutionally permissible .

the only question left for the court was whether the fcc's order implementing section 222 comported with the first amendment .

the court held that it did because it advanced the government's substantial interest in protecting consumer privacy and did so in a way that was "no more expansive than necessary" to serve that interest .

the court noted that , for first amendment purposes , opt - in is only marginally more intrusive than opt - out , and a scheme similar to the one at issue in this case was upheld in the consumer credit context .

turning to the alleged procedural violations in the promulgation of the order , the court found that the fcc had based its decision to return to a limited opt - in regime on reasoned analysis and substantial evidence .

therefore , the agency had not violated the administrative procedure act .

