german chancellor angela merkel took office in november 2005 and was elected to a second term in september 2009 .

since reaching a low point in the lead - up to the iraq war in 2003 , diplomatic relations between the united states and germany have improved substantially and the bilateral relationship remains strong .

merkel has distinguished herself as an advocate for strong u.s. - european relations and as a respected leader within europe and internationally .

despite continuing areas of divergence , successive u.s. administrations and many members of congress have welcomed german leadership in europe and have voiced expectations for increased german - u.s. cooperation on the international stage .

merkel is seeking to establish germany as a u.s. partner on the forefront of multilateral efforts to address global security threats .

she has made a concerted effort to improve the tone of u.s. - german diplomacy , emphasizing shared values and the need for broad u.s. - german and u.s - european cooperation in the face of common security challenges .

both of merkel's governments have sought to increase transatlantic cooperation in areas ranging from economic and trade relations , climate change policy , counterterrorism , and non - proliferation policy , to peacekeeping , reconstruction and stabilization in afghanistan , the middle east , africa , and the balkans .

although u.s. and german officials agree that cooperation has increased , some fundamental differences remain .

during the administration of former president george w. bush disagreement tended to stem from what many germans perceived as a u.s. indifference to multilateral diplomacy and standards of international law and what some in the united states considered a german , and broader european , inability or unwillingness to take the necessary steps to counter emerging threats .

widespread belief that u.s. policy in iraq has failed and even exacerbated global security threats appears to have fueled persistently negative german public opinion of u.s. foreign policy and corresponding skepticism of the exercise of military power .

that said , strong popular support for president obama in germany suggests that many germans expect the united states to distance itself from the policy agenda of obama's unpopular predecessor .

observers caution , however , that policy differences will remain , and that berlin could continue to react skeptically to u.s. foreign policy actions it perceives as unilateral and lacking international legitimacy .

much of the criticism in germany of u.s. foreign policy during the george w. bush administration was grounded in perceived u.s. disregard for multilateral diplomacy and standards of international law — both fundamental tenets of german foreign policy .

since the end of the second world war , german foreign policy has been driven by a strong commitment to multilateral institutions and a deep - rooted skepticism of military power .

in the war's aftermath , the leaders of the newly established federal republic of germany ( west germany ) embraced integration into multilateral structures as a crucial step toward fulfilling two of the country's primary interests: to reconcile with wartime enemies ; and to gain acceptance as a legitimate actor on the international stage .

to this end , foreign policy was identified almost exclusively with the cold war aims of nato and the european integration project , and a related quest for german unification .

german unification in 1990 and the end of the cold war represented monumental shifts in the geopolitical realities that had defined german foreign policy .

germany was once again europe's largest country , and the soviet threat , which had served to unite west germany with its pro - western neighbors and the united states , was no longer .

in the face of these radical changes , and conscious of germany's newly found weight within europe and lingering european and german anxiety toward a larger and potentially more powerful germany , german leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the multilateral process and aversion to military force .

the eu , nato , and the u.n. remain the central forums for berlin's foreign , security , and defense policy .

despite the deployment of approximately 7,000 german troops in internationally sanctioned peacekeeping , reconstruction , and stabilization missions worldwide , german armed forces operate under what many consider stringent constraints designed to avoid combat situations .

since the end of the cold war , german leaders have been increasingly challenged to reconcile their commitment to continuity in foreign policy with a desire to pursue the more proactive global role many argue is necessary both to maintain germany's credibility as an ally within a network of redefined multilateral institutions , and to address the foreign and security policy challenges of the post - cold war , and post - september 11 , 2001 , era .

as one scholar notes , "the tensions , even contradictions , between [germany's] traditional 'grand strategy' — or foreign policy role concept as a 'civilian power' — and a germany , a europe , a world of international relations so radically different from what they had been before 1990 have become increasingly apparent. .

these tensions are especially apparent in an evolving domestic debate over german national interests .

germany's post - world war ii and cold war commitment to the european integration project was grounded in a desire to reconcile with former enemies and spur economic and political development .

since the end of the cold war , german leaders have used the eu as the primary forum through which to forge a more proactive role for germany on the international stage .

german foreign policy in the early - to mid - 1990s was almost singly focused on fostering deeper european integration and eu enlargement to the east .

this focus , strongly supported by former president george h.w .

bush , was widely understood as based in a desire to quell fear of a resurgent germany , and to replicate the benefits of west germany's post - world war ii integration in central and eastern europe .

europe's inability and / or unwillingness to intervene to stem conflicts in the balkans in the early - to mid - 1990s fueled calls within germany and other european countries for a collective european foreign , security , and defense policy .

to some analysts , merkel's predecessor , gerhard schröder , embodied a growing german desire to pursue german interests within the eu more assertively .

merkel has continued this trend , also demonstrating a willingness to forge a more proactive role for germany within europe .

this growing assertiveness has at times put germany at odds with other eu member states , causing some to question germany's long - standing commitment to european unity .

as is the case in several other eu member states , german eu policy under merkel reflects a much tempered enthusiasm for eu enlargement and skepticism of several aspects of european market integration .

on the other hand , germany advocates deeper european integration in areas ranging from climate change policy to police and judicial cooperation , and has assumed an increasingly significant role in europe's common foreign and security policy ( cfsp ) and common security and defense policy ( csdp ) .

germany was a strong proponent of the eu's lisbon reform treaty adopted in december 2009 , and merkel used germany's eu presidency in the first half of 2007 to forge agreement on the outlines of a new reform treaty aimed at enabling a larger eu to operate more effectively .

finally , some analysts point to personal differences between merkel and her french counterpart , nicolas sarkozy , and to what some perceive as their more pragmatic approaches to eu affairs as evidence of a weakening of the franco - german partnership long considered the engine of european integration .

perhaps the most profound change in german foreign and security policy since the end of the cold war is germany's deployment of troops outside nato territory for the first time since world war ii .

since a 1994 constitutional court ruling enabled german leaders to deploy troops abroad , germany has participated in a number of u.n. - and nato - sanctioned combat , peacekeeping , reconstruction and stabilization missions , and today , approximately 7,000 german soldiers are deployed in missions ranging from nato's stabilization force in afghanistan ( isaf ) to the u.n. mission in lebanon ( unifil ) .

however , germans are increasingly questioning the grounds for what many believe has been too rapid a shift in german defense policy .

one german security policy expert categorizes the evolving defense policy debate as evidence of "a widening gap between germany's institutional commitments and official defense posture , and the country's readiness to deal with the practical military consequences of these developments. .

some observers point out that while german politicians have consistently voiced support for more robust collective european and nato defense capabilities , budget allocations in the foreign and defense policy sectors have decreased by about 40% in real terms since their peak in the late 1980s .

in the early 1990s , public opposition and constitutional constraints prevented germany from offering more than financial support to multilateral combat and peacekeeping efforts in the persian gulf and in the balkans .

germany's inability to deploy troops to missions supported by many of its leaders led to the landmark 1994 constitutional court ruling , which determined that german troops could be deployed abroad , but only under a u.n. mandate and with the prior approval of the german parliament .

this paved the way for germany's participation in its first combat mission since the second world war — nato's 1999 air campaign to prevent ethnic cleansing in kosovo .

considerable domestic opposition to german participation in the kosovo mission was based largely on the contention that germany's history obligated it to refrain from all military intervention .

in response , then german foreign minister joschka fischer , a member of the traditionally pacifist green party , successfully argued that german history , in fact , obligated germany to intervene — militarily , when necessary — to stop atrocities similar to those perpetrated by germany during the second world war .

fischer's argument set the precedent for germany's growing participation in so - called humanitarian interventions , mostly in the form of u.n. and nato peacekeeping and reconstruction and stabilization missions , worldwide .

today , germany's global threat assessments mirror those of many of its eu and nato partners , including the united states .

the government identifies terrorism , proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , regional conflicts and failed states , transnational crime , energy security , migration , and epidemics and pandemics as the primary security threats facing germany and its eu and nato allies .

however , germany's approach to countering these threats has at times been perceived to be at odds with u.s. policy .

germany highlights the importance of a multilateral approach within the confines of a strengthened system of international law .

germany's 2006 white paper on security policy emphasizes the importance of non - military means to combat threats to security , arguing for a strong civilian role in all aspects of defense policy .

while germany views terrorism as a primary threat , it has never referred to a war on terrorism , and underscores the need to address root causes of terrorism through development and other policies .

the government does not completely rule out military engagement to combat terrorism , but does downplay this option .

for some , the end of the cold war , germany's growing assertiveness within the european union and corresponding enthusiasm for european integration , and more recently , german opposition to the 2003 u.s. - led war with iraq , all symbolize increasing divergence in u.s. - german relations .

however , the countries continue to cooperate in pursuit of common foreign and security policy goals , and share robust bilateral investment and trade relations .

under merkel's leadership , germany seeks to bolster u.s. - german and u.s. - eu trade and investment ties , and works closely with the united states on counterterrorism policy , and on a range of foreign policy issues .

u.s. administration officials and many members of congress have welcomed the merkel government's commitment to a foreign and security policy anchored in nato and the transatlantic relationship , and have expressed confidence in merkel's ability to improve u.s. - german and u.s. - european cooperation on the world stage .

u.s. - german bilateral relations remain strong , anchored not only by deep economic ties , but by a shared commitment to democratic values .

germany , the european union , and the united states share similar global security threat assessments , and cooperate closely to mitigate these threats , whether in the struggle against international terrorism , through nato efforts to combat the taliban and strengthen the afghan government , or in pursuit of a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict .

looking forward , several overarching features of germany's evolving foreign and security policy stand to shape u.s. - german relations .

these include germany's commitment to international institutions , international law , and the multilateral framework ; its deep - rooted aversion to the exercise of military force ; and a potentially widening gap between the foreign policy ambitions of some in germany's political class and the german public .

in addition , ongoing domestic debate over approaches to german national interests and what many consider too rapid a shift in defense policy could increasingly influence german foreign and security policy decisions .

german politicians have questioned , and at times openly opposed , aspects of u.s. foreign and security policy they view as lacking multilateral legitimacy , and / or as being overly dependent on the exercise of military force .

on middle east policy , for example , merkel urged former president george w. bush to diplomatically engage the leaders of syria and iran in order to initiate a region - wide effort to address the israeli - palestinian dispute and the future status of iraq .

germany's strong commitment to a unified international front in dealing with iran suggests it is more willing to accept compromises in exchange for security council unanimity than to support unilateral measures in the face of chinese or russian opposition .

as u.s. , german , and european leaders consider increased cooperation to stem global security threats and to promote stability , democracy , and human rights in regions from africa to central asia , germany will likely continue to uphold its commitment to the multilateral process .

germany has called on u.s. leaders to enhance u.s. multilateral engagement and has consistently urged u.s .

administrations to join the international criminal court and u.n. - sanctioned climate change treaties such as the kyoto protocol .

german officials appear encouraged by the obama administration's apparent willingness to boost u.s. multilateral engagement and to reconsider the u.s. position on some multilateral treaties and agreements .

recent developments suggest that german leaders will remain both reluctant and hard - pressed to justify increased german military engagement abroad to a persistently skeptical public , even within a nato or eu framework .

germany's 2006 white paper on national security indicates that germany could increasingly emphasize the importance of civilian components to multilateral peacekeeping , stabilization and reconstruction missions , and that it will work within nato and the eu to bolster such capacities .

at the same time , trends in german defense spending , and the relatively slow pace of german defense reform highlight what many consider a notable discrepancy between articulated foreign policy goals and action taken to realize these goals .

germany's ongoing debate on military participation in afghanistan has exposed a lack of domestic consensus on the goals and limits of german foreign and security policy .

specifically , germans appear wary of linking reconstruction and development efforts with combat operations .

until now , merkel and the bundestag have argued that german participation in afghanistan be focused on reconstruction and stabilization efforts .

however , as the distinction between development work and combat operations becomes increasingly unclear , especially under unstable security conditions , germans have begun to re - examine the nature and effect of german military engagement both in afghanistan and elsewhere .

ensuing calls for a reassessment of the grounds for and rules of military engagement stand to further shape germany's ability to partner with its allies in multilateral missions worldwide .

germany appears poised to continue to seek a "middle path" between nato and the eu , promoting the development of an independent european foreign and defense policy as a complement , rather than counterweight to nato .

successive u.s .

administrations have supported esdp as a means to enhance european defense capability and interoperability , but washington has also insisted that eu defense policy be tied to nato .

to this end , u.s. leaders have welcomed merkel's renewed emphasis on nato - eu links .

while germany remains committed to nato as the pillar for european security , some germans have questioned the u.s. commitment to nato , and a perceived u.s. preference to pursue independently defined national interests within the alliance rather than to define and pursue the collective interests of the alliance .

domestic political considerations and german public opinion could continue to play a key role in shaping u.s. - german relations .

president obama's popularity in germany suggests that many germans view the new u.s. administration's foreign policy as a welcome change from the perceived unilateralism of the unpopular george w. bush administration .

however , some observers caution that public expectations of the new president have been unreasonably high and note that policy differences between the two countries remain , particularly in areas where public opposition is high .

for example , in the face of the global economic slowdown , german leaders on both sides of the political spectrum resisted calls from the obama administration to stimulate economic growth through larger domestic spending measures .

in the foreign policy domain , while german officials have welcomed the obama administration's strategic review of afghanistan / pakistan policy , they have essentially ruled out sending more than 500 additional combat troops or relaxing constraints on those troops currently serving in afghanistan .

appendix a .

selected issues in u.s. - german relations — current status economic ties germany is the world's fifth - largest economy and the largest in europe , accounting for about one - fifth of the european union's ( eu ) gdp .

germany is also the largest european trade and investment partner and the second largest overall of the united states .

total two - way trade in goods between the countries totaled $152 billion in 2008 .

u.s. exports to germany in 2008 were worth about $54.5 billion , consisting primarily of aircraft , and electrical and telecommunications equipment .

german exports to the united states — primarily motor vehicles , machinery , chemicals , and heavy electrical equipment — totaled about $97.5 billion in 2008 .

the united states is the number - one destination for german foreign direct investment ( fdi ) ; 11.5% of all u.s. fdi is in germany .

u.s. firms operating in germany employ approximately 800,000 germans , and an estimated 670,000 americans work for german firms in the united states .

like the united states , germany is experiencing a relatively sharp decline in economic growth .

germany's export - based economy contracted 5% in 2009 , and unemployment has been slowly but steadily rising since the end of 2008 .

however , although u.s. - german economic and trade ties remain strong , the global financial crisis and ensuing economic downturn have exposed u.s. - german differences on the cause of and the appropriate response to the crisis .

u.s. officials and some observers have argued that germany was late in recognizing the degree to which the german economy would be affected by the global financial crisis , and that it has not moved aggressively enough to spur domestic economic growth since acknowledging the domestic effects of the crisis .

german officials counter that they have taken substantial action to stimulate their economy — measures which they value at upwards of $100 billion for 2009 and 2010 , including the effect of so - called "automatic stabilizers" guaranteed by germany's social welfare programs .

moreover , they have argued that such domestic spending measures will do little to address the root of the problem , which they tend to view as inadequate regulation of global financial markets .

counterterrorism cooperation most observers consider u.s. - german cooperation in the fight against terrorism to be close and effective .

since discovering that three of the hijackers involved in the september 11 , 2001 , attacks on the united states lived and plotted in germany , the german government has worked closely with u.s. and eu authorities to share intelligence .

germany has identified radical islamic terrorism as a primary threat to its national security , and has passed a number of laws aimed at limiting the ability of terrorists to live and raise money in germany .

in june 2007 , germany's then - interior minister ( and current finance minister ) wolfgang schäuble ( cdu ) proposed a series of domestic counterterrorism initiatives including for increased computer surveillance , and domestic military deployment in the event of a terrorist attack .

schäuble's proposals were not adopted and sparked considerable debate in germany , where personal privacy and individual civil liberties are strictly guarded , and where domestic military deployment is barred by the constitution .

in a march 2010 victory for opponents of schäuble's and other subsequent proposals , germany's highest court ruled that a 2008 data - retention law arising from an eu directive was unconstitutional .

the law would have required telecommunications companies to retain all citizens' telephone and internet data for six months .

the court ruled on personal privacy grounds that all such data be deleted .

also in march 2010 , three german citizens and a turkish resident in germany were convicted of plotting what german investigators say could have been one of the deadliest attacks in european postwar history .

according to german and u.s. intelligence officials , the suspected terrorists planned to target ramstein airbase and other u.s. military and diplomatic locations .

german authorities are reported to have collaborated closely with u.s. intelligence agencies in foiling the plot , with then - homeland security secretary michael chertoff saying that intelligence cooperation between the two countries is "the closest it's ever been. .

discovery of the september 2007 terrorist plot elevated concern in germany about the possibility of future attacks , with some predicting greater support for antiterrorism measures as proposed by merkel and schäuble .

at the same time , others saw the planned attack as designed to raise pressure for a pullout of german troops from afghanistan , and expected calls for an end to german engagement in that country to increase .

german officials are encouraged by the obama administration's reported shift away from the designation "global war on terror. .

germany has never considered its counterterrorism policies part of a war effort and refer rather to a "struggle against international terrorism. .

german officials stress the importance of multilateral cooperation and adherence to international law in combating terrorism .

like the united states , germany advocates a comprehensive u.n. anti - terrorism convention .

germany has welcomed president obama's decision to close the u.s. prison for terrorist suspects at guantanamo bay , cuba , which it views as violating rights guaranteed to "prisoners of war" under the geneva conventions .

however , a reported may 2009 request from the obama administration asking germany to house nine detainees — reportedly all uighurs originally from central and western china — scheduled to be released from guantanamo bay caused concern within the german government .

according to press reports , some german officials were reluctant to accept the detainees for fear of inciting a diplomatic dispute with the chinese government , while others feared that the individuals could pose security risks .

some german officials have also suggested that while they support the obama administration's decision , continued u.s. reluctance to house detainees on u.s. soil could make it more difficult for the merkel government to justify doing so to the german public .

the middle east germany , along with other european countries , believes the israeli - palestinian conflict lies at the root of many of the challenges in the middle east .

merkel has promoted continuity in a german middle east policy based on a commitment to protect israel's right to exist ; support for a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict ; a commitment to a single eu - wide framework for peace ; and a belief that u.s. engagement in the region is essential .

germany has been active in international negotiations aimed at curbing iran's nuclear ambitions and , despite continuing to rule out a german troop deployment to iraq , berlin has provided funded some iraqi reconstruction efforts and participated in efforts to train iraqi security forces .

relations with israel and the israeli - palestinian conflict germany , along with the united states is widely considered one of israel's closest allies .

germany is israel's second - largest trading partner , and long - standing defense and scientific cooperation , people - to - people exchanges and cultural ties between the countries continue to grow .

while distinguishing itself as a strong supporter of israel within the eu , germany has also maintained the trust of palestinians and other groups in the region traditionally opposed to israeli objectives .

germany has been one of the largest country donors to the palestinian authority ( pa ) , and in june 2008 , hosted an international conference to raise funds to bolster pa president mahmoud abbas' emergency government in the west bank .

at the request of the israeli government , german intelligence officers used their contacts with lebanese - based militia hezbollah to negotiate a prisoner exchange between hezbollah and israel in july 2008 .

like other eu member states , germany views a sustainable , two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict as key to ensuring israel's long - term security , and to fostering durable stability in the middle east .

german officials have urged the obama administration to play a leading role in negotiations for a peace agreement .

germany remains firm in its support for eu and u.s. efforts to isolate hamas since its victory in 2006 parliamentary elections and subsequent 2007 takeover of the gaza strip .

however , some experts argue that u.s. - eu efforts to isolate hamas have not worked , and some in germany and europe view engagement as a better way to try to moderate the group and generate progress in the peace process .

iran as a member of the so - called eu - 3 ( france , germany and the united kingdom ) , germany has been at the forefront of eu and u.n. efforts to prevent iran from developing nuclear weapons and continues to seek international consensus on more stringent economic sanctions against iran .

of the eu - 3 , germany has reportedly been the most reluctant to endorse autonomous eu sanctions against iran without an accompanying u.n. security council resolution , and has consequently emphasized the importance of winning chinese and russian support for stricter sanctions .

however , recent reports suggest that officials in berlin could be warming to the idea of more stringent eu sanctions against tehran , including a possible ban on gasoline exports to the country .

since her september reelection , merkel and foreign minister westerwelle have each made strong public statements criticizing the iranian regime and advocating increased sanctions .

the merkel government remains opposed to a military response to the situation .

german and european officials have welcomed the prospect of full u.s. participation in ongoing nuclear talks with iran being led by the eu .

european leaders also appear united in their support for bilateral talks between the united states and tehran .

at the same time , they emphasize that u.s. engagement with iran should be closely coordinated within the existing multilateral framework consisting of the eu3 , china , russia , and the united states ( the so - called p5+1 ) .

germany has been a strong critic of the ahmadinejad government and issued one of the earliest and most vocal condemnations of the iranian government's actions following presidential elections in june .

however , berlin continues to face pressure from the united states and others to limit civilian commercial ties with iran .

along with italy and china , germany remains one of iran's most important trading partners .

two - way trade between germany and iran grew by 20% from 2007 to 2008 .

on the other hand , observers report that german exports to iran were down 17% through july of this year .

germany's two largest banks , deutsche bank and commerzbank ag , have withdrawn from the iranian market , and officials in berlin report that new export credit guarantees to companies doing business in iran have dropped by more than half since 2005 .

in what observers cite as additional evidence of increased pressure on the german business community , the merkel government has reportedly launched an investigation into engineering giant siemens for a possible violation of export control laws .

in december 2009 , authorities at the german port of hamburg seized a shipment of turbo compressors that investigators believe could potentially aide iran's nuclear program .

the delivery was reportedly part of a larger shipment being sent from a siemens branch in sweden .

while some interpret weakening german - iranian economic ties as a sign that berlin is intent on increasing economic pressure on tehran , others argue that german - iranian trade remains robust and that politicians in berlin are unlikely to seek further cuts in commercial ties .

they view german officials' emphasis on unanimity with , for example , russia and china , as evidence that berlin is unwilling to take bolder action against iran .

afghanistan germany is the third - largest troop contributor to isaf and the third - largest donor of bilateral aid for reconstruction and development .

however , perhaps more than any other ally , germany has been criticized for a perceived reluctance to engage in combat and for limiting its military operations to northern afghanistan .

u.s. and nato officials consistently praise germany's contributions to the mission , but continue to call on its leaders to grant more flexibility to its deployed forces .

although germany has resisted sending combat troops to afghanistan's southern regions , it announced in january its intentions to significantly enhance its training of afghan national security forces in northern afghanistan and to double resources for civilian reconstruction efforts as part of a "development offensive" in the region .

german chancellor angela merkel faces persistently low public support for the afghan mission .

in what appears at least in part a reaction to public opposition , the german government says that its "aim over the next four years is to create the conditions necessary to begin a phase - by - phase reduction in its military presence," in afghanistan .

to this end , germany's strategy in afghanistan will increasingly focus on training the ansf and on supporting civilian reconstruction and development priorities identified by the afghan government and .

at a january 2010 international conference on afghanistan in london , germany announced the aforementioned "development offensive" and plans to send an additional 500 to 850 troops to afghanistan in the coming year .

it also committed €50 million ( about $70 million ) to the newly established reintegration fund to support afghan government efforts to reintegrate insurgents into afghan society .

like other allies , german officials have said they could begin to reduce germany's troop presence by late 2011 and hope to see the afghan government take full responsibility for security by 2014 .

germany has about 4,300 troops deployed in isaf engaged almost exclusively in stability operations in the northern part of the country .

germany is the lead nation for regional command north ( rc - n ) , commands a forward support base in mazar - e - sharif , and leads two prts , one in kunduz and one in feyzabad .

since july 2008 , germany has also staffed rc - n's 200-man quick reaction force , intended to provide reinforcement in emergency combat situations .

german officials report that the country provides almost 50% of isaf's fixed wing air transport as well as other country - wide air support .

as part of plans announced at the january 2010 london conference , german officials say they will refocus germany's military deployment to support the training of the afghan national army's 209 th corps , with a goal of establishing three ana brigades .

germany's quick reaction force will be disbanded and the 200 soldiers serving in it joined by an additional 500 military trainers to focus on the training mission .

these forces will supplement eight german operational mentor and liaison teams ( omlts ) currently training ana units .

in 2009 , berlin contributed €50 million ( about $70 million ) to the afghan national army trust fund .

german forces are authorized to engage in combat operations as part of their defense of the northern sector and german commanders have demonstrated an increasing willingness to engage in offensive operations .

however , they continue to face criticism from some nato and allied government officials who allege that german troops and civilians rarely venture beyond the perimeter of their prts and forward operating bases due to concern that they might arouse suspicion or come into contact with armed elements .

a nato airstrike ordered by a german officer in september 2009 that resulted in the death of 142 people , most civilians , caused controversy in germany and has led to heightened public scrutiny of the role of the german military in afghanistan .

in addition to enhancing training of the afghan national army , germany is seeking to boost its police training efforts .

about 120 german police advisors currently staff four german - financed police training centers , which can provide basic and some advanced training to about 5,000 afghan police officers annually .

germany plans to increase the number of trainers in this bilateral program to 200 by mid - 2010 .

in addition , german trainers participate in the focused district development programme ( fdd ) , through which police mentoring teams of up to 10 civil and military police personnel train and accompany afghan units in the field .

about 60 german police officials — mostly retirees — also take part in the eu police - training mission ( eupol ) of 225 that is expected to eventually include up to 450 trainers .

however , the eu mission , initially approved in may 2007 , has reportedly suffered from personnel problems and a lack of eu - nato coordination .

prior to the eu mission , germany shared responsibility for police training with the united states .

some criticized german training efforts , carried out by about 50 police trainers in kabul , for having too narrow an impact and for being overly bureaucratic .

as mentioned above , germany emphasizes the need to enhance civilian reconstruction efforts in afghanistan and has said it will double development resources as part of a "development offensive" in northern afghanistan .

beginning in 2010 , germany plans to almost double annual resources for reconstruction from €220 ( about $304 million ) to €430 million ( about $593 million ) through 2013 .

germany seeks to fund a mix of long - term development projects as well as short - term , "quick - impact" measures that can provide immediate and tangible benefits to the local population .

goals for the coming three years include: job creation and income enhancement through ongoing rural development programs ; infrastructure improvements including construction of an additional 435 miles ( 700 km ) of roads ; improved access to energy and drinking water ; and teacher training .

these efforts will be focused in the northern provinces of kunduz , takhar , badakhshan , baghlan , and balkh .

appendix b .

key date .

