the president enacted h.r .

2638 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , which included the military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act , 2009 , as its division e on september 30 as p.l .

110-329 .

on january 26 , 2009 , representative david r. obey , chair of the house committee on appropriations introduced h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , which supplemented some military construction and veterans affairs appropriations accounts .

the bill was signed by the president on february 17 to become p.l .

111-5 .

the first portion of the " summary and key issues " section of this report , " 'economic stimulus' funding ," beginning on p. 2 , discusses the $4.3 billion arra addition to military construction and veterans affairs appropriations .

this second portion , " regular fiscal year 2009 appropriations " , explains the regular fy2009 appropriations bill , includes a detailed description of its legislative path , and begins on p. 9 .

no official committee conferences were held for either the appropriations or authorization bills before they were enacted .

rather , the appropriations bill was inserted as part of an amendment to h.r .

2638 , a department of homeland security appropriations bill for fy2008 that had been passed by both chambers but never enacted .

the amended bill , renamed the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act for fy2009 , was subsequently passed by both houses without referral to committee and enacted .

the authorization bill was passed and enacted via a different procedural route , but also without recourse to conference .

the authorization bill was subject to an exchange of amendments between the houses , a method known as the "ping pong" procedure , before being cleared for the white house .

the first portion of this section examines those parts of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( h.r .

1 , the arra , enacted on february 17 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-5 ) that touch on military construction and veterans affairs appropriations accounts .

the section's second portion , beginning on p. 9 , discusses the regular fy2009 appropriations to these same accounts enacted on september 30 , 2008 .

the american battle monuments commission ( abmc ) is responsible for the maintenance and construction of u.s. monuments and memorials commemorating the achievements in battle of u.s. armed forces since the nation's entry into world war i ; the erection of monuments and markers by u.s. citizens and organizations in foreign countries ; and the design , construction , and maintenance of permanent cemeteries and memorials in foreign countries .

the commission maintains 24 cemeteries , 22 separate monuments and markers in foreign countries , and three memorials on u.s. soil .

the abmc was responsible for the planning and construction of the world war ii memorial on the mall in washington , dc .

though the national park service assumed responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the memorial at its dedication , the abmc retains a fiduciary responsibility for the remaining public contributions given for its construction .

the abmc also undertook construction of an interpretive center at the normandy american cemetery in normandy , france , to commemorate the world war ii allied invasion of france on june 6 , 1944 , and the subsequent land battles in europe .

the new facility opened on june 6 , 2007 .

the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims was established by the veterans' administration adjudication procedure and judicial review act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-687 ) .

the court is an independent judicial tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the board of veterans' appeals .

it has the authority to decide all relevant questions of law ; interpret constitutional , statutory , and regulatory provisions ; and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an action by the va .

it is authorized to compel action by the va .

it is authorized to hold unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful and set aside decisions , findings , conclusions , rules and regulations issued or adopted by the va or the board of veterans' appeals .

the court currently occupies leased facilities near judiciary square in the district of columbia and is searching for a permanent location as the current lease expires in september 2010 .

the court's major operational initiative is to continue and develop plans , with the general services administration , for a veterans' courthouse and justice center .

the secretary of the army is responsible for the administration , operation and maintenance of arlington national cemetery and the soldiers' and airmen's home national cemetery .

in addition to its principal function as a national cemetery , arlington is the site of approximately 3,200 non - funeral ceremonies each year and has approximately 4,000,000 visitors annually .

the fy2008 omnibus ( p.l .

110-161 ) included additional funds in fy2008 for realignment of government - issued headstones , construction of a heavy equipment storage facility , and funds for costs not included in the budget request related to the relocation of utilities at arlington cemetery .

the armed forces retirement home trust fund provides funds to operate and maintain the armed forces retirement home in washington , dc ( also known as the united states soldiers' and airmen's home ) and the armed forces retirement home in gulfport , mississippi ( originally located in philadelphia , pa , and known as the united states naval home ) .

these two facilities provide long - term housing and medical care for approximately 1,600 needy veterans .

the gulfport campus , encompassing a 19-story living accommodation and medical facility tower , was severely damaged by hurricane katrina at the end of august , 2005 , and is not currently in use .

residents of the facility were transferred to the washington , dc , location immediately after the storm .

a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) was signed between the afrh and the general services administration ( gsa ) for the rebuilding of the gulfport facility , with a targeted completion date in 2010 .

the appropriation for the afrh facilities is from the armed forces retirement home trust fund .

the trust fund is maintained through gifts , bequests , and a $0.50 per month assessment on the pay of active duty enlisted military personnel and warrant officers .

the fy2008 omnibus ( p.l .

110-161 ) provided $800,000 in general funds for the study of the long - term viability of the trust fund .

the budget request for fy2009 includes funds for renovation of the scott dormitory building for residents on the d.c. campus .

the renovations are scheduled to begin in 2010 , so the new gulfport facility can be used to house the d.c. residents displaced by the renovations .

table 9 shows the fy2008 enacted appropriations , the fy2009 request , and the appropriations provided in h.r .

6559 , s. 3301 , and h.r .

2638 ( p.l .

110-329 ) for each of the related agencies .

appendix a. dod military construction accounts appendix b .

additional resource .

crs report rl30002 , a defense budget primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report 98-720 , manual on the federal budget process , by [author name scrubbed] and allen schick ( pdf ) .

veterans affairs crs report rl33991 , disability evaluation of military servicemembers , by [author name scrubbed] et al.. crs report rs22483 , health care for dependents and survivors of veterans , by [author name scrubbed] and susan janeczko .

crs report rs20533 , va - home loan guaranty program: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33704 , veterans affairs: the appeal process for veterans' claims , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33113 , veterans affairs: basic eligibility for disability benefit programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33323 , veterans affairs: benefits for service - connected disabilities , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34370 , veterans affairs: health care and benefits for veterans exposed to agent orange , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22897 , veterans affairs: historical budget authority , fiscal years 1940 through 2008 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22561 , veterans affairs: the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims — judicial review of va decision making , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22666 , veterans benefits: federal employment assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33985 , veterans' benefits: issues in the 110th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33992 , veterans benefits: merchant seamen , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22902 , veterans benefits: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34626 , veterans' benefits: benefits available for disabled veterans , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22804 , veterans ' benefits: pension benefit programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34627 , veterans' benefits: the vocational rehabilitation and employment program , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33993 , veterans ' health care issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34598 , veterans medical care: fy2009 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] .

house committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.house.gov / senate committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.senate.gov / house committee on armed services http: / / www.house.gov / hasc / senate committee on armed services http: / / armed - services.senate.gov / house committee on veterans affairs http: / / veterans.house.gov / senate committee on veterans affairs http: / / veterans.senate.gov / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov / defense base closure and realignment commission ( brac commission ) http: / / www.brac.gov government accountability office http: / / www.gao.gov / .

