the franking privilege , which allows members of congress to transmit mail matter under their signature without postage , has existed in the united states since colonial times .

during the 18 th and 19 th centuries , the franking privilege served a fundamental democratic role , allowing members of congress to convey information to their constituents about the operations of government and policy matters before congress .

conversely , it also provided a mechanism for citizens to communicate their feelings and concerns to members ( prior to 1873 , members could both send and receive mail under the frank ) .

congress has also occasionally granted the privilege to various executive branch officers and others .

although the rise of alternative methods of communication in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries have arguably reduced the democratic necessity of franking , members of congress continue today to use the frank to facilitate communication with their constituents .

the franking privilege has carried an element of controversy throughout american history .

during the 19 th century , the privilege was commonly attacked as financially wasteful and subject to widespread abuse through its use for other than official business .

although concerns about cost and abuse continued in the 20 th century , strong criticism of the franking privilege developed regarding the use of the frank as an influence in congressional elections and the perceived advantage it gives members running for reelection .

contemporary critics of the franking privilege continue to express concerns about its cost and its effect on congressional elections .

in attempting to balance a need for the franking privilege against charges of abuse , congress has routinely amended the franking statutes .

in general , the franking privileges granted at any time can be defined by five dimensions: who is entitled to frank mail , what is entitled to be franked , how much material can be sent , where the franked material can be sent , and when franked material can be sent .

changes to the franking privilege typically have not altered all of these dimensions , resulting in a variety of legislative arrangements of the privilege .

similarly , proposals for future changes may involve altering some , but not all , of these dimensions .

since 1789 , congress has statutorily altered the franking privilege numerous times .

in addition , other bodies empowered to regulate congressional use of the frank — the house and senate , the u.s .

postal service , the house administration committee , the house commission on congressional mailing standards , the senate rules and administration committee , and the senate select committee on ethics and their predecessors — have exercised their authority to reform the governance of the franking privilege .

the franking privilege has its roots in 17 th century great britain .

the british house of commons instituted it in 1660 and free mail was available to many officials under the colonial postal system .

in 1775 the first continental congress passed legislation giving members mailing privileges so they could communicate with their constituents , as well as giving free mailing privileges to soldiers .

in 1782 , under the articles of confederation , congress granted members of the continental congress , heads of various departments , and military officers the right to send and receive letters , packets , and dispatches under the frank .

after the adoption of the constitution , the first congress passed legislation for the establishment of federal post offices , which contained language continuing the franking privilege as enacted under the articles of confederation .

under the post office act of 1792 , members could send and receive under their frank all letters and packets up to two ounces in weight while congress was in session .

subsequent legislation extended member use of the frank to a specific number of days before and after a session , first by 10 days in 1810 , then by 30 days in 1816 , and finally to 60 days in 1825 .

the act of 1825 also provided for the unlimited franking of newspapers and documents printed by congress , regardless of weight .

scholarly work suggests that franked mail played an important role in national politics during the early 19 th century .

members mailed copies of acts , bills , government reports , and speeches , serving as a distributor for government information and a proxy for the then non - existent washington press corps , providing local newspapers across the country with information on washington politics .

because franking statutes allowed members to both send and receive franked mail during much of the 19 th century , constituents could also mail letters to their senators and representatives for free .

according to one scholar , members spent up to three hours each day signing their names on envelopes , some members franking up to 3,000 items daily when congress was in session and occasionally hiring ghost - writers to sign their signature for them .

this led one member to describe the house of representatives as a "bookbinder's shop. .

in 1845 , congress passed comprehensive franking legislation that instituted an accounting system , in which executive departments would pay for mail through general tax revenue , in hopes of easing the burden on the post office department and reducing paid mail rates .

members of congress continued to have their franking privilege paid for out of postal revenue .

the accounting system was repealed in 1847 in favor of an annual appropriation to the post office department to subsidize free and franked mail costs .

after repeal of the accounting system , executive branch use of the frank reverted to the pre - 1845 system .

popular perception of abuse of the franking privilege during the middle of the 19 th century led congress to abolish the privilege in 1873 .

members were provided with special stamps for official government communications , including responses to constituent letters , paid for out of the contingent funds of the house and senate , but could not use free mail to contact constituents unsolicited .

over the following 22 years , the restrictions were gradually relaxed .

in 1874 , reduced postal rates for mailing the congressional record and bound public documents were approved .

in 1875 , members were permitted to send printed speeches and reports for free under their frank , as well as seeds and agricultural reports .

in 1891 , congress allowed members to send mail under their frank to any officer of the federal government .

finally , in 1895 , congress restored the general right of members to mail under the frank , including unsolicited mail to constituents .

after the franking privilege was restored in 1895 , members were allowed to send ( but no longer receive ) "any mail matter to any government official or to any person , correspondence , not exceeding one ounce in weight , upon official or departmental business. .

in 1904 , the franking weight limit was raised to four ounces .

in 1906 , congress explicitly prohibited the loan or use of the frank by anyone not legally entitled to use the frank , as well as use of the frank for the benefit of anyone not legally entitled to use it .

in 1926 , when the 69 th congress consolidated and restated the general and permanent laws of the united states , both penalty mail and the franking privilege were placed in title 39 , the postal service .

in 1953 , in order to encourage fiscal responsibility and allow for more accurate financial management of the post office department , congress began reimbursing the department for franking costs , which the department would treat as revenue .

in order to properly account for these costs , the post office department also began systematic accounting of congressional franked mail costs .

beginning in 1961 , congress passed legislation that allowed members to frank mail to "postal patrons," without a name or street address on the mailing .

strong objections to this policy , largely in the senate , triggered a repeal in 1962 .

after a year of inter - chamber negotiation over such mailings , a compromise was reached: each chamber would handle "postal patron" mailings as it saw fit .

that was the first instance of the house and senate having different franking policies .

the "postal patron" legislation also implicitly expanded the definition of "official business. .

previously , a limited ( albeit flexible ) definition — including department documents to be forwarded and related correspondence — had been the common interpretation of the 1895 provisions .

the house report accompanying the 1961 postal patron statute , however , suggested that the new law would help members deliver "information on the issues pending before congress" to their constituents .

the nature of the postal patron provision meant that newsletters , questionnaires , and constituent reports might now be included in "official business. .

during this period , the post office department was responsible for monitoring and regulating the use of free mailings .

post office department general counsel issued advisory opinions concerning use of the frank , and the post office department attempted to collect postage due on mailings it found improper .

although the post office department issued franking regulations , enforcement placed the post office in an awkward position , as an executive branch agency charged with monitoring the activities of congress .

in 1968 , the post office department stated that , although it would continue advisory opinions , "the final judge as to whether or not the franking privilege has been properly used must be the congressman himself. .

in 1971 , the postal service discontinued offering advisory opinions .

with the postal service no longer offering advisory opinions , a series of lawsuits were brought in 1973 in response to alleged franking abuses by members of congress preceding the 1972 election , including a direct challenge to the constitutionality of the privilege .

some of the lawsuits contended that the franking statutes were being broken by members of congress ; other lawsuits contended that the frank was unconstitutional because it gave incumbents an unfair advantage over challengers in congressional elections .

in response to the legal challenges and a general sense that congress was losing control over the franking privilege to judicial decisions , a new comprehensive franking statute was passed in 1973 .

it included tighter definitions of the types of mail eligible for the frank , prohibited member mass mailings ( defined as 500 or more pieces of substantially similar unsolicited mail ) less than 28 days before primary and general elections in which the member was a candidate for public office , and restricted the frankability of the congressional record to items that would be frankable if sent as letters .

the statute created the commission on congressional mailing standards ( "franking commission" ) to oversee the use of the frank in the house , and designated the senate select committee on standards and conduct to make routine decisions regarding the use of the frank by that chamber .

the commission on congressional mailing standards , consisting of six members chosen by the speaker , three from each major political party , including a chairman selected by the speaker from among the members on the committee on house administration , was authorized "to ( 1 ) issue regulations governing the proper use of the franking privilege ; ( 2 ) to provide guidance in connection with mailings ; and ( 3 ) to act as a quasi - judicial body for the disposition of formal complaints against members of congress who have allegedly violated franking laws or regulations. .

franking reform continued in 1977 , when the house and senate amended their respective chamber rules .

a temporary house commission on administrative review , created in july 1976 , recommended , with respect to the franking privilege , placing a ban on the use of private funds to print mailings distributed under the frank , limiting members to six district - wide mailings per year , extending the pre - election mass mailing ban to 60 days from 28 , and requiring that postal patron mailings be submitted to the franking commission for review .

the commission's recommendations on the franking privilege were subsequently adopted by the house .

the senate adopted a resolution that extended the pre - election mass mailing ban to 60 days , placed a ban on the use of private funds to prepare franked materials , and required senators to file public copies of postal patron mailings .

although the reforms of the 1970s addressed perceived problems of franking abuse , the cost of franking increased dramatically between fy1970 and fy1988 .

in response , congress placed individual limits on members' mail costs and required public disclosure of individual member franking expenditures .

in 1986 , the senate established a franking allowance for each senator and for the first time disclosed individual member mail costs .

in 1990 , the house established a separate franking allowance for its members and required public disclosure of individual mail costs .

the act also required the postmaster general to ( 1 ) monitor use of the frank by each representative and senator ; ( 2 ) notify each member on a monthly basis of the amount of his or her franking allowance used ; and ( 3 ) prohibit the delivery of franked mail in excess of a member's allowance .

tighter restrictions were also placed on member mass mailings .

since october 1992 , members have been prohibited from sending mass mailings outside their districts .

this action followed a u.s. court of appeals ruling that found the practice unconstitutional .

since october 1994 , senators have been limited to mass mailings that do not exceed $50,000 per session of congress .

senators may not use the frank for mass mailings above that amount .

in 1995 , the house consolidated members' allowances for clerk - hire , official office expenses , and mail costs into a single allowance , "member's representational allowance" ( mra ) .

although a representative's franking expenses were still restricted to the mail costs portion of the mra , members could use excess funds in the mail costs allocation for clerk - hire or office expenses .

in 1999 , house regulations were amended such that the combined funds in the mra may be used without limitation in any one allocation category , subject to law and house regulation .

in 1996 , congress extended the pre - election cutoff for representative mass mailings to 90 days from 60 , required each mass mailing to contain the statement , "this mailing was prepared , published , and mailed at taxpayer expense," and required that the statement of disbursements of the house contain member mass mailing information .

during the 109 th congress , in response to allegations of misuse , the committee on house administration adopted a resolution restricting mass mailings made by house committees .

the committee funding resolution for the 109 th congress limited house committees to an aggregate franking cost of $5,000 , and prohibited the use of committee funds for the production of material for a mass mailing unless the mailing fell under specific exceptions related to committee business .

under the new regulations , the chairman or ranking minority member of a committee is required to submit a sample of the material to the house commission on congressional mailing standards for approval .

in addition , no committee is permitted to send franked mail into a member's district within 90 days of an election in which the member is a candidate .

similar restrictions were adopted by the house administration committee in subsequent congresses .

during the 106 th congress , the committee on house administration ( at the time called the committee on house oversight ) adopted a policy requiring advisory opinions for all unsolicited mass communications .

mass communications are defined as any unsolicited communication of substantial identical content to 500 or more persons in a session of congress , and includes mailings , advertisements , automated phone calls , video or audio communications , and emails .

emails to constituents on subscriber lists , however , can be treated as solicited mailings not subject to the pre - election or mass mailing restrictions .

during the 110 th congress , the committee on house administration amended committee regulations to require that members disclose the volume and cost of mass communications on a quarterly basis .

the day - to - day operations of the franking commission are extensive .

the commission offers both formal and informal advisory opinions on the eligibility for the frank of roughly 6,000 to 8,000 pieces of mail each year .

since its establishment in 1973 , the commission has issued regulations and made rulings regarding , among other things , the allowable content of franked mail ; the size , number , and placement of photographs in franked newsletters ; and disclosure of member mass mailings for public examination .

the franking commission also handles , on average , about four or five formal complaints each year about particular pieces of franked mail .

after a finding of fact , the commission is empowered to punish members if appropriate .

inadvertent violations typically result in the member simply reimbursing the house for the cost of the mailing .

more serious violations can result in members losing a portion of their representational allowance , or referral to the house for further action .

historically , congress has regularly expanded and contracted the group of individuals granted the franking privilege .

currently , the franking privilege is granted ( with differing restrictions ) to members of congress , the vice president , certain congressional officers , former members of congress , former presidents , former vice presidents , widows of presidents , and a relative of a member who dies in office .

in the past , congress has granted the franking privilege to high - ranking officers in the executive branch , postmasters , military leaders , and soldiers during wartime .

the vice president is currently eligible for the franking privilege under similar terms as members of congress .

the vice president was first granted the franking privilege in 1792 .

prior to 1873 , the vice president was treated as an official of the executive branch who had the franking privilege , and thus could use the frank without time or weight restriction .

when the frank was restored in 1895 , the vice president was again granted the privilege .

he was , however , subject to similar restrictions as members .

currently , the secretary of the senate , the sergeant at arms of the senate , each of the elected officers of the house ( other than a member of the house ) , the legislative counsels of the house and senate , the law revision counsel of the house , and the senate legal counsel are granted the franking privilege .

this follows a historical pattern of congress granting the privilege to various officers of the legislative branch .

former members of congress are currently eligible for the franking privilege for the 90-day period immediately following the date on which they leave office .

prior to 1847 , former members of congress were not granted any franking privileges .

in 1847 , congress authorized former members to send and receive public documents , letters , and packages under the frank until the first monday of december following the expiration of their term of office .

in 1863 , the privilege for former members was repealed ; in 1872 it was restored .

former members lost the privilege when congress abolished all franking in 1873 .

in 1875 , former members were granted reduced rate postage for nine months after the expiration of their terms .

in 1877 , the date of expiration of the privilege was changed to the first day of december following the expiration of the member's term in office .

in 1895 , congress repealed the reduced rate privilege and restored the franking privilege .

former members were again granted the franking privilege until december 1 .

after the twentieth amendment shifted the end of the congressional term to january 3 from march 4 , congress adjusted the date of expiration on the frank for members of congress to june 30 from december 1 .

in 1970 , congress authorized members to send and receive as franked mail all public documents printed by order of congress , until the last day of june following the expiration of their term in office .

in 1973 , congress moved the expiration date to april 30 .

in 1975 , congress enacted the current law , authorizing the franking privilege for former members for 90 days following the expiration of their term in office , and only for the sending of mail related to the closing of their office .

upon expiration of their term in office , members who at some point during their career served as speaker of the house are granted enhanced franking privileges .

for five years after leaving congress , former speakers are granted the same franking privilege as current members of congress .

this privilege entitles them to send as franked mail correspondence related to their official duties and to send and receive public documents ordered printed by congress .

the franking privilege was first authorized for a former speaker in december 1970 .

h.res .

1238 authorized a general allowance package for the outgoing speaker , john w. mccormack , who was scheduled to retire from the house at the end of the 91 st congress .

mccormack was granted a franking privilege for 18 months beyond the 90 days granted to former members .

in 1974 , congress permanently authorized the franking privilege and other allowances to any former speaker upon expiration of his / her term as a representative , for "as long as he determines there is a need therefor. .

in 1993 , congress limited the period of time for use of the allowance to five years .

persons elected to congress , prior to being sworn in , are currently granted the franking privilege on the same terms as sitting members of congress .

certain relatives of members of congress are eligible for the franking privilege when a member dies in office .

originally enacted in 1968 , this law extends the franking privilege to the spouse of a member who dies in office .

the privilege exists for 180 days and is to be used only to send mail related to the death of the member .

in 1981 , the statute was broadened to allow a member of the immediate family of the member who dies in office to have the franking privilege in the event that there is no surviving spouse .

former presidents have routinely been granted the franking privilege by statute , and in 1958 a general statute was passed providing franking privileges for all former presidents .

since 1800 , congress has regularly , except for two instances , granted the franking privilege to widows of former presidents .

from 1789 until 1973 , the privilege was granted through individual pieces of legislation .

the first such grant was to martha washington in 1800 .

in 1973 , congress enacted general legislation to provide the franking privilege to all future surviving spouses of presidents .

unlike members of congress and other federal officials legally entitled to use the frank , few restrictions regarding weight , substantive content , or volume of use have been placed on the franking privilege of former presidents or widows of presidents , particularly prior to 1973 .

as governed by the 1973 law , the current franking privilege for presidents , spouses of presidents , and surviving spouses of presidents applies only to "nonpolitical mail sent within the united states and its territories. .

no limitation is imposed on volume of use or weight of franked mailings .

since 1873 , officials in the executive branch have used penalty mail for official government correspondence .

prior to 1873 , officials in the executive branch were occasionally granted the franking privilege: heads of departments , the president and vice - president , and high ranking military officials .

early franking statutes granted the franking privilege to local postmasters .

for many citizens seeking postmaster positions , the franking privilege was as important , or more important , than the salaried compensation for the job .

when congress chose to end the franking privilege for postmasters in 1845 , over one - third quit .

the privilege was restored in 1847 .

when the general franking privilege was abolished in 1873 , postmasters were restricted to the use of penalty mail for official government communications .

the first franking statute , passed by the continental congress in 1776 , authorized free mail for revolutionary soldiers .

similar legislation has occasionally been provided to american soldiers in other conflicts .

contemporary critics of the franking privilege generally articulate four objections: ( 1 ) the franking privilege is financially wasteful ; ( 2 ) the franking privilege is abused for private and political gain ; ( 3 ) the franking privilege gives unfair advantages to incumbents in congressional elections ; and ( 4 ) the franking privilege has become outdated with the advent of other forms of communication .

although the word "frank" is derived from the latin francus , meaning "free," the franking privilege is not free .

despite reforms that reduced official mail costs by over 85% between fy1988 and fy2015 , critics continue to view the franking privilege as an unnecessary public expense .

overall congressional mail costs include official mail sent by members ( both regular and mass mail ) , committees , and chamber officers .

during fy2015 , congress spent $8.3 million on official mail according to the u.s .

postal service , representing slightly less than two - tenths of 1% of the $4.3 billion budget for the entire legislative branch for fy2015 .

house official mail costs ( $6.8 million ) were 82% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.5 million ) were 18% of the total .

during fy2014 , congress spent $16.9 million on official mail .

house official mail costs ( $15.1 million ) were 89% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.8 million ) were 11% of the total .

these expenditures continue a historical pattern of congress spending less on official mail costs during non - election years than during election years .

however , analysis of monthly data on official mail costs indicates that , due to the structure of the fiscal year calendar , comparisons of election - year and non - election - year mailing data tend to overstate the effect of pre - election increases in mail costs , because they also capture the effect of a large spike in mail costs from december of the previous calendar year .

reform efforts during the past 30 years have reduced overall franking expenditures in both election and non - election years .

even - numbered - year franking expenditures have been reduced by over 85% from $113.4 million in fy1988 to $16.9 million in fy2014 , while odd - numbered - year franking expenditures have been reduced by over 90% from $89.5 million in fy1989 to $8.3 million in fy2015 .

house mail costs have decreased from a high of $77.9 million in fy1988 to $6.8 million in fy2015 .

the senate has dramatically reduced its costs , from $43.6 million in fy1984 to $1.5 million in fy2015 .

concerns about the public expense of franking have existed virtually continuously since the earliest days of the nation .

two estimates made in the 1840s suggest that congress was franking 300,000 letters and 4.3 million documents each year , with free mail accounting for more than half of the mail leaving washington each day .

these arrangements strained the post office department .

congressional franking , combined with franking privileges granted to local postmasters and executive branch officials , meant that a significant portion of mail in the united states was posted for free .

because the post office department was expected to generate revenue to cover costs , franked and other free mails forced the adoption of higher rates for paid mail .

memorials from many state legislatures urged congress to restrict franking and reduce postage rates .

between 1840 and 1845 , the postmaster general repeatedly asked congress to abolish or restrict the franking privilege , or to have the government pay for free mail through general tax revenue instead of postal revenue .

as with concerns about cost , critics have long objected to the franking privilege because of its abuse for illegal private and political gain .

during the 19 th century , abuse of the franking privilege — either through loan of the frank to non - authorized users or its misuse by those entitled to the privilege — was common .

reports to congress during the mid - 19 th century routinely suggested that the laws prohibiting private use of the frank were universally "disregarded," most people possessing the privilege used it as a "private convenience for themselves and their friends," private companies regularly "secured envelopes with the frank on them," and that "a very small proportion of the matter transmitted through the mails [under the frank] ha[d] any reference to the actual business of congress. .

john quincy adams , during his first year as a united states senator ( 1803 ) noted that the franking regulations requiring all senators to leave a copy of their signature with the local postal clerk for verification purposes were universally ignored .

there is also the famous ( and perhaps apocryphal ) story of a member franking his horse for transportation back home , claiming it was a "public document. .

the franking privilege of the postmasters was also valuable as a party - based patronage benefit , especially in the smaller offices .

in 1840 , amos kendall , auditor to the postmaster general , franked 13,000 letters to postmasters throughout the country , suggesting they subscribe to his newspaper , and implicitly threatening them politically if they did not .

contemporary regulations on the franking privilege severely restrict the types of overt franking abuse common in the 19 th century .

both the house and senate require that members receive an advisory opinion on all mass mailings .

contemporary critics of "abuse" of the franking privilege are often criticizing the incumbency advantage of the frank rather than abuse through the loan or illegal use of the frank .

although contemporary franking critics continue to voice concerns about the costs and abuses of the franking privilege , the most common contemporary criticism of franking regards its use in congressional elections , and the perceived advantage it gives incumbent members running for reelection .

critics argue that the vast majority of franked mail is unsolicited and , in effect , publicly funded campaign literature .

critics also argue that incumbent house members may spend as much on franked mail in a year as a challenger spends on his or her entire campaign .

critics also point out that franked mail costs are higher in election years than non - election years , indicating that members may be using the frank in attempts to influence an election .

historically , although reformers of the franking privilege in the 19 th century were chiefly concerned with abuses that created unnecessary costs , the relationship between the frank and re - election was not unnoticed .

speeches in washington , dc , were often delivered not for consumption by other members , but for the purpose of publication and dissemination back in a member's home district .

several observers noted that the objective was to send a signal to constituents that a member was working hard on their behalf .

even when conceding that the franking privilege serves important purposes , some critics argue that these purposes have been outdated with modern technology .

they point out that telephone , radio , television , and the internet have expanded the mediums by which members can communicate with their constituencies .

email now allows members and constituents to communicate in written form without the marginal costs associated with letter writing .

defenders of congressional franking argue that the privilege continues to facilitate the same important democratic purposes — communication between citizens and representatives and the spreading of political news — that it served during the 18 th and 19 th centuries .

in addition , proponents of franking argue that the rise of modern mass media has given the president certain media advantage over congress , which can be partially counteracted by the franking privilege .

proponents of the franking privilege argue that the frank allows members to fulfill their representative duties by providing for greater communication between the member and an individual constituent .

one defender of the frank has argued that "free transmission of letters on governmental business is directly connected to the well - being of the people because of the nature of the legislative function. .

proponents of the franking privilege argue that representative accountability is enhanced by use of the frank .

they contend that by regularly maintaining direct communication with their constituents , members provide citizens with information by which they can consider current public policy issues , as well as policy positions on which voters can judge them in future elections .

in addition , proponents argue that if legislative matters could not be easily transmitted to constituents free of charge , most members could not afford to pay for direct communications with their constituents .

historically , the franking privilege was seen as a right of the constituents , not of the member .

when the franking statutes were first revised in 1792 , a proponent argued that "the privilege of franking was granted to the members ... as a benefit to their constituents. .

more generally , president andrew jackson suggested that the post office department itself was an important element of a democratic republic: this department is chiefly important as a means of diffusing knowledge .

it is to the body politic what the veins and arteries are to the natural - carrying , conveying , rapidly and regularly to the remotest parts of the system correct information of the operations of the government , and bringing back to it the wishes and the feelings of the people .

beyond direct communications with constituents about matters of public concern , proponents of franking argue that free use of the mails allows members to inform their constituents about upcoming town - hall meetings , important developments in congress , and other civic concerns .

without a method of directly reaching his or her constituents , proponents maintain that members would be forced to rely on intermediaries in the media or significant personal costs in order to publicize information the member wished the constituents to receive .

historically , the franking privilege has long been perceived as serving this role .

in 1782 , james madison described the postal system as the "principal channel" that provided citizens with information about public affairs .

the franking privilege allowed congress to function as a central location for the dissemination of political news , and a large proportion of political news in the united states was delivered to citizens in the form of franked documents , reports , reprinted speeches , and proceedings of congress .

scholars of congress and the presidency have argued that the rise of mass media , particularly television media , have given the president a comparative advantage over congress .

while the president can employ the resources of the executive branch to promote his unitary message , individual members of congress lack the institutional resources to compete with the president and congress as a whole lacks a unity of message .

proponents of franking argue that this puts congress at an institutional disadvantage relative to the president .

one way to maintain a balance between the president and the congress , they argue , is to allow members use of the franking privilege .

in general , the franking privileges granted to members at any given point in time can be defined by five dimensions: who is entitled to frank mail , what is entitled to be franked , how much material can be sent , where franked material can be sent , and when franked material can be sent .

changes to the franking privilege typically have not altered all of these dimensions at once , resulting in a wide variety of legislative arrangements of the franking privilege .

similarly , proposed options for future legislative changes may involve altering some , but not all , of these dimensions .

historically , the franking privilege has been expanded and contracted by congress to cover as few as several hundred persons and as many as 10,000 or more .

currently , the franking privilege is limited to the vice - president , members of congress , certain congressional officers , former presidents , spouses of former presidents , and widows of former presidents .

the frank is available for a limited period to former members and certain relatives of former members who die in office .

currently , there are no general restrictions regarding when the franking privilege may be used .

historically , congress limited use of the privilege to when congress was in session or specific dates surrounding the period when congress was in session .

senators are currently restricted from mass mailing during the 60 day period prior to federal elections , and during the 60 period prior to primary elections in which they are a candidate for any public office .

the restriction for representatives is 90 days prior to federal or primary elections in which they are a candidate for any public office .

in the past , congress has not restricted the franking privilege prior to elections or has restricted it for shorter periods of time , such as 28 days .

current law , chamber rules , and committee regulations place substantial restrictions on the content of franked mail .

the frank may not be used to solicit money or votes , and the materials being mailed cannot relate to political campaigns , political parties , biographical accounts , or holiday greetings .

current law also places specific regulations on the content of individual pieces of mail .

members are restricted in the number and placement of pictures of themselves , repeated use of their name , and the use of biographical material , most commonly found in constituent newsletters .

historically , there was less regulation on the content of franked mail .

historically , congress has regulated the amount of franked mail members may send in a variety of ways .

during all of the 19 th century and most of the 20 th century , the total amount of franked mail individual members could send was not limited .

after the authorization of "postal patron" mailings , members were limited to a specific number of mass mailings .

currently , members are limited in their total amount of franked mail by cost .

the house and senate appropriations committees , and subsequently the respective chambers , determine the amount to be appropriated for each of the two bodies .

each member receives an allotment from these appropriations .

in the senate , the allowance is administered by the committee on rules and administration ; in the house , by the committee on house administration .

representatives and senators are authorized a specific dollar allotment for franked mail , according to a formula based on the number of addresses in their districts / states .

in the senate , the mail allowance is one of three allowances that comprise each senator's "personnel and official expense accounts. .

the other two accounts provide funds for office staff and office expenses .

subject to law and senate regulations , the combined funds may be used without limitation in any one allocation category .

since january 3 , 1999 , in the house the combined funds for each representative's franked mail , office staff , and office expenses ( "members representational allowance" ) may be used without limitation in any one allocation category , subject to law and house regulation .

since october 1992 , representatives have been prohibited from sending mass mailings outside their districts .

this action followed a u.s. court of appeals ruling that found the practice unconstitutional .

contemporary critics of the franking privilege have offered a number of suggestions to abolish or change the privilege .

several of these ideas have been incorporated in bills in recent congresses .

among the ideas are the following proposals .

although the franking privilege has only been abolished once , bills for its abolition have been introduced regularly in congress since the 1830s .

most proponents of abolishing the franking privilege , however , do not support a complete ban on free mail , and disagreement exists on what system would replace the frank .

some proponents advocate replacing the frank with a postage stamp allowance for members as part of their representational allowance .

this option , however , does not directly address contemporary concerns about the frank .

because all franking is now individually charged against member expense accounts , switching to a stamp allowance would have only a symbolic effect as an abolition of the frank .

a second option would be for members to use the penalty mail system under the same restriction as other federal employees .

this would restrict members from sending any mail matter other than official correspondence in response to constituent requests .

this option would likely reduce congressional mail costs significantly .

it could also impair the ability of members to communicate with their constituents .

a ban on all unsolicited mass mailings could potentially save millions of dollars in congressional mail costs and reduce concerns about the effect of franked mass mailings on congressional elections .

a related option would be to reduce the number of mailings that constitute a mass mailing to a smaller number from 500 .

h.r .

2687 introduced by representative ray lahood during the 110 th congress , would have effectively prohibited representatives from mass mailing newsletters , questionnaires , or congratulatory notices .

the prohibition would not have covered certain other types of mass mailings made by members , including federal documents ( such as the congressional record ) or voter registration information .

the proposed legislation would have applied only to representatives ; it would not have affected mass mailings made by senators .

similarly , h.r .

5151 , introduced in the 111 th congress , would have restricted franked materials to documents transmitted under the official letterhead of members .

a ban on all unsolicited mass mailings could potentially save millions of dollars in congressional mail costs and reduce concerns about the effect of franked mass mailings on congressional elections .

unlike a ban on mass mailing , however , a ban on unsolicited mailings might be governed by rules similar to the house's current email policy , allowing unsolicited mass communications to constituents on a subscriber list .

opponents argue that a prohibition on unsolicited mail would restrict the ability of members to communicate with their constituents .

bills to extend the current pre - election ban on mass mailings have been introduced in congress in recent years , ranging from an extension of the prohibited period to 120 days prior to the general and primary elections to a year - long ban that would prohibit mass mailings during the second session of each congress .

some critics of the franking privilege have raised concerns about its effect on elections and have advocated giving franking privileges to challengers in congressional elections .

advocates argue that giving the frank to challengers would reduce the incumbency advantage of members of congress by allowing non - incumbent candidates a similar ability to contact constituents .

opponents have argued that use of the frank is currently prohibited for political purposes and that challengers in congressional elections would inherently be using the frank for campaign purposes .

critics of the frank advocate reducing the overall mail allowance for both senators and representatives .

currently , each senator's franking allowance is determined by a formula that gives a maximum allowance equal to the cost of one first - class mailing to every address in their state .

senate offices that exceed their allowance may supplement the allowance with official office account funds .

senators are , however , limited to $50,000 for mass mailings in any fiscal year .

in the house , each representative's mail allowance is combined with allowances for office staff and official office expenses to form the member's representational allowance ( mra ) .

members may spend any portion of their mra on franked mail , subject to applicable law and house regulations .

critics also suggest restricting representatives to a total mass mailing limit , similar to the current restriction on senate mass mail .

currently , individual member franking costs are disclosed by both the house and senate .

in addition , all mass mailings contain the statement , "this mailing was prepared , published , and mailed at taxpayer expense. .

advocates of increased disclosure support individual disclosure of all franking - related costs , not just mail costs .

h.r .

5151 in the 111 th congress , for example , would have required that current house disclosures include a break - down of expenses for each type of mass communication sent by members .

other proponents propose putting the individual cost of each mass mailing on each piece of the mailing .

h.r .

2788 , introduced in the 110 th congress , would have required that each individual piece of franked mail contained in a mass mailing made by a member of the house contain a statement indicating the aggregate cost of producing and mailing the mass mailing .

each piece of franked mail would have contained the statement , "the aggregate cost of this mailing to the taxpayer is____," with the blank space containing the total cost of producing and franking the mass mailing .

the legislation would not have affected mass mailings made by senators .

although the franking privilege has existed almost continuously since the founding of the nation , the legal restrictions on its use have routinely been altered by congress .

two important trends emerge from this analysis .

first , restrictions on the use of the frank — who is entitled to frank mail , what is entitled to be franked , how much material can be sent , where the franked material can be sent , and when franked material can be sent — have been both tightened and loosened by congress throughout history .

this reflects a normative ambiguity about the privilege , with congress seeking to balance a perceived democratic need for the franking privilege against charges of abuse , wastefulness , and incumbency protection .

second , members of congress continue to use the frank to communicate with constituents , despite the rise of alternative forms of mass communication .

although illegal use of the frank has been largely curtailed , contemporary critics of the privilege continue to voice concerns about wastefulness and incumbency protection .

recent proposed changes to the franking privilege reflect these concerns , seeking to reduce the overall volume of franked mail and the impact of mass mailings on elections , while maintaining the ability of members to effectively communicate with constituents .

