with the end of the first session of the 110 th congress at hand and only the defense appropriation legislation enacted , congress passed a consolidated spending measure for all remaining appropriations bills .

h.r .

2764 , the state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bill , became the vehicle for a $555 billion omnibus spending bill that included funding for domestic agencies .

congress completed action on the bill the week of december 17 , 2007 , and the president signed it on december 26 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

the bill included some of the emergency supplemental funding requested by the white house .

the state department operations and foreign aid programs comprise and total $35 billion , including $2.4 billion in emergency supplemental funds .

the international affairs budget , also known as function 150 , funds a variety of u.s. government programs and activities , including foreign economic and military assistance , contributions to international organizations and multilateral financial institutions , state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) operations , public diplomacy , and international broadcasting programs .

figure 1 provides a percentage breakout of the fy2008 budget request , including food aid that is appropriated in the department of agriculture appropriations bill .

the administration's fy2008 budget request for the department of state is $10.014 billion , representing a 10.5% increase over the fy2007 estimate , but a decline of 4.3% as compared with the fy2006 actual appropriation ( the most recent enacted appropriation for the department of state ) , including rescissions and supplementals .

for international broadcasting , the fy2008 request of $668.2 million represents a 3.8% increase over the fy2007 estimate , but a 1.7% decline from the fy2006 level , including rescissions and supplementals .

related agencies , which are also funded in the state and foreign operations appropriations bill , include the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) , and u.s. assessed contributions to united nations ( u.n. ) , international organizations , and u.n. peacekeeping .

also included are funding for the asia foundation , the national endowment for democracy , and several other small educational and exchange organizations , as well as resources for international commissions , and the u.s. institute of peace .

table 2 shows appropriations for the last decade in both current and constant dollars .

the foreign operations budget comprises the majority of u.s. foreign assistance programs , both bilateral and multilateral .

 ( see tables at the back of this report for foreign operations accounts and funding levels. ) .

the annual foreign operations appropriations bill funds all u.s. bilateral development assistance programs , managed mostly by usaid and the state department , together with several smaller independent foreign aid agencies such as the millennium challenge corporation , the peace corps , and the inter - american and african development foundations .

it also includes funds for the export - import bank , whose activities are regarded more as trade promotion rather than foreign aid .

food aid , such as the p.l .

480 food for peace program , is funded in the agriculture appropriations bill , although it is also considered foreign aid .

the fy2008 request for food aid programs totals $1.319 billion .

the foreign operations budget request for fy2008 totals $24.4 billion in foreign assistance programs , representing a 12% increase from the previous year's enacted level of $21.7 billion .

this level of increase is the largest within the budget request government - wide , and continues the general trend of increases since september 11 , 2001 .

table 3 provides funding levels for foreign operations since fy1999 in both current and constant dollars .

on june 5 , the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related agencies marked up the fy2008 spending measure .

the bill provides a total of $34.243 billion .

of the total , $10.76 billion is for title i — state department operations , international broadcasting , and related agencies , and $23.62 billion is for foreign assistance programs .

the total is $2.95 billion over last year's level and $700 million less than the president's request .

on june 12 , the full house appropriations committee reported out the bill after several amendments were considered .

those amendments are described in the relevant sections below .

on june 28 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee reported out its version of the fy2008 state , foreign operations and related programs bill .

it was passed by the full senate on september 6 by an 81-12 vote .

the senate version provides a total of $34.2 billion in discretionary spending , the same as the house - passed bill .

several provisions of the senate bill differ from those of the house version .

the senate appointed conferees also on september 6 .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $10.08 billion for state department operations ( including ned funds ) .

this represents $71 million more than the house - passed appropriation .

in addition , the senate committee recommended $673.4 million for international broadcasting , nearly $9 million below the house - passed level .

it approved $35.7 million ( $2.2 million below the house level ) for related agencies .

some key differences from the house - passed bill include the following: the senate bill provides $102 million for ned , $22 million more than the house or the fy2007 levels .

the senate bill also moves the ned funding to title iii under the heading democracy fund , rather than fund it in state department operations , title i , where it traditionally has been funded and where it is in the house bill .

the senate bill provides $48 million more than the house for diplomatic and consular programs , but $55 million less for worldwide security upgrades within that account .

the bill renames the subaccount worldwide security protection .

the senate bill recommends $509.5 million ( about $8 million more than the house bill ) for educational and cultural exchanges .

the funding provides $222.6 million for the fulbright program ( the house bill provides $218.8 million ) and $2 million for a new senator paul simon study abroad foundation , as requested by the president .

the senate bill recommends $50 million more than the house bill for contributions to international peacekeeping activities .

the senate report accompanying the bill ( s.rept .

110-128 ) notes that the administration request was unrealistically low and states that additional missions are expected in fy2008 , including in chad , the central african republic , somalia , and possibly darfur .

the senate bill provides $20 million for the east - west center , whereas the house bill provides no funding .

the senate bill provides $662.7 million ( $8.9 million less than the house ) for international broadcasting .

the senate funding measure , however , does not include funds to continue expansion of alhurra tv broadcasting to the middle east , started by $10 million in the iraq war supplemental ( p.l .

110-28 ) .

the committee expressed concern about recent reports of alhurra allowing terrorist affiliates air time and will consider funding in the future .

the senate completed action on h.r .

2764 ( s.rept .

110-128 ) on september 6 , 2007 .

several floor amendments reduced funding for department of state diplomatic and consular affairs general administration to fund increases in some foreign aid accounts ( see "foreign operations" section below ) .

other floor amendments included the following: a leahy amendment to require the secretary of state to establish visa processing facilities in iraq within 180 days of enactment was adopted by unanimous consent .

it also requires a report to congress no later than 30 days after enactment on funding and security requirements for consular operations in iraq in fy2008 .

a cardin amendment to increase funding for the commission on security and cooperation in europe by $333,000 and to reduce funds for state's diplomatic and consular affairs general administration by the same amount was adopted by unanimous consent .

the foreign operations portion of the senate bill , as it was reported out of committee , is similar to the house bill in many respects , including language that would allow the provision of contraceptives to ngos who are ineligible to receive funding because of mexico city restrictions .

the white house has stated that it will likely veto a bill that contains this provision .

like the house bill , it does not provide assistance to iraq .

the senate bill differs from the house version in several aspects .

the senate bill provides $1.2 billion for the millennium challenge corporation , $600 million below the house level and $1.8 billion below the request .

for a second year , the senate bill incorporates all health - related funding from various accounts into one global health programs account that totals $6.531 billion , including pepfar funds .

the house bill maintains separate accounts .

the senate bill provides $4.479 billion for foreign military financing , which is $20 million above the house level , and $57 million below the request .

the senate bill provides $2.915 billion for the economic support fund , which is $258.5 million more than the house , but $404.6 million less than the request .

the senate bill continues funding for a democracy fund , not requested by the administration , that would receive $177 million in fy2008 .

the house bill proposes no separate democracy fund account .

the senate completed action on h.r .

2764 ( s.rept .

110-128 ) on september 6 , 2007 , and adopted several amendments , including a controversial repeal of the long - standing mexico city policy .

the overall funding level remains the same as the committee - reported bill and the house - passed measure .

major amendments approved on the floor include the following: a boxer amendment to repeal the mexico city policy was adopted by a vote of 53-41 .

the mexico city policy bars u.s. aid to international family planning organizations that perform or promote abortions , even if they use their own funds to do so .

a brownback amendment to include language commonly referred to as the kemp / kasten provision to bar the use of funds from being made available to any organization or program that , as determined by the president , supports or manages a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization was adopted by a vote of 48-45 .

a coburn amendment to prohibit funding for the u.s. contribution to the united nations unless copies of all grants , contracts , and other financial and procurement information are posted on a publicly available website was adopted by a vote of 92-1 .

a vitter amendment to bar the use of funds by any international organization , agency , or entity , including the united nations , that requires the registration of , or taxes , a gun owned by a citizen of the united states was adopted by a vote of 81-10 .

a martinez amendment to increase funding for democracy promotion in cuba from $15 million to $45.7 million , matching the administration's request , was adopted by voice vote .

a lieberman amendment to increase funding for democracy promotion programs in iran from $25 million to $75 million was adopted by unanimous consent .

a feinstein and dodd amendment to increase funding for the peace corps by $10 million , from $323.5 million to $333.5 million , and reduce funding for foreign military financing by the same amount was adopted by voice vote .

a leahy amendment to expand the existing human rights certification for assistance to bolivia to include police forces was adopted by unanimous consent .

a leahy amendment to condition assistance to morocco was adopted by unanimous consent .

the provision requires that the secretary of state certify that morocco is ceasing to persecute , detain , and prosecute individuals for expressing their opinions with regard to the western sahara , and is providing unimpeded access to ngos , journalists , and representatives of foreign governments .

a leahy amendment to add gross human rights violations to a provision that prohibits assistance to countries that grant sanctuary to any individual or group that has committed an act of international terrorism was adopted by unanimous consent .

a gregg amendment to prohibit any funds in the bill to be used for aid to iraq was adopted by unanimous consent .

funds can be expended if the secretary of state certifies that the department of state and department of defense are providing the committees on appropriations full and unfettered access to programs in iraq for oversight purposes .

a gregg amendment to require that recipient countries make public their budgets on an annual basis was adopted by unanimous consent .

a gregg amendment to permit the use of $500 million in esf funds for egypt for a u.s. - egypt friendship endowment was adopted by unanimous consent .

an alexander amendment to increase funding for the overseas private investment corporation by $8 million and decrease contributions to the world bank's international development association by the same amount was adopted by unanimous consent .

a brown amendment to increase global health funds for the treatment of drug - resistant tuberculosis by $90 million , and cut $65 million from the state department's diplomatic and consular affairs general administration and $25 million from the asian development fund , was adopted by unanimous consent .

an obama amendment to require the president to propose a comprehensive nuclear threat reduction and security plan was adopted by unanimous consent .

a coleman amendment to prohibit u.s. funds for the u.n. human rights council unless the president certifies that it is in the national interest , or the united states is a member , was adopted by unanimous consent .

a number of amendments failed passage on the floor .

those amendments included the following: a coburn amendment to bar the use of multilateral economic assistance funds for the world bank's malaria control or prevention programs was rejected by a vote of 33-60 .

a coburn amendment to redirect $106.8 million from the global environmental facility to the president's malaria initiative and child survival and health programs was rejected by a vote of 46-47 .

a brownback amendment to strike language in the bill providing that no contract or grant to provide donated contraceptives in developing countries would be denied to any non - governmental organization solely on the basis of the mexico city policy was rejected by a vote of 41-53 .

an ensign amendment to strike a provision in the bill that increases the limit on the u.s. share of u.n. peacekeeping operations from 25% to 27.1% was rejected by a vote of 30-63 .

appendix a .

acronyms appendix b .

foreign aid country categories the restrictive country category includes those countries that have restrictions on the receipt of u.s. assistance either by statute or secretarial determination .

the state department does not provide a list of restrictive countries , although the fy2008 foreign operations congressional budget justification lists certain countries with no categorization: belarus ; burma ; china ; cuba ; iran ; libya ; north korea ; venezuela ; west bank and gaza ; and zimbabwe .

appendix c. state department and related agencies appropriations ( millions of current dollars ) appendix d. foreign operations appropriation ( millions of dollars ) .

