although a number of u.s. agencies and departments implement global health programs that might improve child survival and maternal health ( cs / mh ) , this report focuses only on cs / mh programs conducted by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) from fy2001 to fy2008 .

this report also discusses the interconnected nature of usaid's global health programs , such as how advancements made in addressing malaria might improve maternal and child survival .

in the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) report the state of the world ' s children 2008: child survival , unicef executive director ann veneman celebrated the decline of total annual deaths among children under age five .

in 2006 , an estimated 9.7 million children in that age range died , representing a 60% drop in under - five mortality since 1960 .

despite the decrease , ms. veneman asserted that a critical number of daily deaths among children under five remains high ; some 26,000 die each day .

most studies that measure child mortality focus on deaths that occur before age five because 90% of childhood deaths occur during this time , while 37% occur during the neonatal period ( the first 28 days ) , amounting to about 4 million annual newborn deaths .

the majority of child deaths occur in developing countries , and almost half of them in africa .

on average , nearly 90% of all child deaths are caused by neonatal infections and five infectious diseases: acute respiratory infections ( mostly pneumonia ) , diarrhea , malaria , measles and hiv / aids ( table 1 ) .

according to unicef , undernutrition is the underlying cause of up to half of these deaths .

some health experts assert that maternal and child health are particularly important to monitor , because their mortality rates serve as a barometer for overall health conditions .

supporters of this idea often use the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) listed in table 2 to demonstrate the interconnected nature of health and development and to gauge improvements in child and maternal health ( table 3 ) .

mdgs 4 and 5 call for a two - thirds reduction in child and maternal mortality .

the ability to reach those goals , however , is affected by progress in other mdgs .

for example , countries with significant undernourished populations ( mdg 1 ) that lack sufficient access to clean water ( mdg 7 ) tend to have higher maternal and child mortality rates ( mdgs 4 and 5 ) ; undernourished women and children are also more likely to be impoverished ( mdg 1 ) and are more susceptible to infectious diseases , such as hiv / aids , tb , and malaria ( mdg 6 ) .

unicef found that 62 countries were making no progress towards the millennium development goal on child survival ; nearly 75% of these were in africa .

unicef asserts that child survival and maternal health are inextricably linked .

more than 500,000 women die each year due to pregnancy - related causes , and an additional 15-20 million more suffer debilitating long - term effects , such as obstetric fistula ( discussed below ) .

the vast majority of women who die during or shortly after labor live in developing countries where maternal mortality rates are significantly higher than in industrialized nations ( table 4 ) .

the united nations food and agriculture organization ( fao ) maintains that almost all of these deaths could be prevented if women in developing countries had access to adequate diets , safe water and sanitation facilities , basic literacy , and health services during pregnancy and childbirth .

unicef estimates that 20% of all maternal deaths are linked to undernutrition and that about 75% of maternal deaths are caused by obstetric complications including hemorrhage , sepsis , hypertensive disorders ( mostly eclampsia ) , prolonged or obstructed labor , and unsafe abortions .

maternal mortality and morbidity rates are generally higher for mothers younger than 20 years who typically have more pregnancy and delivery complications , such as toxemia , anemia , premature delivery , prolonged labor , and cervical trauma , and are at higher risk of delivering low birth weight babies .

pregnancy - related complications are the leading cause of death among 15- to - 19-year - olds around the world , and their babies have higher morbidity and mortality rates .

the united nations estimates that adolescents give birth to 15 million infants each year .

girls aged between 15 and 19 years are twice as likely to die from childbirth as women in their twenties , and those younger than 15 years are five times as likely to die .

a survey conducted in mali indicated that the maternal mortality rate for girls aged between 15 and 19 years was 178 per 100,000 live births and 32 per 100,000 for women aged between 20 and 34 years .

causes of maternal death vary significantly among regions .

data collected from 1990 through 2006 indicate that hemorrhage caused about 34% and 31% of maternal deaths in africa and asia , respectively .

in industrialized nations and latin america and the caribbean , hemorrhage caused an estimated 13% and 21% of maternal deaths , respectively ( table 5 ) .

the united nations has found that regions with the lowest proportions of skilled health attendants at birth also have the highest maternal mortality rates .

in sub - saharan africa , 43% of women gave birth with the assistance of a skilled birth attendant , 65% in south asia , and 99% in industrialized nations .

one in every 22 women in sub - saharan africa will likely die from pregnancy - related causes , as will one in every 59 asian women .

in industrialized nations , meanwhile , one in every 8,000 woman faces the probability of dying from pregnancy - related causes .

unicef has found that health systems in many countries do not have the capacity to reduce mortality nationwide .

of the 68 priority countries that account for 97% of all maternal and child deaths , 54 ( 80% ) have health workforce densities below the critical threshold ( 2.5 health workers per 1,000 people ) for significantly improving their health conditions and reaching the health - related mdgs ( table 6 ) .

south africa and swaziland are the only two sub - saharan african countries among the 68 priority countries that have reached the minimum standard .

child and maternal survival rates are higher in areas with ample numbers of health workers to administer immunizations , easy access to clean water , controlled mosquito populations , and sufficient access to nutritious food .

while the greatest shortage of health care workers in absolute terms is in southeast asia ( mostly in bangladesh , india , and indonesia ) , sub - saharan africa suffers from the greatest proportional shortage of health care workers in the world .

who estimates that there are 57 countries with critical shortages of health care workers , of which 36 are in africa and none in industrialized nations .

globally , who estimates that an additional 4.3 million health workers are needed , and that on average , countries across africa would need to increase their number of health workers by about 140% in order to meet the minimum threshold of 2.5 health care professionals per 1,000 people .

the u.s. agency for international development is the lead u.s. agency responsible for improving child survival around the world .

according to usaid , research that it supported during the 1970s and 1980s has been used to develop interventions and technologies now used to save millions of children .

over the past 20 years , usaid has committed more than $6 billion in support of global child survival efforts .

about half of those funds were committed from fy2001-fy2008 , when congress appropriated $3.4 billion to child survival and maternal health efforts .

recognizing that six health problems ( acute respiratory infections , diarrhea , malaria , hiv / aids , measles , neonatal complications ) cause about 90% of all child deaths in developing countries and that undernutrition contributes to half of these , usaid allocates a significant proportion of its child survival funds to addressing these health issues .

this section summarizes information usaid has presented about its efforts to improve child and maternal health .

usaid's maternal health programs seek to ensure healthy pregnancy outcomes in low - resource environments through a wide range of interventions , including nutritional supplementation for mothers , treatment for parasitic worms that disrupt nutrient absorption , tetanus toxoid immunizations , prevention of mother - to - child hiv transmission , intermittent treatment for malaria , and detection and treatment of syphilis .

usaid advocates that families plan for all births to be attended by a skilled birth attendant and that communities develop contingency plans for accessing emergency obstetric care for mothers who deliver at home — the preferred method in many cultures .

usaid trains birth attendants to avert infant deaths by facilitating infant breathing , resuscitating , and caring for the infant in the event of birth asphyxia ; ensuring hygienic cord and eye care ; and encouraging immediate breastfeeding .

community - based maternal health interventions include teaching families and communities to recognize birth complications and where to bring a mother for emergency care , identifying transportation to a hospital ahead of time , identifying a blood donor for the mother , and creating a savings plan for health care costs .

this section discusses how usaid reports it addresses key causes of maternal mortality .

congress has consistently boosted appropriations to usaid's global health programs throughout the administration of president george w. bush , though mostly for specific diseases .

from fy2001 through fy2008 , congress has supported the president's calls for higher spending on targeted , disease - specific u.s. programs through three key initiatives: the president's international mother and child hiv prevention initiative ( fy2002-fy2004 ) , pepfar ( fy2004-fy2008 ) , and the president's malaria initiative ( fy2006-fy2010 ) .

at the same time , appropriations to other health issues , such as child survival and maternal health have changed little ( with the exception of fy2008 , when appropriations to cs / mh activities increased ) .

while most health experts applaud the recent increase in u.s. commitment to countering the global spread of diseases like hiv / aids , many remained concerned that other health programs that offer life - saving interventions for women and children are overlooked and underfunded , particularly in sub - saharan africa .

the world health organization asserts that some two - thirds of child deaths are preventable through practical , low - cost interventions .

those expressing concern about the apportionment of u.s. global health funds argue that hiv / aids , tb , and malaria are not the only diseases killing people .

in addition to proposing an increase in funding for cs / mh programs , some observers urge congress to boost support for other health issues that affect child survival and maternal health .

below is a list of bills introduced to date in the 110 th congress to directly and indirectly improve maternal and child health .

h.amdt .

360 to h.r .

2764 , consolidated appropriations act of 2008 , increased support for maternal and child health by $5 million for fy2008 .

the amendment was incorporated into the bill , which was enacted and became p.l .

110-161 .

h.r .

5501 and s. 2731 , tom lantos and henry j. hyde united states global leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 , authorize $50 billion and $48 billion , respectively , for international hiv / aids , tb , and malaria interventions and require that women receiving drugs to prevent mother - to - child hiv transmission are also provided with or referred to appropriate maternal and child services .

the house version , which passed by recorded vote , 308-116 , calls for linkages to and referral systems for ngos that implement multi - sectoral approaches for access to hiv / aids education and testing in family planning and maternal health programs supported by the united states .

the senate version does not include language on family planning .

the senate passed h.r .

5501 by voice vote , 80-16 , with a substitute amendment that inserted the language of s. 2731 after amendments were made on the senate floor .

h.r .

1302 and s. 2433 , global poverty act of 2007 , require the president to develop and implement a comprehensive strategy to advance u.s. efforts to promote the reduction of global poverty , the elimination of extreme global poverty , and the achievement of the millennium development goal of reducing by one - half the proportion of people worldwide , between 1990 and 2015 , who live on less than $1 per day .

language in the bills indicates that improving maternal and child health is part of this comprehensive strategy .

the house passed the bill by voice vote on september 25 , 2007 , and referred it to the senate foreign relations committee .

the senate version was placed on the senate calendar on april 24 , 2007 .

h.r .

2266 and s. 1418 , u.s .

commitment to global child survival act of 2007 , provide assistance to improve the health of newborns , children , and mothers in developing countries , and for other purposes .

the house version was referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

the senate version was reported out of the senate foreign relations committee and placed on the senate legislative calendar .

h.r .

1225 , focus on family health worldwide act of 2007 , amends the foreign assistance act of 1961 to improve voluntary family planning programs in developing countries , and for other purposes .

the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

h.r .

2114 , repairing young women's lives around the world act , provides a u.s. voluntary contribution to the united nations population fund for the prevention , treatment , and repair of obstetric fistula .

the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

h.r .

2604 , united nations population fund women's health and dignity act , provides financial and other support to the united nations population fund to carry out activities to save women's lives , limit the incidence of abortion and maternal mortality associated with unsafe abortion , promote universal access to safe and reliable family planning , and assist women , children , and men in developing countries to live better lives .

the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

s. 1998 , international child marriage prevention act of 2007 , authorizes funds to reduce child marriage , and for other purposes .

the bill was referred to the senate foreign relations committee .

s. 2682 , united nations population fund restoration act of 2008 , directs u.s. funding to the united nations population fund for certain purposes including maternal and child health .

the bill was referred to the senate foreign relations committee .

h.res .

1045 , global security priorities resolution , while acknowledging a need to address the threat of international terrorism and protect the global security of the united states , calls for reducing the number and accessibility of nuclear weapons and preventing their proliferation .

the resolution estimates that "the savings generated in the long term by significant reduction of nuclear armaments will be appreciable , with estimates as high as $13 million annually. .

the resolution directs a portion of these savings towards child survival , hunger , and universal education , and calling on the president to take action to achieve these goals .

the resolution was referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

h.res .

1022 , affirms the house's commitment to promoting maternal health and child survival at home and abroad through greater international investment and participation and recognizes maternal health and child survival as fundamental to the well - being of families and societies , and to global development and prosperity .

the house agreed to suspend the rules and agree to the resolution , as amended , but the motion to reconsider was agreed to without objection .

