this report provides an overview of the process by which the department of defense ( dod ) acquires weapon systems and briefly discusses recent major efforts by congress and dod to improve the performance of the acquisition system .

for a discussion on the process for dealing with significant cost growth in weapon systems , see crs report r41293 , the nunn - mccurdy act: background , analysis , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the department of defense acquires goods and services from contractors , federal arsenals , and shipyards to support military operations .

acq uisition is a broad term that applies to more than just the purchase of an item or service ; the acquisition process encompasses the design , engineering , construction , testing , deployment , sustainment , and disposal of weapons or related items purchased from a contractor .

from a policy perspective , federal regulations and federal law generally use the terms acquisition and procurement interchangeably .

the term procurement , when used within the context of acquisitions , is different from the budget definition of procurement that generally references the procurement budget appropriations account — a funding stream that is distinct from research and development , operations and maintenance , and other budget categories .

dod's acquisition process is highly complex and does not always produce systems that meet estimated cost or performance expectations .

congress has been concerned with the structure and performance of the defense acquisition system for many years .

for example , the house armed services committee's report of the fy2007 defense authorization bill stated simply put , the department of defense ( dod ) acquisition process is broken .

the ability of the department to conduct the large scale acquisitions required to ensure our future national security is a concern of the committee .

the rising costs and lengthening schedules of major defense acquisition programs lead to more expensive platforms fielded in fewer numbers .

the committee's concerns extend to all three key components of the acquisition process including requirements generation , acquisition and contracting , and financial management .

over the decades , congressional oversight has focused on many aspects of the acquisition process , from "micro - level" practices , such as characteristics of a particular contract , to "macro - level" practices , such as management and execution of the joint strike fighter and other major defense acquisition programs ( mdaps ) .

congress has held oversight hearings and enacted legislation in an effort to improve the defense acquisition structure and its practices .

every weapon system in the u.s. arsenal is intended to satisfy a specific military need ( often referred to as a requirement ) , must be paid for by the federal budget , and is designed and built within an acquisition system .

from concept to deployment , a weapon system must go through the three - step process of identifying the required weapon system , establishing a budget , and acquiring the system .

these three steps are organized as follows: 1 .

the joint capabilities integration and development system — for identifying requirements .

2 .

the planning , programming , budgeting , and execution system — for allocating resources and budgeting .

3 .

the defense acquisition system — for developing and / or buying the item .

these three steps ( each of which is a system onto itself ) , taken together , are often referred to as "big 'a'" acquisition , in contrast to the defense acquisition system , which is referred to as "little 'a'" acquisition ( see figure 1 ) .

programs are divided into acquisition categories ( acats ) based primarily on program cost .

the level of management oversight of an acquisition program increases as the cost of the program increases .

the most significant dod and congressional oversight activities apply to mdaps , which are categorized as acat i programs .

table 1 illustrates the thresholds and decision authorities for all acats .

concerns over defense acquisitions generally center around significant cost overruns , schedule delays , and an inability to provide troops in the field with the equipment they need when they need it .

many analysts believe that cost overruns and schedule delays have a debilitating effect on the nation's military and threaten america's technological advantage and military capabilities .

for more than 50 years , both congress and dod have initiated numerous attempts to improve defense acquisitions .

despite the numerous initiatives , studies and reports ( many of which echo the same themes and highlight the same weaknesses in the acquisition process ) , congressional hearings , and legislative fixes , dod acquisition reform efforts have failed to rein in cost and schedule growth .

in recent years , dod and congress have taken another look at defense acquisitions and embarked on an effort to improve the process .

some analysts believe that the efforts currently underway are the most comprehensive in more than 20 years .

in recent years , dod has embarked on a number of initiatives aimed at improving the process for buying weapon systems .

for example: on january 10 , 2012 , dod issued updated versions of the instructions charter of the joint requirements oversight council and joint capabilities integration and development system .

on january 19 , 2012 , dod issued an updated version of the manual for the operation of the joint capabilities integration and development system .

on november 26 , 2013 , dod issued an updated "interim" instruction operation of the defense acquisition system ( 5000.02 ) .

dod has also undertaken a comprehensive effort to improve the overall operation of the defense acquisition system .

on september 14 , 2010 , then - under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ashton carter issued the memorandum better buying power: guidance for obtaining greater efficiency and productivity in defense spending .

the memorandum outlined 23 principal actions to improve efficiency , including making affordability a requirement , increasing competition , and decreasing the time it takes to acquire a system .

in november 2012 , secretary carter's successor , frank kendall , launched the better buying power 2.0 initiative , an update to the original better buying power effort , aimed at "implementing practices and policies designed to improve the productivity of the department of defense and of the industrial base that provides the products and services" to the warfighters .

better buying power 2.0 contained 34 separate initiatives , including reducing the frequency of senior - level reviews and improving requirements and market research .

according to officials , better buying power 3.0 is in development .

these and other related dod initiatives generally focus on rewriting the rules and regulations to create a more efficient and effective acquisition process , improving the culture and professionalism of the acquisition workforce , and improving the overall performance of the acquisition system .

although these efforts are not aimed solely at weapon system acquisition , if such efforts succeed in improving acquisitions writ large , weapon system acquisitions should similarly improve .

in recent years , the primary mechanism through which congress has exercised its legislative powers to reform the defense acquisition structure has been the annual national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) .

sections of the acts have prescribed requirements applicable to both specific acquisition programs and acquisition structure overall , the latter of which has typically been addressed in section viii , usually titled "acquisition policy , acquisition management , and related matters. .

generally , the requirements prescribed in this section have focused on specific issues rather than a comprehensive overhaul of the entire defense acquisition structure .

in the national defense authorization acts for fy2008-2012 , the titles dealing with acquisitions included more than 240 sections .

the most recent legislation that had a significant impact on weapon system acquisitions was enacted in may 2009 , when congress passed and the president signed into law the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 ( s. 454 / p.l .

111-23 ) .

key provisions in the act included the appointment of a director of cost assessment and program evaluation within dod who communicates directly with the secretary of defense and deputy secretary of defense and who issues policies and establishes guidance on cost estimating and developing confidence levels for such cost estimates ; the appointment of a director of developmental test and evaluation who serves as principal advisor to the secretary of defense on developmental test and evaluation and develops polices and guidance for conducting developmental testing and evaluation in dod , as well as reviewing , approving , and monitoring such testing for each major defense acquisition program ; the appointment of a director of systems engineering who serves as principal advisor to the secretary of defense on systems engineering and who will develop policies and guidance for the use of systems engineering , as well as review , approve , and monitor such testing for each mdap ; a requirement that the director of defense research and engineering periodically assess technological maturity of mdaps and annually report findings to congress , requiring the use of prototyping , when practical ; a requirement that combatant commanders have more influence in the requirements - generation process ; changes to the nunn - mccurdy act , including rescinding the most recent milestone approval for any program experiencing critical cost growth ; a requirement that dod revise guidelines and tighten regulations governing conflicts of interest by contractors working on mdaps ; and a requirement that a principal official in the office of the secretary of defense be responsible for conducting performance assessments and analyses of major defense acquisition programs that experience certain levels of cost growth .

