congress has enacted laws requiring individuals and facilities to take measures to protect environmental quality and public health by limiting potentially harmful emissions and discharges , and remediating damage .

enforcement of federal pollution control laws in the united states occurs within a highly diverse , complex , and dynamic statutory framework and organizational setting .

multiple statutes address a number of environmental pollution issues , such as those associated with air emissions , water discharges , hazardous wastes , and toxic substances in commerce .

regulators and citizens take action to enforce regulatory requirements in a variety of ways to bring violators into compliance , to deter sources from violating the requirements , or to clean up contamination ( which may have occurred prior to passage of the statutes ) .

implementation and enforcement provisions vary substantially from statute to statute , and are often driven by specific circumstances associated with a particular pollution concern .

given these many factors , it is difficult to generalize about environmental enforcement .

this report focuses on enforcement of federal environmental pollution control requirements under the clean air act ( caa ) ; the clean water act ( cwa ) ; the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla or superfund ) ; and other statutes for which epa is the primary federal implementing agency .

the report provides a brief synopsis of the statutory framework that serves as the basis for pollution control enforcement , including an overview of the key players responsible for correcting violations and maintaining compliance .

implementation and enforcement of pollution control laws are interdependent and carried out by a wide range of actors including federal , state , tribal , and local governments ; the regulated entities themselves ; the courts ; interest groups ; and the general public .

figure 1 , below , presents the array of local , state , tribal , and federal entities that constitutes the environmental pollution control enforcement / compliance framework and organizational setting .

a diverse set of regulatory approaches and enforcement tools is applied to a sizeable universe of regulated entities by these multiple regulating authorities to ensure compliance .

a general discussion of enforcement monitoring and response tools is included in this report , followed by a summary of recent fiscal year federal funding levels for enforcement activities .

discussion of available enforcement data sources , as well as tables illustrating examples of trends in enforcement activities , is presented in the two appendixes .

while this report touches on many aspects of environmental enforcement , it does not describe every aspect and statute in detail .

rather , the report is intended to provide a broad perspective of environmental enforcement by highlighting key elements , and a general context for the range of related issues frequently debated .

information included in this report is derived from a variety of sources .

these sources , including relevant subject - matter crs reports providing in - depth discussion of specific topics and laws , are referenced throughout .

several themes reflecting congressional concerns over time since epa was established in 1970 are reflected throughout the major sections of this report .

congress has conducted oversight , primarily in the form of hearings , on various aspects of the organizational infrastructure and operations designed to enforce pollution control statutes .

these aspects of enforcement have also been the topic of investigations by the government accountability office ( gao ) and epa's office of inspector general ( epa - oig ) .

the federal government's oversight of and coordination with states in implementing and enforcing federal pollution control laws have been of particular interest to congress .

the following sections briefly discuss some of the key issue areas .

as congress has enacted a number of environmental laws over time , as well as major amendments to these statutes , responsibilities of both the regulators and the regulated community have grown .

organizational structures of regulatory agencies have evolved in response to their expanding enforcement obligations .

regulators also must adapt to an evolving , integrated system of administrative and judicial enforcement , compliance assistance , and incentive tools ( see discussion under " enforcement response and compliance tools ," later in this report ) .

epa and states apply a set of environmental enforcement tools to identify and correct noncompliance , restore environmental damage , and impose penalties intended to deter future violations .

compliance with pollution control laws is addressed through a continuum of response mechanisms , ranging from compliance assistance to administrative and civil enforcement , to the stronger criminal enforcement .

the spectra of tools , which escalate in terms of their level of severity and intensity , are authorized in each of the environmental statutes .

the following sections of this report provide a brief overview of the various enforcement response mechanisms .

over the years , epa and states have sought to effectively balance the provision of guidance and assistance to prevent violations or achieve compliance by regulated entities with federal pollution control requirements , with the imposition of strong enforcement actions in response to violations .

some critics have depicted environmental enforcement as overly litigious , or requiring unwarranted remedies .

others counter that actions are not pursued with enough rigor and frequency , or that penalties are not severe enough to deter noncompliance .

epa officials have countered that , in some instances , the agency is relying more on settlements and focusing on requiring increased expenditures on pollution control technologies , and that it is focusing judicial actions on larger and more complex cases that are expected to result in larger environmental benefits .

epa and states maintain a considerable degree of flexibility in determining how to respond to potential violations , to the extent authorized by individual statutes .

initially , a potential violation is identified through monitoring , inspecting , citizen reporting , or through self - reporting by the regulated entity .

as a first step in the enforcement process , unless an imminent danger or hazard has been determined , epa and states may attempt to obtain corrective actions by simply issuing a warning or notifying a facility that minor violations may exist , and granting reasonable time for compliance .

epa or a state may then ( or sometimes as a first step ) initiate a civil administrative action under its own authority without involving the judicial process , or file formal civil or criminal judicial actions in court .

sanctions imposed , whether through negotiated settlements or decisions by the court , generally include required actions to achieve compliance and to correct environmental damage ( injunctive relief ) , and may include monetary penalties ( and incarceration in the case of criminal violations ) .

during the last 10 years , settlements increasingly have also included requirements that violators undertake mutually agreed - upon environmentally beneficial projects supplemental to other sanctions .

as noted , epa , states , and the courts have considerable discretion in determining sanctions and remedies on a case - by - case basis so that the individual circumstances of each case are appropriately addressed .

a majority of environmental violations are addressed and resolved administratively by states and epa , and many of these cases are settled through negotiations between the government and the alleged violator .

for example , during fy2013 , epa issued 873 administrative compliance orders and filed 1,440 final administrative penalty order complaints .

in comparison , also during fy2013 , 137 civil judicial cases were filed with the court , and 176 civil judicial enforcement cases were concluded .

civil judicial cases constitute the second - largest category of environmental enforcement actions .

historically , judicial actions focused on violation of a single environmental statute .

in recent years , epa and states have increased the frequency of reliance on a multimedia ( multi - statute ) approach and multimedia investigations .

the number of administrative and judicial enforcement actions and penalties often fluctuate significantly from year to year .

these fluctuations are generally a reflection of a combination of factors , including statutory deadlines ; new or amended requirements in response to new scientific information or amended and new regulations ; increased or decreased resources ; environmental priority changes at the federal or state levels ; and increased or improved monitoring / reporting .

for example , epa reported that the number of administrative penalty order complaints issued by the agency more than doubled , from 2,229 complaints in fy2005 to 4,647 in fy2006 , then declined to 2,237 in fy2007 , 2,056 in fy2008 , 1,914 in fy2009 , 1,901 in fy2010 , and 1,735 in fy2011 .

the number of administrative penalty order complaints increased to 1,760 in fy2012 , then declined to 1,407 in fy2013 .

epa reported that the combined $1.15 billion in civil penalties ( administrative and judicial ) assessed in fy2013 was an all - time high , due to a record settlement of $1.0 billion reached with the transocean defendants to resolve alleged violations associated with the deepwater horizon gulf of mexico oil spill .

additionally , the total dollar amount of penalties collected in a given year could reflect the completion of one or two large cases .

for example , the settlement with the transocean entities represented nearly 90% of the civil penalties assessed for fy2013 .

illustrations of the frequency of enforcement actions by type over time are presented in appendix b ; this appendix also includes illustrations of administrative , judicial , and criminal penalties assessed over time by statute .

the adequacy of resources needed by epa , doj , and the states to effectively enforce the major federal environmental pollution control laws is often highlighted during congressional debate of fiscal year appropriations .

historically , congress has specified funding levels for certain aspects of epa enforcement activities , or required the agency to undertake certain actions under annual appropriations ; an example is the previously mentioned provision included in the house - passed fy2008 interior and environmental agencies appropriations bill ( h.r .

2643 ) that would have required epa to hire criminal investigators to bring the total number of investigators up to the statutory requirement of 200 , pursuant to the pollution prosecution act of 1990 .

 ( the provision was not included in the fy2008 consolidated appropriations. ) .

the president's fy2015 budget request included $583.0 million for epa's enforcement program activities , compared to $560.9 million enacted for fy2014 , $553.1 million enacted ( post - sequestration ) for fy2013 , and $583.4 million enacted for fy2012 .

as of the date of this report , n o regular appropriations acts for fy2015 ha d been enacted .

on september 19 , 2014 , president obama signed into law the continuing appropriations resolution , 2015 ( p.l .

113-164 , h.j.res .

124 ) .

section 101 of the act continues appropriations for federal departments and agencies generally at fy2014 enacted levels minus a 0.0554% rescission .

the continuing resolution ( cr ) is authorized until december 11 , 2014 , or until the enactment of fy2015 appropriations .

funding for epa under the cr is subject to the authority and conditions provided in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2014 ( division g , p.l .

113-76 ) .

section 104 of the cr further states that continuing funding for all federal departments and agencies cannot be used to initiate or resume any project or activity that did not receive appropriations for fy2014 .

table 5 , which follows , illustrates the distribution of funding and full - time equivalents ( ftes ) among various enforcement activities across the agency's appropriations accounts for the fy2013 president's request and the three prior fiscal years enacted .

because of differences from fiscal year to fiscal year in the scope of the activities included within each of the accounts , apt direct comparisons below the appropriations account level are often difficult .

these differences include the addition and discontinuation of program activities , as well as the reorganization and consolidation of certain activities .

doj's resource ( funding / staff ) requirements and outlays associated with its litigation activities under the major federal pollution control statutes are , in the main , a subset of the funding ( proposed and previously appropriated ) for the environment and natural resources division ( enrd ) in its annual budget justifications .

as discussed previously , enrd is responsible for the majority of doj's support of the federal pollution control laws , as well as many other responsibilities , including representing the united states in matters regarding natural resources and public lands , acquisition of real property by eminent domain for the federal government , and cases under wildlife protection laws .

the president's fy2015 budget request for doj included $112.5 million for enrd and an estimated 526 ftes .

an additional $21.8 million for up to 115 ftes was included in the president's fy2015 request for epa to be transferred by epa to doj / enrd through a reimbursable agreement for superfund work .

the fy2014 enacted levels for doj included $107.6 million and 526 ftes for enrd , plus an additional $23.1 million for up to 115 ftes transferred from epa for superfund work .

fy2012 enacted levels for enrd were $108.0 million and 582 ftes , plus $24.6 million for up to 115 ftes transferred from epa .

of the fy2014 enacted amount , including the transfers from epa , roughly $67.0 million and 312 ftes were for environmental litigation activities ; $9.9 million and 46 ftes were for criminal litigation conducted by doj's environmental crimes section ; and $57.1 million and 266 ftes were for civil environmental enforcement and defensive litigation conducted by the environmental enforcement and the environmental defense sections .

detailed reporting of federal funding to states and states' funding contributions for pollution control enforcement / compliance activities is not readily available .

ecos has tracked a broader category of state funding and expenditures that it defines as annual "environmental and natural resource spending," which , in more recent years , has been primarily based on survey data reported by states .

the data , which include state and federal funding , are limited for purposes of enforcement of federal pollution control laws in that they combine environmental and natural resource spending .

also , states vary in how they track and report this type of spending .

the data do provide a source of state funding from a national perspective .

in its march 2008 state expenditures report , ecos only analyzed regulatory environmental agency work , which includes work pursuant to the primary federal pollution control laws addressed in this report and related activities .

for fy2008 ecos projected a total expenditure for all states combined of $12.65 billion for these regulatory environmental protection activities .

ecos reported that $3.06 billion , or less than 25% of the projected amount , was from federal funding to states for these purposes .

based on a february 2010 survey of 36 states and puerto rico , ecos reported that of the agencies represented by the survey respondents , 2,112 positions were eliminated or were being held vacant due to budget limitations in fy2010 .

in an august 2010 report , ecos found that overall , state environmental agencies' budgets have decreased from fy2009 to fy2011 .

that said , there is a budget increase from fy2009 to fy2010 among states that included srf / arra [state revolving loan funds / american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009] administrative funds .

there has been a slight overall drop in money coming from state general funds , while funds from the federal government have increased marginally , and funds from "other" sources , such as those raised through permitting fees , have remained relatively constant .

federal appropriations , in particular allocations to states , for adequate staffing and effective enforcement of federal environmental statutes to protect human health and the environment , will likely continue to be an issue of concern .

fully evaluating and measuring the overall effectiveness of current ( and past ) pollution control enforcement and compliance activities can be quite complicated .

discussion throughout this report highlights the difficulties inherent in characterizing the many facets of environmental enforcement at a macro level , and identifies many of the factors that may contribute to its perceived successes and shortcomings .

however , several indicators do provide insight into a better understanding of the complexities associated with elements of enforcement , such as the vastness and diversity of the regulated community , the multiplicity of the activities and priorities across many regulating entities , and variability across statutes .

since the establishment of epa in 1970 , congress has been concerned with a number of crosscutting issues associated with the enforcement of pollution control statutes and regulations , as reflected in provisions of enacted and amended environmental legislation over time .

congressional interest remains heightened , particularly with regard to the substance of intergovernmental relations , epa - state relations , and fiscal requirements .

continued involvement for the remainder of the 113 th congress with these issues could take several directions .

one likely result could be additional oversight hearings .

alternatively , relevant appropriations legislation may contain provisions or language regarding funding for specific enforcement activities .

congressional interest might focus on further statutory approaches to establish changes in the epa - states' partnership , such as legislation similar to past proposals concerning refinement of the national environmental performance partnership system ( performance partnerships , or nepps ) and the associated grants award process .

the 113 th congress is also considering other statute - specific legislation to address other long - standing concerns that affect certain aspects of epa enforcement / compliance activities under the various pollution control laws .

the regulated community , public interest groups , federal and state officials , and congress are often divided on whether to pursue legislation that would further expand or constrain enforcement / compliance .

they are similarly divided with respect to proposals that would expand states' authority for implementing and enforcing certain aspects of the major federal pollution control laws .

views and congressional involvement with respect to these issues are likely to continue to evolve in the years ahead .

appendix a. enforcement / compliance databases and examples of reported results enforcement / compliance databases and reporting compliance monitoring data are used to manage the compliance and enforcement program , and to inform the public of enforcement actions taken and penalties imposed .

epa and the states collect and maintain compliance / enforcement data in many forms .

according to epa's oeca fy2006 accomplishments report , ecos reported that states collect about 94% of environmental quality data contained in epa's databases , primarily from state - issued permits and monitoring programs .

information is often entered into multiple databases or transferred from state databases .

historically , the databases were often incompatible , making cross media / statute queries difficult .

in recent years , epa has been working to expand and modernize the integration of several of the individual databases to allow more cross referencing of compliance data by regulators and to provide querying capabilities to the public .

epa compiles data from the various databases and provides various statistics in the form of annual accomplishment and multi - year trends reports .

reporting has traditionally focused on statute - by - statute results , including actions initiated and concluded , and penalties and other sanctions assessed .

the reliability and consistency of epa and state databases , and how effectively the reported information can be used as an indicator of environmental progress and the impacts of environmental enforcement has been an issue of some debate , and questioned in reviews conducted by epa - oig and gao .

critics contend , and epa has long recognized , that while somewhat indicative of the failure to comply with environmental requirements , counting enforcement actions alone ( "bean counting" ) does not provide a complete measure of the effectiveness of the national environmental enforcement / compliance program .

epa has expanded its reporting by including estimates of environmental benefits ( pollution reduction and impacts avoided ) in its "annual results" for the most recent fiscal years .

additionally , epa developed a new web - based tool and interactive map that allow the public to obtain detailed information by location about the environmental pollution control enforcement actions taken at approximately 4,600 facilities .

released initially in december 2009 , the interactive maps show facilities in the united states where epa concluded an enforcement action between october 1 , 2008 , and september 30 , 2013 ( fy2013 ) .

the maps are provided on epa's annual results website .

the maps do not include environmental pollution control enforcement actions taken by state or local governments .

epa has taken steps to expand and modernize its primary publicly available enforcement reporting database enforcement and compliance history online , or echo .

in february 2013 , epa released interactive dashboards and comparative maps on the echo website that include state - level enforcement data for the most recent five years .

as part of its echo modernization and redesign effort , following the september 2013 release of an echo beta test site , epa launched the initial phase of the modernized echo database in december 2013 ( echo 2.0 ) .

the original echo website launched in 2002 was retired , and at the present time certain features are not available , but epa has been continuously updating the website , and features from the original website have been modernized and phased in throughout 2014 .

on september 11 , 2014 , epa announced its most recent upgrade "echo 2.3" which includes the addition of resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) and epa civil enforcement case compliance data searching capabilities .

the modernization of the echo database has also subsumed epa's online tracking information system ( otis ) , which was available only to government employees ( including tribal governments ) .

otis was retired at the time of the december 2013 release of the modernized echo website .

overview of enforcement / compliance databases a number of epa's single - and multi - media national databases include enforcement and compliance data elements .

while these databases are generally available to epa staff , and in some cases state and local governments , most are not readily available to the public .

the enforcement and compliance history online , or echo , developed and maintained by oeca is the most prominent publicly accessible database .

introduced in 2002 , echo queries provide a snapshot of the most recent three years of a facility's environmental compliance record , but are limited primarily to certain requirements under the caa , cwa , and rcra .

epa continues to expand the integration and capabilities of this and other databases .

finally , several state environmental agencies maintain additional information about compliance and enforcement ( beyond what is reported to epa systems ) .

for a more complete list and descriptions of epa's enforcement / compliance databases , see epa's "compliance and enforcement data systems" web page at http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / data / systems / index.html .

the following brief summaries of several of epa's integrated national databases are a consolidation of descriptions provided on the agency's website: enforcement and compliance history online ( echo ) see http: / / echo.epa.gov / .

originally released in 2002 , echo is an interactive website that allows users to query permit , inspection , violation , enforcement action , informal enforcement action , and penalty information for individual or multiple facilities .

initial queries return a list of relevant facilities , each linked to a "detailed facility report," indicating whether a facility has been inspected / evaluated , occurrence and nature of violations ( noncompliance ) , nature of enforcement actions ( including penalties ) that have been taken , and contextual information about the demographics surrounding the facility .

the echo database does not contain violations and enforcement information about all environmental laws for which epa has primary jurisdiction , instead focusing only on actions for clean air act ( caa ) stationary source facilities , clean water act ( cwa ) major direct discharge facilities , resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) hazardous waste handlers , and systems violations of the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) .

as noted by epa , examples of data not generally available from echo include violations at cwa direct discharge minor facilities , caa mobile source and asbestos violations , toxic substances control act ( tsca ) and federal insecticide , fungicide and rodenticide act ( fifra ) violations , superfund violations , and cwa wetlands and pretreatment violations .

a "modernized" version of the echo website , echo 2.0 , was launched on december 3 , 2013 , and the original echo website was retired ( as was the nonpublicly available otis database ) .

not all features and data will be immediately available .

the central features of the initial release were cross - statute ( multimedia ) facility searching and state comparative maps and dashboards .

epa began phasing in program - specific ( air , water , waste searching ) and other enhancements in january 2014 , and will continue to do so throughout 2014 until all features of the original echo website are replaced .

to date epa released a variety of enhancements: echo release 2.1 on march 24 , 2014 , echo release 2.1.1 on april 18 , 2014 , echo release 2.1 update on april 24 , 2014 , echo release 2.2 on june 24 , 2014 , and echo release 2.3 on september 10 , 2014 .

epa reports these updates , including a summary of upgrades and enhancements , on its echo "what's new" website at http: / / echo.epa.gov / whats_new .

during the modernization process , some searches will be unavailable from time to time .

as of the publication of this crs report , epa proposed the following estimated schedule for completing additional specific capabilities: clean air act facility and pollution search — february 2015 epa and state annual enforcement actions map — to be determined prior to the modernization effort , in february 2013 , epa had released interactive dashboards and comparative maps on the echo website that include state - level enforcement data for the most recent five years .

the feature remains available on the modernized version of the echo website .

information includes the number of completed inspections , types of violations found , enforcement actions taken , and penalties assessed by state , and users can customize the presentation to view state activity as well as view comparisons with epa activity .

epa initially added an interactive maps feature for tracking federal enforcement activities in fy2011 .

envirofacts see http: / / www.epa.gov / enviro / .

envirofacts provides public access to information about environmental activities , such as releases , permit compliance , hazardous waste handling processes , and the status of superfund sites , which may affect air , water , and land anywhere in the united states .

data are retrieved from various epa source databases .

users can develop online queries , create reports , and map results .

facility registry system ( frs ) see http: / / ofmpub.epa.gov / sor_internet / registry / facilreg / home / basicinformation / .

frs ( a companion to the integrated facility searches in envirofacts ) can be used to create facility identification records , including geographical location , and to locate sites or places subject to environmental regulations or oversight ( eg , monitoring sites ) .

records are based on information from epa program national systems , state master facility records , and data collected from epa's central data exchange .

integrated compliance information system ( icis ) see http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / data / systems / icis / index.html .

icis integrates data that are currently located in several separate data systems .

icis contains information on federal administrative and federal judicial cases under the following environmental statutes: the caa , cwa , rcra , epcra , tsca , fifra , cercla ( superfund ) , sdwa , and mprsa .

icis also contains information on compliance assistance activities conducted in epa regions and headquarters .

the web - based system enables states and epa to access integrated enforcement and compliance data .

the public can only access some of the federal enforcement and compliance information in icis by using the epa enforcement cases search and epa enforcement sep search through echo .

integrated data for enforcement analysis ( idea ) see http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / data / systems / multimedia / idea / index.html .

idea maintains copies of epa's air , water , hazardous waste , and enforcement source data systems that are updated monthly .

an internal epa database , idea uses "logical" data integration to provide a historical profile of inspections , enforcement actions , penalties assessed and toxic chemicals released , for epa - regulated facilities .

online tracking information system ( otis ) the otis web link is no longer updated , http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / data / systems / multimedia / aboutotis.html .

note: the otis website , available only to federal , state , and tribal government staff , was retired with the december 2013 release of the modernized echo website .

former otis content and "government - only features" will be accessible internally to government staff via epa lan id and password , or through an epa portal id log - in on the "echo gov" portion of echo.epa.gov .

otis was a collection of search engines that enabled epa , state / local / tribal governments and certain other federal agencies to access a broad range of data relating to enforcement and compliance .

no public access was available .

this web interface application sent queries and drew data from the idea ( discussed above ) system , which integrates facility data from different epa databases .

idea copies many epa and non - epa databases , and organizes the information to facilitate cross - database analysis .

see http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / data / systems / multimedia / aboutotis.html ( website no longer supported ) .

a number of other databases , mostly for single media , also include compliance / enforcement data .

many of these databases were the basis for certain data elements in the various idea and otis integrated databases , and typically were not directly available to the public .

other databases included the air facility system ( afs ) ; permit compliance system ( pcs ) ; resource conservation and recovery act information system ( rcrainfo ) ; national compliance data base system and federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act / toxic substances control act tracking system ( ncdb / ftts ) ; and safe drinking water information system / federal ( sdwis / fed ) .

although the information on the integrated systems did not represent "real time" data , it was updated once a month when oeca refreshed the source data systems .

additionally , epa routinely made improvements to existing aspects of otis , idea , and echo , and often enhanced the system by adding new search capabilities and tools .

for example , in december 2012 epa announced that it had completed a major , multi - year database modernization for searching clean water act actions .

epa decommissioned the previous permit compliance system ( pcs ) and replaced it with the new integrated compliance information system for the national pollutant discharge elimination system ( icis - npdes ) .

as another example , in september 2012 epa began adding greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission data to the otis database , adding ghg emission column in the air and multimedia search results , and new ghg rows to the detailed facility report "facility and permits and identifiers" section .

appendix b .

examples of reported enforcement actions and penalties over time the following figures and tables provide examples of the type of enforcement data collected , compiled , and reported over time .

they are intended to show proportional relationships of the various types of enforcement actions ( eg , administrative vs. judicial ) in a given year and by statute , not annual or long - term enforcement trends .

to compare the reported activities from year to year requires more detailed information regarding the specific circumstances in those years .

there can be significant variability from year to year in how data were reported and which entities reported .

epa has refined terms and definitions in the data elements from year to year .

other factors that result in variability include the introduction of new regulatory requirements in a given year , and fruition of statutory deadlines .

the figures presented below reflect longer - term data ( 15 to 20 years ) through fy2013 , whereas the tables generally provide data for the most recent five years , depending on the availability of data for the most recent fiscal year .

results are presented by action ( eg , administrative , civil judicial , criminal judicial ) , and where readily reported , for actions by statute ( eg , clean water act , clean air act ) .

the data have been compiled from epa's annual fiscal year results reports , national enforcement trends charts and tables , and data provided directly to crs by epa .

