four groups of federal programs target unemployed workers: unemployment insurance programs , health care assistance , job search assistance , and training .

this report describes these programs , how they interact with each other , and their funding .

unemployed workers and their families may experience substantial income loss .

if the unemployed worker's family income is low enough , there are a number of means - tested benefits and programs for which the unemployed worker's family might qualify ( eg , temporary assistance for needy families , ssi , or medicaid ) .

eligibility for such benefits is not conditional on an individual's current employment status .

this report does not attempt to discuss these means - tested benefits and programs .

a variety of benefits may be available for unemployed workers .

when eligible workers lose their jobs , the unemployment compensation ( uc ) program may provide income support through the payment of uc benefits .

those who exhaust uc benefits may be eligible for additional weeks of unemployment compensation through the temporary emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program or through the permanent extended benefit ( eb ) program .

since the creation of the euc08 program in june 2008 , congress has made several changes to the structure of the euc08 program .

these structural changes have consequences for the availability of euc08 tiers and benefits in states .

the current maximum potential duration of euc08 benefits available to individuals is 47 weeks , depending on state unemployment rates ( in addition to the weeks of uc benefits that are available ) .

certain groups of workers who lose their jobs on account of international competition may qualify for additional or supplemental income support through trade adjustment act ( taa ) programs .

if an unemployed worker is not eligible to receive uc benefits and the worker's unemployment may be directly attributed to a declared major disaster , a worker may be eligible to receive disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) benefits .

two federal laws may aid unemployed workers in the purchase of health insurance .

the first , the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( cobra ) , allows unemployed workers in certain circumstances to purchase continued health insurance coverage from their previous employers .

the second , the health coverage tax credit ( hctc ) , allows certain taa and rtaa participants to receive an advanceable and refundable tax credit for purchasing health insurance .

federal support for americans seeking assistance to obtain , retain , or change employment is undertaken by a national system of local one - stop career centers ( one - stops ) .

one - stops were established by law under the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia , p.l .

105-220 ) , but had been encouraged by the dol since it began awarding states one - stop development grants in 1993 .

although one - stops bring together employment and training services of approximately 20 required partners , the central component of all one - stops is a labor exchange system that is universally accessible to job seekers and employers .

this labor exchange system is undertaken by the u.s. employment service ( es ) , first established by the wagner - peyser act of 1933 .

the nation's central workforce development legislation is the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ) .

in addition , the act established linkages between wia training activities and three other populations targeted by federal programs: workers eligible for taa , military veterans , and workers over the age of 55 covered under the older americans act of 1965 .

wia includes titles that authorize programs for job training , adult education and literacy ( the adult education and family literacy act ) , vocational rehabilitation ( the rehabilitation act of 1973 ) , and the employment service ( the wagner - peyser act of 1933 ) .

title i of wia provides employment and training services for unemployed and underemployed individuals through three state formula grant programs ( adults , dislocated workers , and youth ) and a number of national programs .

wia programs operate on a program year ( py ) of july 1 to june 30 ( eg , py2012 runs from july 1 , 2012 , through june 30 , 2013 ) .

fy2012 appropriations fund programs from july 1 , 2012 , until june 30 , 2013 .

although wia authorized funding through september 30 , 2003 , wia programs continue to be funded through annual appropriations .

table 1 provides detailed national funding information for wia title i programs .

the wia programs are briefly described below .

the three formula grant programs for youth , adult , and dislocated workers provide funding for employment and training activities provided by the national system of one - stop career centers .

statutory formulas distribute funds to states on the basis of measures of unemployment and poverty status for youth and adult allocations and unemployment measures only for dislocated worker allocations .

states in turn distribute funds , again by formula , to local workforce investment boards .

this formula grant funds employment and training services through a "sequential service" strategy to both unemployed and employed individuals aged 18 and older .

any individual may receive "core" services ( eg , job search assistance ) .

to receive "intensive" services ( eg , individual career planning ) , an individual must have received core services and need intensive services to become employed or to obtain or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency .

to receive job training ( eg , occupational skills training ) , an individual must have received intensive training and need training services to become employed or to obtain or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency .

in fy2012 , funding for state grants for adults was $770.8 million .

a majority ( approximately 80% ) of wia dislocated worker funds are allocated by formula grants to states ( which in turn allocate funds to local entities ) to provide training and related services to individuals who have lost their jobs and are unlikely to return to those jobs or similar jobs in the same industry .

the remainder of the appropriation is reserved by dol for a national reserve account , which in part provides for national emergency grants to states or entities ( as specified under section 173 of wia ) .

grants under this section are for employment and training assistance to workers affected by major economic dislocations , such as plant closures or mass layoffs .

in fy2012 , funding for state grants for dislocated worker training activities was $1.008 billion and was $224 million for the national reserve .

this formula grant program provides training and related services to low - income youths aged 14-21 who face barriers to employment .

services prepare both in - school and out - of - school youth for employment and post - secondary education by linkages between academic and occupational learning .

in fy2012 , funding for state grants for youth activities was $824.4 million .

wia authorizes several national grant programs that provide training funds to targeted populations .

job corps and programs for native americans and migrant and seasonal farm workers are generally found in all states .

this primarily residential job training program , first established in 1964 , provides services to low - income individuals aged 16-24 primarily through contracts administered by dol with corporations and nonprofit organizations .

currently , there are 125 job corps centers in 48 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

in fy2012 , funding for job corps was $1.7 billion .

this competitive grant program provides training and related services to low - income indians , alaska natives , and native hawaiians through grants to indian tribes and reservations and other native american groups .

in fy2012 , funding for the native americans program was $47.6 million .

this competitive grant program provides training and related services , including technical assistance , to disadvantaged migrant and seasonal farmworkers and their dependents through discretionary grants awarded to public , private , and nonprofit organizations .

this program is also referred to as the national farmworker jobs program and was funded in fy2012 at $84.3 million .

additional competitive grant programs are specified in either the wia legislation itself or in appropriations language for wia .

this program provides training and related services to veterans through competitive grants to states and nonprofit organizations .

it has been administered by dol's veterans' employment and training service since fy2001 .

in fy2012 , funding for the veterans' workforce investment program was $14.6 million .

authorized under section 171 of wia , this competitive grant program will provide resources to up to 12 states to implement the workforce data quality initiative ( wdqi ) , which is a joint initiative started in fy2010 between eta and the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

the wdqi is intended to enable state workforce agencies to build longitudinal data systems to merge workforce and education data .

the wdqi complements the arra - funded state longitudinal data system program in the ed .

in fy2012 , funding for the wdqi was $6.5 million .

this competitive grant program combines two previous demonstration projects , the prisoner reentry initiative ( pri ) and the responsible reintegration of youthful offenders ( rryo ) .

pri , first funded in fy2005 , supports faith - based and community organizations that help recently released prisoners find work when they return to their communities .

rryo , first funded in fy2000 , supports projects that serve young offenders and youth at risk of becoming involved in the juvenile justice system .

in fy2008 , the reintegration of ex - offenders program combined the pri and rryo into a single funding stream .

in fy2012 , funding for this single program was $80.2 million .

this competitive grant program funds projects that provide education and construction skills training for disadvantaged youth .

since its inception in 1992 , the program was administered by the department of housing and urban development , but was moved to dol by the youthbuild transfer act ( p.l .

109-281 ) , effective fy2007 .

participating youth gain work experience , job training , education ( a ged or preparation for secondary education ) , and leadership development by working to rehabilitate and construct housing for homeless and low - income families .

funding in fy2012 for youthbuild was $79.7 million .

appropriations for wia totaled $4.9 billion in fy2012 .

from that amount , $2.6 billion was allotted to states through programmatic formula grants .

these dollars flow through the state workforce investment board and then , by formula , to local boards to serve as the central funding for one - stop centers .

although unemployed persons are the target population for wia title i programs , particularly for training , currently employed individuals also benefit from many wia services .

table 1 provides program - by - program funding information for fy2012 .

as discussed above , the wia statute mandates connections between the nation's one - stop system and a number of other employment , education , and social service programs .

two of these one - stop partners also specifically fund employment and training activities for their particular populations: workers affected by trade - related layoffs and low - income older americans .

in addition to the benefits described previously , taa - certified workers are eligible for training assistance .

approved training programs include a number of governmental and private programs and may last up to 104 weeks .

in fy2011 , more than 86,000 workers participated in taa - funded training .

training for taa - certified workers is funded out of the taa reemployment services funding annually allocated to each state .

under the 2011 reauthorization ( p.l .

112-40 ) , $575 million is distributed each year using a formula that considers the number of recent taa - certified individuals in a state and the local cost of providing training .

in addition to training activities , states must fund administrative activities and case management out of their reemployment services allocation .

older workers who opt for the rtaa program ( described previously in this report ) and work full - time may not receive training assistance .

rtaa participants that work more than 20 hours per week but less than full - time are required to be enrolled in a training program to receive the rtaa wage supplements .

title v of the older americans act of 1965 ( oaa ; p.l .

89-73 , as amended ) authorizes the community service employment for older americans ( cseoa ) program , also known as the senior community service employment program ( scsep ) .

administered by dol , its purpose is to promote part - time employment opportunities in community service for unemployed low - income persons aged 55 or older and who have poor employment prospects .

the program is the primary job creation program for adults since the elimination of public service employment previously authorized under wia's predecessor legislation .

while cseoa aims to move participants into subsidized employment , it also recognizes that older people who have special needs may need to remain in subsidized employment .

however , program participation is limited to 48 months .

the program also supplements the income for some workers who cannot find jobs in the private economy .

for fy2012 , cseoa funding of $448.3 million represented 23% of oaa funds .

cseoa funds are awarded to both states and national sponsor organizations .

