forests are major carbon sinks — repositories of vast amounts of carbon .

activities that alter forests — create , enhance , modify , or eliminate them — significantly affect the amount of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) in the atmosphere .

forests store about 45% of terrestrial carbon , and were estimated to sequester 2.6 billion metric tons ( tonnes ) of co 2 per year in the 1990s , about a third of annual anthropogenic carbon emissions from fossil fuel and land use changes .

concerns about global climate change and its impacts on the environment and the economy are encouraging policy - makers and stakeholders to explore a range of opportunities that would reduce emissions of co 2 and other greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) .

reducing deforestation and increasing the amount of carbon stored in forests are approaches that have generated considerable interest for their ability to support climate change mitigation .

congress is considering legislation that would , among other things , provide financial incentives for parties to reduce ghgs or sequester ( store ) co 2 .

the possible use of forests to sequester co 2 is part of this larger debate over ghgs and climate change .

this report describes current markets for forest carbon sequestration , the potential for using forests to offset other sources of ghg emissions , and the concerns and drawbacks related to forest carbon sequestration efforts .

the potential economic and environmental impacts of global climate change have led many to consider regulating ghg emissions from various sources , and to seek ways to ameliorate their own ghg emissions .

projects that sequester ghgs or reduce ghg emissions from unregulated economic sectors , such as forestry , can generate offsets , or credits , to sell to regulated entities or to those who wish to reduce their carbon footprints .

in either case — for regulated entities or for voluntary reductions — forestry activities ( eg , afforestation , reforestation , and avoided deforestation ) typically present opportunities to offset ghg emissions .

offsets are commonly project - based initiatives involving specific projects or activities whose primary purpose is to reduce , avoid , or sequester ghg emissions .

parties can develop offsets from a wide variety of activities , such as methane capture and agricultural soil projects , but forestry - related projects offer significant potential , in the volume of ghgs that can be avoided or sequestered .

offsets , or credits earned by an offset project , would likely be the currency of most forest carbon markets .

offsets are the measurable avoidance , reduction , or sequestration of co 2 or other ghg emissions .

forestry projects as offsets raise a number of concerns .

to be credible , the emissions reduced , avoided , or sequestered must be additional to business as usual ( i.e. , what would have happened anyway ) , verifiable , and permanent .

these concepts , and the problems that arise in assuring credible forestry , are discussed later in this report .

one concern for offset markets , in addition to the drawbacks discussed below , is the potential for double - counting the offsets — that is , that sellers might try to sell the same offset to multiple buyers .

thus , compliance markets , and some voluntary markets , require some type of reporting and registration for offsets .

this has led to incentives for independent reporting and registry programs , as discussed below .

several types of forestry projects might qualify as offsets for compliance or voluntary carbon markets .

the capacity of forestry projects to provide offsets is substantial , with higher carbon prices increasing the number of economically feasible projects .

one study estimated that u.s. forestry projects could sequester more than 100 million tonnes of co 2 at a carbon price of $5 per tonne or as much as 1,200 million tonnes at $50 , as shown in figure 2 .

subsequent changes in law and policy , as well as changes in energy , carbon , and forestry markets and different assumptions , would likely lead to different conclusions .

still , this potential is significant when compared to the 6,957 million tonnes of u.s. co 2 emissions in 2008 .

the inclusion of projects in other countries would affect the quantity and price of offsets .

this is particularly significant for forestry , since tropical deforestation and forest degradation have been estimated to cause as much as 17% of anthropogenic carbon emissions .

whether to include international projects in compliance schemes has been subject of extensive debate .

 ( see " avoided deforestation ," below. ) .

in addition , international forestry projects may face more significant problems than domestic projects , as discussed below .

although forestry - related projects may offer considerable opportunities to mitigate climate change , several issues with offsets generally and with forestry projects in particular have generated controversy .

the primary concern is the integrity and credibility of offsets generated by forestry activities .

to be credible , a forestry offset should provide a net co 2 reduction or sequestration equal to an emission reduction from a direct emission source , such as a smokestack or exhaust pipe .

this issue is critical , particularly if the offsets are to be used in an emissions trading program .

implementing this objective imposes challenges for all offset types , but forest offsets generally present more hurdles than other projects .

to generate credible offsets , projects must be additional to what would have occurred without the incentive supplied by the carbon market ; they must be verifiable ( i.e. , measurable and enforceable ) ; they must control or adjust for leakage ; and they must address the issue of permanence .

forward crediting is proposed by some to accommodate the long period of carbon accumulation in forests , but others are concerned about assuring payments only for actual carbon sequestration .

these issues are discussed below .

additionality is a significant factor in determining offset integrity .

indeed , if a project is not additional , it cannot qualify as an offset in a compliance market .

additionality means that the offset project is an activity beyond what would have occurred under a business - as - usual scenario .

in other words , in the case of a forestry project , would the sequestration have happened anyway ? .

a test of additionality would examine whether the offset project would have gone forward in the absence of the forest carbon market .

for instance , does the activity represent a common practice or conform to an industry standard ? .

is the forestry project required under other federal , state , or local laws ? .

would the sequestration project generate financial gain ( i.e. , be profitable ) due to revenues from outside the offset market ? .

for example , in the united states and canada , reforestation following a timber harvest would generally not qualify as an offset , because most states and provinces require reforestation .

similarly , disposal of sawmill waste by burning to produce energy , and displace the use of fossil fuel , would not qualify as an offset , because all u.s. sawmills burn their waste ( except for what is sold for paper production ) for energy .

additionality is at the crux of an offset's integrity , but applying the additionality criterion may present practical challenges .

assessing a project's additionality may involve some degree of subjectivity , which may lead to inconsistent additionality determinations .

for instance , it may be impossible to accurately determine "what would have happened anyway" for some projects .

data on historic deforestation are sketchy , at best , making it difficult to assess whether an avoided deforestation program would be additional .

in addition , offsets from forest management via delayed timber harvests might be difficult to document as additional , since many landowners do not have explicit plans for the exact timing of future harvests .

the forest carbon sequestration must be real and measurable .

that is , the forestry project — afforestation , avoided deforestation , etc. — must actually occur and have a quantifiable amount of carbon sequestered .

meeting these objectives requires measurement , monitoring , and enforcement .

measuring forest carbon sequestration can be problematic .

various approaches have been taken , including tables , models , and protocols for estimating carbon sequestration by various practices in different locales .

a common limitation is that many estimators use commercial timber volume as the basis for carbon stored , but the relationship between commercial volume and carbon sequestered might not be linear .

for example , thinning is a forestry practice intended to increase commercial volume by concentrating the same total growth on fewer commercial stems .

total growth also varies widely from site to site , depending on a host of localized physical and environmental factors .

thus , many observers recommend , and some existing carbon markets require , field measurements to adjust the estimated carbon storage to on - the - ground reality .

one problem is that field measurements are expensive and subject to sampling error .

to verify that sequestration projects are meeting their stated level of sequestration , some level of monitoring is required .

for enforceable contracts , periodic monitoring is essential to assure that the contract is fulfilled .

for agreements larger than projects , such as avoided deforestation for an entire landholding or country , periodic monitoring becomes more important and more difficult .

remote sensing ( eg , satellite imagery ) and field sampling are common practices for monitoring large - scale changes , but both are expensive and both are subject to sampling and other possible errors .

the two practices are commonly used together , with field sampling to assure the on - the - ground accuracy of remotely sensed data .

often , the reality of a project is assured through an enforceable contract , such as an easement attached to the forested property to require continued forest cover .

many existing forest carbon markets require third - party verification for forest carbon credits .

for some markets and practices , assurance of sustainable forest management can be obtained through forest certification .

a number of organizations , such as the forest stewardship council ( fsc ) , the programme for the endorsement of forest certification ( pefc ) , and the sustainable forestry initiative ( sfi ) , have set standards and rely on independent third parties for certification of sustainable forest management .

leakage "occurs when economic activity is shifted as a result of the emission control regulation and , as a result , emission abatement achieved in one location that is subject to emission control regulation is [diminished] by increased emissions in unregulated locations. .

in the context of forestry - related offsets , the opportunity for leakage exists on two fronts: emissions leakage and product leakage .

compared to other offset types , forestry projects , particularly those that sequester carbon by curbing logging , likely present the greatest risk of leakage .

for example , if large landowners or countries agree to preserve their forests , wood processors might simply shift their harvests to neighboring landowners or countries .

as a result , the total harvest ( total deforestation ) might be unchanged , even though particular landowners or countries might have avoided deforestation of their forests .

the only recognized solution is for a majority of landowners or countries to agree to participate in a program to reduce deforestation .

forest products face another type of leakage: product leakage .

producing long - term wood products , such as lumber and plywood , uses much less energy — and thus emits fewer ghgs — than comparable quantities of alternative products used to build homes and other structures , such as concrete and masonry walls and steel and aluminum framing .

thus , avoided deforestation might lead builders to replace wood with other more energy - intensive , ghg - emitting products .

the net carbon consequences of such a shift are unclear .

for forestry projects , one concern is that the projected sequestration will be halted or reversed .

forest offset projects are typically expected to generate offsets ( via sequestration ) for decades .

some are concerned that the emission offsets will be subsequently negated by human activity ( eg , change in land use ) or a natural occurrence ( eg , forest fire , disease , or pestilence ) .

permanence is especially problematic for forests , because forests are composed of living organisms — they are born ( seeds germinate ) , they grow , and eventually they die .

this life cycle varies widely , depending on the tree species ; for example , aspen and southern yellow pines rarely grow older than 200 years , while douglas - fir and many live oak species commonly grow for more than 1,000 years , and bristlecone pines can live for more than 4,000 years .

nevertheless , trees die eventually , and their carbon is converted to wood products , contributed to the soil , or sent into the atmosphere .

permanence can be achieved for forest projects by providing for mitigation or a buffer against natural losses .

an analysis of four particular carbon offset market standards found that one required a 10% buffer ( i.e. , only 90% of the estimated carbon offset could be sold ) ; another required a 30% buffer , while the other two used variable buffers ( from 5% to 60% ) depending on an assessment of the risk of the project .

for landowners or countries , carbon sequestration permanence can be achieved through sustainable forestry practices , with reforestation following any and all carbon removals to assure stable or increasing carbon storage .

an alternative for achieving permanence is to use regional or national accounting , such that a reversal on one project or site is balanced by additional sequestration from other projects or sites .

this relies on accurate measurement and monitoring to assure that payments are for net carbon sequestration .

many biological sequestration projects , such as afforestation or reforestation , present a unique challenge because of the significant time gap between the initial project activity ( eg , planting trees ) and the actual carbon sequestration .

although the project may generate considerable offsets in aggregate , the offsets are produced gradually , over the course of many years or decades .

tree growth patterns follow a traditional s - shape , with slow growth in the early years , accelerating for many years to decades , before tapering off to an eventual maximum .

the age at which growth has reached its maximum varies widely among species — as short as 100 years for short - lived species ( eg , aspen and southern pines ) , and more than 1,000 years for long - lived species ( eg , western hemlock and douglas - fir ) .

however , even old - growth forests that have little or no additional tree growth apparently continue to sequester carbon in the soils .

this aspect of sequestration projects raises the question of how sequestration offsets should be distributed .

should they be allotted as they are produced — on an annual basis — or should they be allotted up front in an aggregate sum , based on expected future sequestration ? .

the latter option is referred to as forward crediting .

forward crediting entails risk , because there is some uncertainty about whether the offsets will actually be realized .

this risk can be addressed through discounting , much as the permanence risk is addressed through buffers: by retaining a percentage of the offsets that are expected over the course of the project to accommodate unexpected events ( eg , slower vegetative growth than anticipated ) .

whether such discounting is necessary for forest carbon offsets , and if so how much the discount should be , are as yet undetermined .

