this report provides an overview of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) budget and operations for fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2010 .

it chronicles congressional action on the annual commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) , and related agencies appropriations bills for those fiscal years , as well as action on supplemental and stimulus appropriations bills .

located in the department of justice ( doj ) , the atf is the lead federal law enforcement agency charged with administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms and explosives .

as part of the homeland security act , congress transferred atf's enforcement and regulatory functions for firearms and explosives to the doj from the department of the treasury , adding "explosives" to atf's title .

atf is also responsible for investigating arson cases with a federal nexus , as well as criminal violations of federal laws governing the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol and tobacco .

the regulatory aspects of those alcohol and tobacco laws are the domain of the tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) , which was established at treasury following atf's transfer to doj .

as a law enforcement agency within the doj , atf's first priority is preventing terrorist attacks within the united states .

atf is responsible for countering the illegal use and trafficking of firearms and explosives , and the criminal diversion of alcohol and tobacco products as an illegal source of funding for terrorist activities .

in criminal investigations , atf agents have reportedly uncovered foreign terrorists and their supporters bootlegging cigarettes as part of larger terrorist - financing operations in the united states .

with those responsibilities , atf special agents are partners on doj's joint terrorism task forces .

as shown below , however , the lion's share of atf's resources are allocated to its firearms compliance and investigations program .

while the atf periodically checks the records of federally licensed gun dealers , the major focus of the firearms program is the reduction of firearms - related violence .

in three years , congress increased appropriations for atf by 13.4% , from $988.1 million in fy2007 to $1.121 billion in fy2010 ( see table 1 ) .

for this time period , the annual percent growth was 4.3% .

most of the program increases were provided to bolster atf's capabilities in the areas of gun trafficking and explosives .

for example , for the past two fiscal years , fy2009 and fy2010 , congress has provided atf with program increases to address illegal gun trafficking from the united states to mexico under an initiative known as "project gunrunner. .

for fy2008 , congress also provided atf with a program increase for domestic gun trafficking , and the focus of this program increase was also largely on the southwest border .

as a result , for those three fiscal years , congress has provided over $49 million in program increases to address gun trafficking , which is the diversion of firearms from legal to illegal markets .

congress has also provided nearly $30 million for the construction of a national center for explosives training and research ( ncetr ) .

atf's firearms budget program funds activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms .

the principal focus of atf's firearms - related activities , however , is the reduction of firearms - related violence .

as part of this focus , the atf has dedicated increased resources in recent years toward investigating the criminal activities of violent street gangs , ensuring that federally licensed gun dealers comply with the law , and suppressing gun trafficking .

for fy2010 , the firearms allocation is $802.6 million , or 72% of the $1.121 billion appropriated by congress for atf .

atf's arson and explosives budget program covers activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws governing the manufacture , importation , and distribution of explosives , as well as investigating arson cases with a federal nexus .

among law enforcement agencies , the atf is recognized for its investigative expertise in responding to both arson and explosive incidents .

the attorney general ( ag ) , for example , made the atf responsible for maintaining a consolidated database of all arson and explosive incidents that occur in the united states .

reportedly , as part of the department's law enforcement information - sharing program , this and other databases are to be linked and made web - accessible , and first responders anywhere in the united states are to have access to critical information about arson and explosive cases nationwide .

congress made atf responsible for more closely regulating the explosives industry in the united states under the safe explosives act .

the act made atf responsible for fully investigating all explosive thefts and losses , as well as providing background checks for licensees and permittees to prevent prohibited persons from acquiring explosives .

this act also requires atf to inspect explosive licensees and permittees every three years to ensure that all explosive materials are properly stored and accounted for .

atf reports that there are about 12,000 licensees and permittees nationwide , so that to comply with the act , about 4,000 inspections would need to be conducted by atf annually .

according to atf , 3,291 explosives compliance inspections were conducted in fy2007 , or about 28% of licensees / permittees .

for fy2010 , the arson and explosives allocation is $295.8 million , or 26% of the $1.121 billion appropriation .

as discussed above , for fy2008 and fy2010 , congress appropriated a total of nearly $30 million for the construction of a atf - administered national center for explosives training and research .

the atf alcohol and tobacco budget program covers expenses related to agency efforts to counter a rising trend in the illegal diversion of tobacco products , as well as the illegal movement of distilled alcohol products .

according to the general accounting office ( now the government accountability office ) , the illegal diversion and smuggling of cigarettes in the united states results in an unknown but significant loss in tax revenues .

in addition , atf criminal intelligence indicates that cigarette bootlegging is a lucrative criminal venture that terrorist groups have used and would possibly use in the future to finance their activities .

neither the fy2009 or fy2010 budget requests included any new resources for this program .

for fy2010 , the alcohol and tobacco program allocation is $22.3 million , or 2% of the $1.121 billion appropriation .

