more than 131 million private and public sector employees in the united states are covered by some form of workers' compensation .

although the details of the various state and federal workers' compensation systems differ , all workers' compensation systems in the united states provide for limited wage replacement and full medical benefits for workers who are injured or become ill as a result of their work and survivors benefits to the families of workers who die on the job .

in most cases , workers' compensation is mandated by state law and administered by state agencies .

however , for some classes of workers , including overseas federal contractors , workers' compensation is mandated by federal law and provided or administered by the federal government .

table 1 provides summary data on workers' compensation in the united states .

the workers' compensation system is a no - fault system that pays workers for injuries or illnesses related to employment without considering the culpability of any one party .

in exchange for this no - fault protection and the guarantee of benefits in the event of an employment - related injury , illness , or death , workers give up their rights to bring actions against employers in the civil court system and give up their rights to seek damages for injuries and illnesses , including pain and suffering , outside of those provided by the workers' compensation laws .

with limited exceptions , injuries , illnesses , or deaths that are the result of accidents or incidents that occur in the workplace or that are the result of activities related to employment are covered by workers' compensation .

state and federal laws differ on how private employers may meet their responsibilities to insure against the economic losses to employees from workplace injuries and illnesses .

in nearly every state and federal system , firms can self - insure or purchase workers' compensation insurance from private providers or , in some states , from state funds .

the dba requires that many federal government contractors and subcontractors provide workers' compensation insurance for their employees who work outside of the united states .

under the provisions of the dba , overseas federal military and public works contractors are subject to the same workers' compensation rules , including the same insurance requirements and same schedules of benefits for affected workers , as maritime firms covered by the longshore and harbor workers' compensation act ( lhwca ) .

dba insurance is provided by private companies or through self - insurance and the dba program is administered by the department of labor ( dol ) .

like all workers' compensation systems , the dba provides no - fault coverage and is an exclusive remedy to injured workers .

injured workers and the survivors of workers killed on the job are entitled to benefits for employment - related injuries , illnesses , and deaths regardless of fault and are not permitted to sue their employers or the federal government for any types of damages caused by employment - related incidents .

the dba extends the provisions of the lhwca to federal contractors working outside of the united states .

the lhwca is a federal law that requires that private - sector firms provide workers' compensation coverage for their employees engaged in longshore , harbor , or other maritime occupations .

workers' compensation insurance under the lhwca can be provided either by a private carrier approved by the dol or through a self - insurance system .

injured workers covered by the lhwca and dba are entitled to full medical benefits to treat their injuries provided by a physician of their choice .

injured workers are also entitled to cash disability benefits to replace a portion of their lost wages .

the basic weekly lhwca and dba disability benefit is equal to two - thirds of a worker's pre - disability weekly wage .

under the lhwca and dba , benefits for total disability are capped at 200% of the national average weekly wage ; benefits for partial disability are capped on the basis of a schedule of impairments .

benefits are also paid to survivors of covered workers killed on the job .

although many federal agencies have had or currently have overseas contracts subject to the dba , the departments of state ( dos ) and defense ( dod ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) are the major dba contractors operating in iraq and afghanistan .

these agencies take different approaches to contracting for insurance services under the dba .

dos and usaid have awarded competitive contracts through the use of blanket contracts , with fixed rates , to a single provider for each agency .

in contrast , under the dod approach private contractors negotiate individually with private insurers .

over time , evidence has shown that rates for dba insurance charged to dod have been significantly higher than dba insurance rates for dos and usaid .

although the dba requires that federal contractors working overseas either purchase workers' compensation insurance for their employees or self - insure , the costs of this insurance is usually passed along to the federal government as a cost item in the contract .

if the agency is purchasing services under a cost - plus contract , the contractor receives a set percentage of the total cost of all items , including dba insurance , billed to the federal government .

in cost - plus contracts , the contractor's fees rise with contract costs .

there is no financial incentive for the contractor to limit the government's costs .

current military operations in iraq and afghanistan have brought increased congressional attention to several issues surrounding the dba .

concerns have been raised over the following issues: the overall cost and variability of dba premiums paid ; the basis for dba premiums ; the costs of the program to the federal government ; the manner in which contractors select their dba providers ; and the coordination of the dba with the whca .

in 2006 , congress enacted language in the defense authorization act that required the dod to review its dba procedures and to work with the dos and usaid to find ways to more effectively provide dba insurance to overseas military contractors .

on may 15 , 2008 , the house oversight and government reform committee held a hearing on dba issues that focused on dba costs involved in the logcap contract as well as the possibility of the dod adopting a single - source model for dba insurance similar to what is currently used by dos , usaid , and usace as part of its pilot program .

section 843 of the fy2009 national defense authorization act requires dod to adopt a department - wide dba insurance provision that will minimize costs , ensure that premium prices are tied to expected claims , minimize risk to dod , and provide for a competitive dba marketplace .

although this legislation does not require dod to adopt any specific dba strategy , an earlier version of the bill ( h.r .

5658 ) provision passed by the house provided an outline of several policy options that dod was required to consider when formulating its overall dba strategy .

in h.r .

5658 , the house - passed version of the bill , section 850 contains policy options that fall into three broad categories of dba reform that are similar to those mentioned in reviews of the dba performed by the gao , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the usaaa , and the house oversight and government reform committee .

the three categories of policy options are using a single contracted source , or a limited set of contracted sources , for all dod dba contracts , similar to the model used by dos , usaid , and the usace pilot program ; using a rating system to set premiums based on past claims incurred , similar to the experience rating systems used in many private insurance lines ; and having the federal government self - insure for all dba costs similar to what is currently done with the workers' compensation for injuries and death related to war hazards under the whca and workers' compensation for federal employees under the feca program .

currently , dos , usaid , and usace use single - source contracts to provide dba insurance for their contractors .

under this model , all agency contractors purchase dba insurance from a single source selected through a competitive bidding process .

this process allows a single insurer to pool the risks of multiple contractors and contracting activities with the goal of using this pooled risk to reduce the premiums paid by all contractors .

because of the different nature of the contracts issued by dos , usaid , usace , and dod , it is difficult to compare premiums to determine if dod would experience cost savings from a single - source contract for dba insurance .

currently , across all geographic areas and activities , dod pays lower average premiums then does usace .

however , the highest premiums paid by dod are double those paid under usace's single - source contract .

in addition , both dos and usaid have lower negotiated premium rates under their single - source contracts than usace does under its contract .

a report issued by the majority staff of the house oversight and government reform committee found that underwriting gains were significantly higher for major dba contracts independently negotiated than for the single - source contracts used by dos and usaid .

cbo estimates that adopting a single - source model for all dod dba insurance would result in savings of $33 million in the first year and a 10-year cost savings of $362 million .

although there are indications that adoption by dod of a single - source model for dba insurance could result in cost savings , the size and complexity of the dod and its contracts may result in difficulties in that agency adopting the system used by the smaller dos and usaid .

it is not known if a single insurer would be willing or able to take on all of the dod's dba business .

usaaa reports that only one insurance carrier bid to provide coverage under the logcap contract , and an earlier effort by dod to find a single carrier for all dba contracts in iraq resulted in no carriers placing bids .

similarly , a dod survey of the four largest dba insurers found that all opposed a single source contract system and none would bid for such a contract if it were offered by dod .

this problem is not unique to dod as in their most recent contract solicitations , dos , usaid , and usace each only received a single bidder for their dba insurance .

usace reports that even with a single source for all dba insurance under its pilot program , the agency is still required to provide administrative support and bear administrative costs .

the cbo concurs with this assessment and notes that although it estimates overall cost savings if dod were to adopt a single - source model for dba insurance , these cost estimates do not take into account the costs to dod involved in setting up and administering the system and that these costs "could greatly diminish savings. .

in its audit of dba insurance for the logcap contract , usaaa concluded that the premiums being paid by kbr did not reflect either the expected claims to be paid or the risks involved in the covered activities , especially given kbr's relatively low accident rates .

usaaa also found that logcap dba rates were subject to large annual fluctuations and were a major component of the overall cost of the logcap contract .

the use of experience ratings , in which current premiums are based on past claim rates , could bring dba premiums more into line with the risks faced by dba contractors .

experience rating is common in the insurance industry and is a feature of many workers' compensation systems governed by state laws .

under an experience rating system , a base premium can be increased if a customer has a history of claims that indicate a greater risk to the insurer or be lowered if the claims history indicates a reduced insurance risk .

the proprietary nature of individual insurance arrangements between contractors and carriers and that neither dol nor any of the contracting agencies has any authority to regulate dba claims makes it difficult assess what factors are currently used to set current dba premiums .

there may be difficulties in using experience ratings to determine dba premiums .

the fluctuations in the price of premiums charged under the logcap program may indicate difficulties in accurately estimating insurance risk in a war zone .

one such difficulty involves the determination of whether a claim should be paid under the dba or the whca .

for example , usaaa reports that kbr's insurance broker was concerned with the probability of increased dba claims due to a plane crash and the current dos insurance contract allows for higher premiums for security contracts that involve aviation .

however , under some circumstances a plane crash would be covered not by the insurer under the dba but rather by the federal government under the whca .

in addition , in response to usaaa's audit of the dba insurance under the logcap contract , the u.s. army sustainment command stated that it "may prove difficult to find insurance carriers who use retrospective rating plans in determining dba insurance premiums for countries where war risk hazards have been recognized by the dos. .

the dba is a privatized workers' compensation system in which individual contractors either purchase insurance from private carriers or self - insure .

however , because the terms of many federal contracts allow the contractors to bill the federal government for the cost of dba insurance , dba insurance costs are often ultimately paid by the federal government .

one option for dba insurance reform would be to eliminate the private nature of dba insurance and have the federal government act as the sole dba insurer and pay 100% of all dba administrative and claim costs .

having the federal government self - insure for dba insurance would be similar to the way workers' compensation insurance is handled for injuries and deaths caused by war hazards under the whca and for federal employees under the feca program .

under a federal self - insurance system , benefits would likely be paid from a trust fund in a manner similar to the way that feca and whca benefits are paid from the federal employees compensation fund .

the federal government could administer the program itself or hire a third - party administrator .

there are several potential advantages to having the federal government self - insure for dba hazards .

first , rather than paying insurance premiums , the federal government would only be responsible for paying the actual cost of claims and administration .

given that claims make up just over 25% of total costs paid for dba insurance under the logcap contract , the federal government could potentially see cost savings through self - insurance .

in addition , issues involving premium loading and the charging of dba insurance premiums on non - covered components of payroll such as hazard pay would be eliminated if the federal government self - insured .

second , the use of the federal government as self - insurer would eliminate the need to distinguish between dba and whca claims , because every claim would be paid by the federal government .

there is evidence that the current process , in which the federal government identifies whca claims after they have been paid as dba claims and then reimburses insurers for claim and administrative costs , results in the federal government paying significant amounts that do not go directly to claimants .

over the past six years under the whca , the federal government has paid more in reimbursements to insurers for expenses ( $19.7 million ) than it has paid in compensation to claimants ( $12.1 million ) .

there is also evidence , including testimony provided by dba and whca claimants at a 2009 house committee on oversight and government reform hearing , that in some cases , claimants with injuries that clearly fall under the statutory requirements of the whca must first navigate procedural and other requirements of their contractors' dba insurers before their cases are eventually transferred to dol .

in some cases , dba insurers controvert claims or oppose specific benefits for claims that are likely to end up at the dol under the whca .

under the current system , insurers have the right and responsibility to investigate all claims and controvert or oppose claims and benefits they feel are not their responsibility or that fall outside of the dba .

however , this can cause delays for claimants , including claimants with clear whca cases that will eventually be paid by the dol .

having the federal government self - insure for dba hazards would change the historic private nature of the dba program and place the program at odds with the privatized lhwca program .

in addition , federal self - insurance for dba claims would go against current trends in state workers' compensation programs .

exclusive state funds , in which the state pays all workers' compensation claims , are being replaced either by state funds that compete on the open market with private carriers , or by systems in which all workers' compensation insurance is provided privately .

the dod , in its 2009 report to congress on dba insurance alternatives , stated that a self - insurance system , in which none of the costs of employee - injuries or deaths would be paid by the employer , could result in moral hazard .

contracting firms with no financial stake in the health and safety of their employees may take additional risks or compromise procedures without any fear of ultimately having to pay , through higher insurance premiums , for the negative consequences of these actions .

in september 2009 , in response to section 843 of the ndaa , the dod reported to congress the results of its review of various possible acquisition strategies for providing dba insurance to its contractors .

this report used information from industry sources and data from existing dod dba activities to evaluate the following four dba reform alternatives: alternative a: improvements to the existing open market dba system ; alternative b: a single - source contract for all dod dba coverage ; alternative c: limiting dba insurance to a small number of pre - selected providers ; and alternative d: federal self - insurance with third - party administration .

these four alternatives were evaluated against the following six criteria , based , in part , on criteria provided by congress in section 843 of the ndaa .

1 .

minimize overhead costs associated with obtaining dba insurance ; 2 .

minimize the costs of coverage consistent with realistic assumptions regarding the likelihood of incurred claims by contractors ; 3 .

provide for a correlation of premiums paid in relation to claims incurred that is modeled on the best practices in government and industry for similar kinds of insurance ; 4 .

provide for a low level of risk to the dod ; 5 .

provide for a competitive marketplace for insurance required by the dba to the maximum extent practicable ; and 6 .

consider implementation issues .

the dod's analysis of the four alternatives evaluated against the six criteria resulted in the highest rankings for alternative a: improvements to the existing open - market dba system ; and alternative d: federal self - insurance with third - party administration .

specifically , improving the existing open - market system was predicted to best minimize overhead and coverage costs ; provide the best correlation of premiums paid to claims incurred ; and provided the lowest risk to dod .

federal self - insurance with third - party administration was predicted to best provided for a competitive marketplace and be the easiest to implement .

although the dod's analysis of four major policy alternatives is comprehensive , there are limitations to its utility as a guide for congress in making changes to the overall dba system .

the dod report only focuses on dod contractors and while these make up the bulk of dba - covered firms , other contracting agencies , such as dos and usaid may have different experiences and issues than dod and dod's recommended policy changes may not be as successful if applied across the entire federal government .

two of the six criteria used to evaluate the four alternatives also serve to limit the utility of the dod analysis .

congress required dod to consider the how each alternative provided for a competitive dba marketplace .

this requirement may have biased the study against policy options , such as self - insurance or single or limited - source contracts for dba insurance which , by definition , do not support a competitive marketplace but which may still be viable policy options for congress to consider .

in its analysis , dod added an additional criteria based on the ease of policy implementation .

evaluations of alternatives against this criterion were based , in part , on how quickly policy changes could be made and whether or not federal laws or regulations would need to be changed .

it is understandable that dod would consider this criterion necessary , given the time and cooperation within the executive branch and with the congress that regulatory and statutory changes would require .

however , when looking at alternatives for making changes to the national dba program , congress may not want to limit itself to alternatives that provide for easy implementation .

the dod report identified making improvements to the existing open - market dba system as one of the preferred alternatives .

specifically , the dod report suggests four improvements to the current dba insurance system .

first , all approved dba carriers should have access to comprehensive data on losses and costs .

in its discussions with industry representatives , the dod found that some carriers felt that they were at a competitive disadvantage without this data as more than 75% of the dod dba market is covered by a single carrier , aig .

in addition , unlike in conventional workers' compensation insurance , there is no national clearinghouse , such as the national council on compensation insurance ( ncci ) , for loss and cost data .

second , the dol should be given the authority to establish a program of assigned risk pools for the dba program and require that large insurers provide coverage to pool members .

an assigned risk pool would assure that small contractors , those that are high - insurance risks , or contractors otherwise unable to secure dba insurance would be covered at reasonable rates and that all major dba insurance carriers would share the risks of providing insurance to these contractors .

the dod also recommends requiring that insurance carriers separate out the pricing of dba insurance from other types of insurance , such as accidental death and dismemberment and ransom insurance .

in addition , the dod recommends establishing a single dod contact for issues relating to country - waivers under the dba program .

