although the intelligence community ( ic ) has received its share of criticism since its formal establishment in 1947 , it appears such criticism has intensified since the end of the cold war as the community confronted a string of perhaps unprecedented challenges , including those from the dissolution of the former soviet union , the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , and the 2003 iraq war and its aftermath .

although each of these events triggered demands for intelligence community reform , perhaps no single change in the past quarter of a century can match the enduring , day - to - day challenge posed by the information revolution .

twenty five years after the development of the internet and the personal computer , the explosive impact of the this technology - driven change continues to ripple through the intelligence community .

one result of this revolutionary change has been a newfound willingness on the part of the u.s. intelligence community to reexamine the extent to which it relies — or has failed to rely — upon open source information , which some have argued has been relegated to a "second class" status by many intelligence professionals who continue to value secret information above all else .

as part of this reexamination , the intelligence community appears to be reassessing a number of open source issues , including the relative value of open source information compared to that of secret information ; the impact and importance of the growing volumes of information unlocked by easy access to the internet ; the dampening effect that certain community security practices may have had and may continue to be having on the use of open sources ; the state of development of analytic tools necessary to effectively and efficiently collect , sift , analyze , and disseminate a vast volume of publicly available information when analysts are expected to also analyze increasingly large amounts of classified information ; and , training issues relating to open source technology and techniques .

if the global information revolution has sparked debate within the intelligence community over the value of open source information , the ongoing jihadist terrorist threat has sharpened its focus .

in underscoring the strategic and tactical importance of open source information generally , and the role of the internet specifically , one senior policymaker recently described the internet as being america's new open source battlefield .

those who share this view tend to argue that the intelligence community must improve its strategic understanding of the of the jihadist threat by more effectively mining the internet and other open sources for information .

such an effort , it is suggested , also will enable the community to achieve a better tactical understanding of how jihadists use the internet's web - television capabilities , chat rooms , and "news" sites , to train forces and raise money .

ultimately , these observers suggest , the united states must develop the capability to understand and influence foreign populations — "not in their council of states but in their villages and slums" — if it is to effectively counter the threat posed by jihadists .

in such circumstances , it is argued , the information that should matter most to policymakers can be derived from open sources .

the debate over the relative value of open source information , compared to that of classified data , is occurring at a time when the global information environment is viewed by some as having reached a "post - modern" stage .

in such an environment , secret information may be less important than the combination of open source information , information sharing , computer networking , and an ability to sift and analyze a dizzying volume of open source information .

indeed , one former senior intelligence officer suggested that whereas the 20 th century was the century of secrets , the 21 st century may well prove to be the century of global information .

if the intelligence community as a whole accepts and understands this change , according to some observers , it may gain an edge in confronting current threats , particularly those posed by terrorism .

over the past decade , two national commissions criticized the intelligence community for its failure to promote the use of open source information and a third recommended that an open source center be established that would serve the community .

the commissions also criticized the community's preferential bias with regard to classified information .

the unfolding of the administration's plan to establish a national open source center ( nosc ) began on november 1 , 2005 when the center was officially and publicly established by the dni .

administratively , it was placed under the management of the cia and its organization incorporated and augmented the foreign broadcast information service ( fbis ) which has provided open source products to the government and outside researchers since february 1941 .

according to a dni press release , the center's functions include "collection , analysis and research , training , and information technology management to facilitate government - wide access and use. .

located in suburban northern virginia , the nosc currently has several hundred full - time personnel some of whom are on temporary assignments in other agencies .

although nosc remains under the administrative control of the cia , the aim is to provide a center of expertise for the entire government in exploiting open source information .

it can be tasked by other agencies for specific research efforts .

nosc provides translations and transcriptions of media products from around the world .

nosc translations and analytical products are currently available online in a website ( opensource.gov ) that is available to government officials .

many of these products are also available to the public or to outside experts through the world news connection , a commercial news service .

the nosc maintains a vast collection of published material in electronic form , including daily downloads of hundreds of newspapers and journals .

the nosc seeks to establish higher professional standards for open source collection and analysis , to create an open source "guild. .

although every analyst knows about some open source materials such as the local newspaper , the rapidly expanding availability of electronic databases and a large variety of search strategies requires extensive training and skills that only it specialists are likely to acquire in graduate schools .

it is widely maintained that training in specific searching skills is cost effective as it reduces time - consuming and unproductive searches .

a fundamental goal is not just to hire more open source practitioners but to alter agency cultures to ensure that use of open source information is a routine and natural component of analytical practice .

changing agency cultures is a formidable task .

as one intelligence scholar has noted: the culture of the intelligence community tends to devalue the use of open sources except in marginal ways .

in part because open sources are by definition available to the public , they remove one of the psychological benefits of being an insider with special information .

relying on classified information immediately limits those with whom an analyst can discuss issues and creates a wall between those with access and those without it .

intelligence analysts must , by law , exclude outsiders without clearance from access to classified information ; but in this way they create an exclusive club that inhibits the use of relevant and potentially significant expertise .

also , as noted earlier , many intelligence analysts trust only classified information .

they may put excessive confidence in such materials , perhaps in the belief that they have been closely vetted and validated during the collection process .

this stamp of approval for classified information , and the bias favoring it over other sources , can cause analysts to be closed off to data emerging from researchers who use open sources .

to some extent , resistance to the use of open source information may be more prevalent among analysts whose careers began during the cold war when the focus was on secretive nation states with sophisticated military capabilities .

analysts who have entered the workforce in more recent years will have had routine access to open source information in academic environments or in previous professional assignments .

thus they may be more inclined to continue routine use of open sources in conjunction with classified data .

a major component of the open source initiative has , nevertheless , been an effort to ensure that open source experts are available and utilized in all intelligence agencies and at the same time avoid unnecessary duplicative efforts .

this effort has concentrated on enhancing expertise within the nosc and in offering training for open source experts in other agencies .

in many cases , however , the number of persons whose job responsibilities focus on , or include open source information to a significant degree have not been consistently identified .

the odni's budgetary authorities may permit decisive support to the open source effort .

dedicated open source positions at appropriate paygrades could do much to ensure the visability of the open source effort .

with information expected to be available from individual agencies and reviewed by the odni , budgets submitted by the dni each year could include more detailed information on specific open source analyst positions in each agency .

congress would then have the opportunity to review these efforts through the budget process to ensure adequate , but not redundant , open source capabilities .

some argue that open source billets should be identified not only in national intelligence agencies but also in military intelligence agencies .

information sharing , based on state - of - the - art information technology , is another important part of the effort .

the open source center manages this effort for the entire intelligence community as well as homeland defense partners at the state , local , and tribal levels .

the goal is to maximize connectivity throughout the government and to supercede separate agency - based system that have incompatible formats and extensive duplicative materials .

individual agencies may continue to maintain independent open source databases , but the goal is that they are maintained in formats that can be accessed by analysts at other agencies .

the wmd commission noted that "information technology has made remarkable advances in recent years .

the private sector ( without the same kinds of security concerns as the intelligence community ) has led the adoption of technologies that are also critical to intelligence .

two areas show particular promise: first , machine translation of foreign languages ; and , second , tools designed to prioritize documents in their native language without the need for translation. .

this effort depends heavily on the expertise and initiative of commercial enterprises to develop useful and cost - effective technologies .

in 1999 the cia developed in - q - tel to provide a means for business firms to work with intelligence agencies on comparatively small contracts .

the effort has been widely praised but has been largely focused on classified technologies .

a similar approach , but one focused solely on unclassified open source technologies has been proposed for implementation by the odni .

one of the most important sources of information from non - governmental sources private sector contributors is commercial imagery that is purchased by the national geospatial - intelligence agency .

commercial satellites provide extensive overhead coverage of targets throughout the world to supplement imagery from government satellites .

in some cases it has also meant that overhead imagery of significant quality is available to anyone with access to the internet .

although the background and extent of this use lies beyond the scope of this report , the use of commercial imagery has had a major influence on the intelligence community , especially on the procurement and operation of government satellites .

commercial imagery , however , is a special case as the government is in the many cases the principle customer .

for most other open source information , the u.s. government is only an incidental customer ( and in some cases an undesired one ) .

congress has been an important advocate of greater use of open source information ; as noted above , it created a statutory requirement for increased use of open source information .

in addition to ongoing oversight , some observers suggest that there are also a number of specific issues that congress might address to further the goal of its greater use .

these issues include: identifying open source activities copyright issues moving the nosc to the office of the dn .

congress also has broader reaching options .

the bush administration's approach to open source intelligence is based on establishing standards and best practices at the national open source center , and encouraging through various means , greater acquisition and use of open source information by analysts in all agencies .

although there has been little opposition to this approach expressed by members of congress , some outside observers have advocated alternative approaches .

a more radical , approach would be to establish an open source agency completely outside the intelligence community ( in addition to the existing open source center ) .

the goal would be to provide open source information not just to intelligence analysts but to all elements of the federal government including congressional committees .

it is envisioned that the new agency would be an independent federal agency under the secretary of state ( and similar to the broadcasting board of governors ) .

such an entity could also be established in the defense department ( outside of intelligence agencies ) with special responsibilities for supporting multilateral operations involving a number of countries some of whom might not be intelligence partners of the united states .

this initiative could be based on an assessment that open source information , systematically collected and analyzed , is important for all government efforts including those that cannot realistically be supported by the intelligence community .

a particular advantage cited by advocates is that open source intelligence could support the conduct of u.s. public diplomacy efforts without what is considered the taint of the "secret world. .

in addition , there might be less concern about acquiring public information that included references to u.s. persons , than about intelligence agencies collecting information from all sources that included references to u.s. persons .

proponents of this plan argue that open source information is essential for virtually all governmental functions but that the explosion of available information has not been matched by concerted efforts to acquire and analyze it .

the goal would be to establish a center of expertise for the entire federal government and to make available to the public free universal access to all unclassified information acquired through this initiative .

at present , information provided by the nosc is available to all government agencies , but it is designed to support the intelligence community .

some ask why shouldn't an "information collection and analysis" agency be established to deal with policy issues that may be of concern to other government agencies including those responsible for domestic issues ? .

such an effort would have to be justified on the basis of a widely perceived need and pervasive support throughout the federal government .

this support , it seems , is not yet apparent , but advocates of a wider effort to acquire and analyze open source information may continue to make the case that it is needed to meet ongoing and emerging policy issues .

it is also possible that the nosc will become more useful as times goes on , and that its contribution will be so widely recognized that it will become a model for a larger entity that can serve all federal organizations .

although unclassified information has often been slighted by the intelligence community , a consensus now exists that open source information must be systematically collected and in fact constitutes an essential component of analytical products .

this has been recognized by various commissions and by congress in statutory language .

responding to legislative direction , the intelligence community has established the position of assistant director of national intelligence for open source and the national open source center .

the goal is not only to perform open source acquisition and analysis functions ; but also , to create a center of excellence in open source collection and analysis that will support and encourage all agencies in the intelligence community in the effective use of open source .

the challenge is to deploy all available information sources and technologies , including cutting edge approaches , to obtain and analyze information of national security importance that is available openly .

the effort has been only underway since late 2005 but the nosc is up and running , and providing support , including training , to open source professionals throughout the intelligence community .

it is less clear that administrative mechanisms are in place to ensure that there is a comprehensive community - wide open source effort .

it appears to observers that not all agencies have as yet made comprehensive commitments to acquiring and using open source information , nor that the odni has taken sufficient steps to ensure that open sources are fully exploited .

observers suggest that congressional oversight of the open source process might provide insight into current progress of administration efforts as well as identify areas that need modification .

a particular focus of congressional interest might be potential tradeoffs between classified and open source collection to ensure that needed information is obtained in the best and most cost - effective manner .

the goal would be to ensure that vulnerable human agents and expensive surveillance systems are focused on obtaining information that is being actively hidden and obtainable through no other means .

" senator , we didn ' t have a clue. .

 ( response by former director of central intelligence director george tenet in a telephone conversation with chairman richard shelby in the aftermath of india's 1998 nuclear tests. ) .

on may 11 , 1998 , the indian government tested three nuclear devices , the first such tests in 20 years .

the tests caught the u.s. intelligence committee by surprise .

then - director of central intelligence george tenet appointed former admiral david jeremiah to "examine how and why we had missed the boat so badly. .

in conducting his review , jeremiah touched on a number of issues , including the availability at the time of open source information in the form of public statements made by bharatiya janata party ( bjp ) leaders prior to the election of party leader atal behari vajpayee to be india's prime minister .

those public statements indicated that the bjp was interested in exercising the nuclear option .

in his final report , jeremiah concluded: ...that both the intelligence and the policy communities had an underlying mindset going into these tests that the bjp would behave as we behave .

for instance , there is an assumption that the bjp platform would mirror western political platforms .

in other words , a politician is going to say something in his political platform leading up to the elections , but not necessarily follow through on the platform once he takes office and is exposed to the immensity of his problem .

the bjp was dead serious... others were more explicit in their criticism .

former u.s .

senator patrick moynihan reportedly commented , "it didn't take spies or spy - masters simply to read what indian leaders said and to take it seriously. .

these and other observations suggest that if analysts had paid greater attention and attached more significance to some of the bjp's public statements about nuclear testing , the intelligence community might have more accurately assessed bjp intentions .

a review of the public record prior to the indian tests , however , presents a mixed picture in this regard and arguably underscores some of the difficulties analysts confront when attempting to analyze open source information .

during the election campaign in january 1998 , the bjp's foreign policy spokesman stated that his party had every intention of exercising the nuclear option if elected .

but in february of that year the bjp issued a campaign manifesto that suggested to some indian analysts that the bjp might not be fully committed to conducting nuclear tests .

new bjp prime minister vajpayee , while reportedly stating that government would keep open the option of adding a nuclear capability to its arsenal , said there was no time frame for doing so .

the government's defense minister further suggested there was no need to test nuclear weapons .

amid other public signs that included no indication of imminent nuclear testing , a high - level u.s. delegation met with their indian counterparts and concluded that no such tests were imminent .

in the final analysis , open source information that was available prior to india's nuclear tests in 1998 presents a mixed if not misleading picture that presented a number of analytic challenges .

