the military retirement system is a government - funded benefit system that has been viewed historically as a significant incentive in retaining a career military force .

the system includes a defined benefit ( i.e. , pension ) element for all retirees and a defined contribution element for certain eligible retirees .

the defined benefit includes a monthly annuity for qualified active and reserve retirees paid out of the military retirement fund .

the defined contribution benefit includes government - matching payments into an individual retirement thrift savings plan ( tsp ) account .

the amount of the retirement annuity depends on time served and basic pay at retirement .

it is adjusted annually by a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) to ensure that the annuity is protected from the adverse consequences of inflation .

military retirees are also entitled to nonmonetary benefits , which include exchange and commissary privileges , medical care through tricare , and access to morale , welfare and recreation facilities and programs .

the non - disability military retirement system has evolved since the late 1800s to meet four main goals .

to keep the military forces of the united states young and vigorous and ensure promotion opportunities for younger members .

to enable the armed forces to remain competitive with private - sector employers and the federal civil service .

to provide a reserve pool of experienced military manpower that can be called upon in time of war or national emergency to augment active forces .

to provide economic security for former members of the armed forces during their old age .

among active duty personnel , eligibility for a monthly pension is generally based on a service requirement of at least 20 years of ( active ) service .

for reserve component personnel , the system is based on points , and reservists do not generally begin to receive retired pay until the age of 60 .

both the active duty and reserve component retirement systems vest at 20 years of qualifying service .

however , some members who are retired with a physical disability may receive a pension regardless of the amount of time they have spent on active duty .

disability retirement offers a choice between two retirement compensation options: one based on years of service ( longevity ) and one on the severity of the disability .

in fy2017 , approximately $53.5 billion was paid to approximately 2 million military retirees , and an additional $3.9 billion was paid to 319,431 survivors .

as shown in table 1 , the number of military retirees and the cost of their retirement benefits have increased over the past decade .

congress grapples with constituent concerns as well as budgetary constraints in considering military retirement issues .

in the past , some have viewed military retirement as a place where substantial savings could be made , arguing that the military retirement compensation is overly generous relative to pension systems in the civilian sector .

in particular , they note that active duty military personnel become eligible for retirement at a relatively young age .

in fy2017 , the average active duty non - disability enlisted retiree is 42 years old and has 21 years of service at retirement ; the average officer is 46 years old and has about 23 years of service at retirement .

others argue that the military retirement system is fair given the unique demands of military service , pointing out the high operational tempo and repetitive tours of duty in overseas combat areas that servicemembers have endured over the past 15 years .

in addition , some have argued that past modifications to the system intended to save money have had a deleterious effect on military recruiting and retention , particularly in times of strong economic performance .

while congressionally mandated changes to the military retirement system have been infrequent , any potential changes are closely monitored by current servicemembers , retirees , survivors and the veterans' service organizations that support them .

there are currently three separate but related retirement systems within the dod: one for active duty members , one for reservists , and one for those who become medically disabled and are unable to complete a 20-year military career due to their disability .

each of these systems has distinct eligibility requirements and formulas for calculating the retirement annuity .

retirement pay calculations are based on the date when the servicemember first entered active duty and their pay base at the time of retirement .

the defined benefit portion of the active and reserve component retirement systems cliff - vest s after 20 years of service .

this means servicemembers who leave the service prior to completing 20 years of eligible service typically will not receive any non - disability retirement benefit .

this contrasts with eligibility for disabled veterans , who are vested on their disability retirement date regardless of years of service .

military retirees receive full social security benefits in addition to their military retired pay .

current military personnel do not contribute a portion of their salary as part of the military retirement pay accrual .

however , they have paid taxes into the social security trust fund since january 1 , 1957 and are entitled to full social security benefits based on their military service .

military retired pay and social security are not offset against each other .

military retired pay is not subject to withholding for social security tax .

however , all non - disability retired pay is subject to withholding of federal income tax .

a portion of the social security benefit may also be subject to federal income tax for individuals who have other income .

military retired pay is adjusted for inflation by statute ( 10 u.s.c .

§1401a ) .

the military retirement reform act of 1986 , in conjunction with changes contained in the fy2000 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

106-65 ) , provides for colas as indicated below .

congress has not modified the cola formula since 1995 .

however , policymakers regularly discuss cola modifications , typically with the aim of reducing costs and , hence , the payments to retirees .

colas for 2007 to 2017 are shown in table 5 .

some advocacy groups and servicemembers have expressed concerns about the implementation of the blended retirement system , in particular in relation to the reduced multiplier for the defined benefit ( monthly annuity ) and the lump sum payment option .

these include the potential impacts of the brs on recruitment and retention , as well as on the financial well - being of military personnel .

for example , there is some uncertainty as to whether the reduced multiplier for the defined benefit remains a strong enough retention incentive for mid - career personnel .

a recent study for the marine corps that modeled potential retention outcomes found relatively small effects on force profiles , with officer retention being somewhat more sensitive than enlisted retention .

the study also noted that retention may vary by occupational specialty — supporting the notion that flexibility may be needed for the services to vary the continuation pay , to offer other retention bonuses , or to lengthen minimum service requirements for high - demand fields .

in terms of financial well - being , the study found that , in general , those who retire after a 20-year career and contribute to the tsp throughout their career , will have lower take - home pay from retirement to age 60 than those in the legacy retirement system , but will be better off after the age of 60 when eligible to start drawing from the tsp without penalty .

the total lifetime benefit was estimated to be slightly higher under the legacy retirement system than under the brs .

since the average military retiree upon retirement is in his or her 40s , many choose to pursue a second civilian career and may also accrue retirement savings and benefits from his or her new employer .

estimates of retirement savings are sensitive to the amount a member contributes to the tsp and the return on investment for tsp accounts .

one of the ways that congress addressed these concerns was to require financial literacy training for servicemembers in the fy2016 ndaa with the authorization for the new retirement system .

military retirement costs , which include all payments to current retirees and survivors , have been rising modestly each year , due to a predictable , slow rise in the number of retirees and survivors coupled with cost of living increases .

all dod budgets through fy1984 reflected the costs of retired pay actually being paid out to personnel who had already retired .

that is , congress appropriated the amount of money required to pay current retirees each year as part of each annual defense appropriations bill .

since fy1985 , the accrual accounting concept has been used to budget for the costs of military retired pay .

the unfunded liability resulting from the change in accounting practices is discussed in the next section .

under the accrual accounting system , the dod budget for each fiscal year includes a contribution to a military retirement fund ( mrf ) sufficient to finance future retirement payouts to current uniformed personnel when they retire , not the amount of retired pay actually paid to current retirees .

these annual accrual contributions accumulate in the mrf , along with interest earned on them .

therefore , changes to military end - strength , increases or decreases in basic pay tables , or changes to retirement pay formulas , in any given year will result in same - year dod budget obligations for military retired pay .

once military personnel retire , payments to them are made from the accumulated amounts in the mrf , not from the annual dod budget .

the amount that dod must contribute to the mrf each year to cover future retirement costs is determined by an independent , presidentially appointed , department of defense retirement board of actuaries , which decides how much is needed to cover future retirement costs as a percentage of military basic pay .

estimated future retirement costs are modeled based on the past rates at which active duty military personnel stayed in the service until retirement and on assumptions regarding the overall u.s. economy , including interest rates , inflation rates , and military pay levels .

the model helps determine the level percentage of basic pay for each active servicemember that must be contributed from the dod budget every year to cover future retirement costs — approximately 30 cents on every dollar of basic pay for full - time members .

this is called the normal cost percentage ( ncp ) and is shown in table 6 .

the military retirement fund also receives intergovernmental transfers from the general fund of the treasury to fund the initial unfunded liability of the military retirement system .

this is the total future cost of military retired pay that will result from military service performed prior to the implementation of accrual accounting in fy1985 .

current debates over both federal civilian and military retirement have included some discussion of unfunded liability , which consists of future retired pay costs incurred before the creation of the military retirement fund in fy1985 .

the initial unfunded liability as of september 30 , 1984 was $528.7 billion .

the unfunded liability at the end of fy2016 was $742.6 billion .

these obligations are being liquidated by the payment to the fund each year of an amount from the general fund of the treasury and are currently expected to be fully amortized by fy2025 .

congressional action to change basic pay , retired pay , or associated benefits ( eg , concurrent retirement disability pay , or survivor benefit program ) may affect the unfunded liability .

for example , the implementation of the blended retirement system reduced the unfunded liability by $800 million , while the fy2017 ndaa provision authorizing an extension of the special survivor indemnity allowance ( ssia ) for certain survivors of military members raised the unfunded liability by $200 million .

the fy2017 ndaa extended the ssia as a permanent benefit which annual cola increases .

the dod actuary estimates that this change will raise ncps by approximately 0.1 percentage point and lead to an actuarial loss of approximately $8 billion to the military retirement fund .

every four years , the president is required by law to direct a comprehensive review of the military compensation system and to forward the review , along with his recommendations , to congress .

this review is known as the quadrennial review of military compensation ( qrmc ) .

the military compensation and retirement modernization commission ( mcrmc ) served as the 12 th qrmc .

the sections below summarize the recommendations of these commissions .

10 th qrmc recommendations in the 10 th quadrennial review of military compensation ( qrmc ) , one of the directed areas of assessment was "the implications of changing expectations of present and potential members of the uniformed services relating to retirement. .

to accomplish this , the qrmc suggested a major revision of both the active and reserve retirement systems .

selected options were: 1 .

a defined benefit plan similar to the current high three system that would vest personnel at 10 years of service , with benefits to begin either at age 60 ( for personnel who have served less than 20 years of service ) or age 57 ( for those that served more than 20 years of service ) .

retirees could opt to receive the retirement annuity immediately upon retirement but the annuity would be reduced by 5% for each year under age 57 .

2 .

combined with the above defined benefit plan would be a defined contribution plan that would require the services to contribute up to 5% of annual base pay into a retirement account for each servicemember .

the contribution would start at 2% for those with two years of service and increase incrementally until it reached 5% for those with five or more years of service .

this plan would also vest at 10 years of service but withdrawals could not begin until age 60 .

3 .

a system of gate pays would be established at specified career points to retain selected personnel in specified skill areas .

4 .

separation pay would be used to encourage personnel in over - manned skills to separate prior to vesting at the 10-year point or becoming eligible for an immediate annuity at 20 years .

11 th qrmc recommendations dod submitted the 11 th qrmc final report in 2012 .

while this qrmc did not have the same focus on the entire retirement system as the previous qrmc , dod recommended more closely aligning active and reserve retirement systems with the goal of eventually transitioning to a total force single - system approach for both the active and reserve components .

the report recommended the following modification to the reserve retirement system: reserve component members who have attained 20 qualifying years for retirement benefits could begin receiving retired pay on the 30 th anniversary of their service start date or at age 60 , whichever comes first .

reserve members would receive one retirement point for each day of service , and the points needed for a qualifying year would be reduced from the current 50-point requirement to 35 .

military compensation and retirement modernization commission ( mcrmc ) the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) established a military compensation and retirement modernization commission ( mcrmc ) to provide the president and congress with specific recommendations to modernize pay and benefits for the armed services .

in terms of retirement , the commission was mandated to provide recommendations to "modernize and achieve fiscal sustainability for the compensation and retirement systems for the armed forces and the other uniformed services for the 21 st century. .

notably , section 674 of p.l .

112-239 mandated that the commission comply with conditions that would grandfather existing servicemembers and retirees into the existing retirement system , stating: ( i ) for members of the uniformed services as of such date , who became members before the enactment of such an act , the monthly amount of their retired pay may not be less than they would have received under the current military compensation and retirement system , nor may the date at which they are eligible to receive their military retired pay be adjusted to the financial detriment of the member .

 ( ii ) for members of the uniformed services retired as of such date , the eligibility for and receipt of their retired pay may not be adjusted pursuant to any change made by the enactment of such an act .

the commission delivered its final report and recommendations to congress on january 29 , 2015 .

congress adopted many of the mcrmc's recommendations in the fy2016 ndaa .

several of the most prominent changes include , reduction of the retired pay multiplier , government matching contributions , and the lump sum option .

the mcrmc did not make any recommendations changing the 20-year eligibility for retirement ; however , it recommended that the secretary of defense be given authority to modify the years - of - service requirement to shape the force profile as long as it does not impose involuntary changes on existing servicemembers .

dod expressed opposition to this proposal and congress did not adopt a provision based on this mcrmc recommendation .

the 20-year eligibility remains in current law .

