the development of satellite reconnaissance systems is one of the major and enduring accomplishments of the u.s. intelligence community .

beginning in the eisenhower administration , officials in the department of defense ( dod ) and the central intelligence agency ( cia ) developed "remote sensing" devices that would permit the gathering of accurate information on capabilities of potential enemies without entailing the risks of manned overflights or of covert agents .

satellite imagery undergirded u.s. strategic planning for a quarter century and a series of arms control agreements with the soviet union .

in early years , film canisters were returned to earth and processed at ground stations for further dissemination .

in the 1970s it became possible to forward data by electrical transmission directly to collection agencies .

the efforts of intelligence agencies are focused abroad , and satellite passes were optimized to gather information on areas of interest , mostly in europe and asia .

at the same time , satellites also passed over u.s. territory , and collection on domestic targets could be obtained as a "free good. .

in addition , it was often necessary to undertake "engineering passes" by which technical specialists could compare imagery with data obtained directly from ground observation .

engineering passes provided detailed aerial photography of domestic sites .

declassified documents published by the national security archive indicate that as early as 1968 consideration was being given to provide images captured by intelligence satellites to civilian agencies on issues such as hydrology and oceanography , mapping , and emergency preparedness .

in the mid - 1970s , there was extensive concern about past efforts of the cia and other agencies to monitor u.s. persons , and these concerns extended to reconnaissance satellites .

the 1975 rockefeller commission ( the commission on cia activities within the united states ) reviewed the issues involved in domestic overhead photography and reported that the cia , then in charge of most satellite efforts , had provided photography for mapping , assessing natural disasters , conducting route surveys for the alaska pipeline , national forest inventories , determining the extent of snow cover in the sierras to forecast the extent of runoff , and detecting crop blight in the plains states .

the commission noted that it was possible that a small percentage of aerial photography was being used for law enforcement and was "outside the scope of proper cia activity .

the commission believes , however , that the legislators , when they prohibited the cia from engaging in law enforcement activities in the 1947 enactment of the national security act , could not have contemplated the systems presently in use. .

in response to the rockefeller commission's conclusions and other concerns , the civil applications committee ( cac ) was established in 1975 to serve as an interface through which the needs of civilian agencies for satellite data could be reviewed and prioritized .

the cac was created by a joint memorandum signed by the assistant to the president for national security affairs , the director of the office of management and budget , and the director of central intelligence .

with a staff of some 10 officials , the cac has provided the principal means of communication between civil users of intelligence capabilities and the providers in the intelligence community under the chairmanship of the director of the u.s. geological survey , a component of the interior department , and there is a secretariat hosted by the geological survey .

by july 2001 , the cac had a membership of some 10 departments and independent agencies: u.s. department of interior u.s. department of agriculture u.s. department of commerce u.s. department of energy u.s. department of transportation u.s. environmental protection agency national emergency management agency national aeronautics and space administration national science foundation u.s. army corps of engineers associate members included the following: national imagery and mapping agency national reconnaissance office central intelligence agency ( director of central intelligence environmental and societal issues center ) department of state the end of the cold war saw increased interest in exploiting the intelligence community's collection and analytical assets for civilian purposes , especially in regard to environmental issues .

intelligence agencies provided more analytical products to government agencies outside of the national security community .

in 1992 , as part of project medea , a group of civilian scientists were asked to review data collected by intelligence satellites to determine the usefulness of the data to the scientific community .

in a number of areas , information gathered by intelligence satellites was deemed especially important — deforestation , indications of global warming , and reductions in rain forests .

in response to this effort , president clinton issued executive order 12951 , making public some 860,000 satellite images taken from 1960 to 1972 .

some of these images were of u.s. territory — clouds off the california coast , the mojave desert , the luquillo experimental forest in puerto rico , and permafrost in alaska .

the use of intelligence resources for domestic purposes was described by then - director of central intelligence ( dci ) john deutch in a 1996 speech: in the united states , the intelligence community provides support to the federal emergency management activity and other civil agencies when there is a natural disaster .

using data from a variety of sources , within hours after a disaster strikes we can assess and report the nature and scope of the damage — conditions of roads , airports and hospitals ; and the status of potential secondary threats such as dams and nuclear facilities .

here i would like to make two points: first , we only provide this support upon request .

to image us territory , we must first get permission .

second , we provide unclassified products generated from classified information .

we have a disaster response team that can quickly produce unclassified maps and diagrams that show the damage resulting from an earthquake , fire , flood , hurricane , oil spill , or volcanic eruption .

although the precise capabilities of intelligence satellites are classified , they are known to have greater resolution than anything available in commercial markets , such as google earth , spot , or landsat .

their usefulness would appear to be unquestionable for map - making and related civilian uses .

satellite information has continued to have important civil applications in such disparate areas as the movement of glaciers in yakutat bay in alaska , forest fires in montana , and near mount pinatubo in the philippines .

they are regularly relied on to provide coverage of environmental events .

information from intelligence satellites supplements other sources of overhead imagery available to government agencies — from nasa satellites , commercial satellites , or from manned aircraft or unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) .

generally , satellite - derived intelligence is combined by the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) with information from airborne platforms , commercial imagery , and other information to meet the needs of military commanders and senior policy makers .

the nga employs a wide range of techniques to prepare mapping and elevation data , scene visualization , and situation analysis .

working through the cac , the nga has become a routine partner in disaster relief efforts such as those following the 2004 undersea earthquake and tsunami in the indian ocean and hurricane katrina in 2005 , when the nga provided graphics for "relief efforts that depicted the locations of major airports , police and fire stations , emergency operations centers , hazardous materials , highways and schools. .

nga argues that it "has a strong tradition of collaborating with colleagues across government , non - profit academia and industry arenas to exchange ideas , share best practices , display new geoint [geospatial intelligence] solutions and technologies and discuss potential tradecraft advances as they relate to geoint. .

thus , even though commercial data are available for procurement by any government agency , the nga and other intelligence agencies believe that their experience and expertise will enable them to provide "value - added" information support to agencies responsible for homeland security and law enforcement .

satellites are also capable of supporting measurement and signature analysis ( masint ) , which is an important , but little known , intelligence discipline , involving information derived from the analysis of radar , laser , infrared , and other emanations .

masint could be useful for domestic applications in some circumstances ; in particular , it might provide evidence of the existence and location of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) materials or wmds themselves prepared or smuggled in by hostile individuals or groups .

the capabilities that satellite - derived information might add to homeland security and law enforcement efforts are inevitably classified but could be investigated and assessed by congressional committees .

the comparative advantages of intelligence satellites are that they can be targeted in an emergency ( assuming no foreign intelligence requirements take precedence ) , their products are cost - free to the requesting agency , and their resolution is higher than what is otherwise available .

on the other hand , they may not be available for civil use at a particular time — a prolonged international crisis or ongoing combat operations could significantly limit their availability for civilian uses .

they do not "belong" to the civilian agency on a permanent basis .

furthermore , the extreme resolution of their imagery may be superfluous for the tasks at hand .

it nevertheless remains uncertain exactly how much "value added" satellites would offer for homeland security and law enforcement purposes .

clearly , additional imagery sources could be useful in many situations , and sophisticated techniques for acquiring information about the presence of wmd materials would be highly valuable , albeit in extremely unlikely circumstances .

what other uses would be important remain uncertain and cannot be determined on the basis of unclassified , public materials .

the obama administration , taking office in january 2009 , undertook a review of the nao .

on june 23 , 2009 , dhs secretary janet napolitano announced her decision to end the nao program maintaining that other programs "better meet the needs of law enforcement , protect the civil liberties and privacy of all americans , and make our country more secure. .

details on current arrangements for using information derived from intelligence satellites have not been made public .

members' concerns about the constitutionality of the national applications office were expressed not only in correspondence but are also reflected in statutory law .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 , division e , section 525 ) , signed by the president on december 26 , 2007 , provides that "none of the funds provided in this act shall be available to commence operations of the national applications office ... until the secretary certifies that these programs comply with all existing laws , including all applicable privacy and civil liberties standards , and that certification is reviewed by the government accountability office. .

although some argued that the nao charter would have delayed use of the ic capabilities for domestic law enforcement purposes until the legal issues were resolved , the leadership of the house homeland security committee continued to express its concerns , noting that the nao charter had been drafted without any input from the committee .

in a letter of april 7 , 2008 , the homeland security committee chairman , representative thompson , joined by subcommittee chairpersons , representatives carney and harman , indicated their opposition to the establishment of the nao until the legal framework for supporting law enforcement efforts was established .

they argued , "bifurcating the nao into 'easy to do' domains and a 'hard to do' law enforcement domain is not an option. .

observers see a number of legal issues involved in the use of satellite - derived information for law enforcement purposes , although discussion and analysis are complicated by the classified nature of satellite capabilities and operations and the absence of public information about ways that satellite - derived information could be used by law enforcement agencies .

most frequently , the proposed expansion of the use of satellite intelligence for domestic law enforcement purposes has been called into question on the basis of possible civil liberties implications , including concerns about privacy rights .

other commentators have also questioned whether the proposed surveillance would violate the posse comitatus act , post - civil war legislation that restricts the use of military forces for domestic law enforcement .

a key consideration in this regard is the nature of the intelligence agencies that would be involved .

the cia is a civilian institution to which some military personnel on active duty are assigned .

dhs is also a civilian department with both law enforcement and intelligence responsibilities .

the nro , which develops and operates satellites , and the nga , which processes and analyzes the data collected , are components of dod .

although the nro is currently headed by a civilian , both agencies have sizable numbers of active duty military personnel assigned .

questions about the appropriate or lawful assignment of military personnel to functions that substantively support domestic law enforcement thus have particular relevance to the nga and nro .

the following sections describe the state of the law regarding the application of fourth amendment analysis to satellite surveillance ( not including electronic surveillance of communications ) , as well as the current statutory framework regarding intelligence collection and military involvement in law enforcement .

although mechanisms for using imagery and other data acquired by satellites for some domestic needs have been in existence since the 1970s without controversy , the possibility of using satellites to support law enforcement and homeland security missions has raised serious concerns among members of congress and individuals and groups concerned about the possibility of using intelligence resources as a weapon against u.s. persons .

the complexities of congressional oversight of agencies with law enforcement and foreign intelligence missions along with widely circulated reports that congress was not notified of new satellite missions contributed significantly to these concerns .

the bush administration delayed the establishment of the nao and provided an opportunity for further congressional consideration of the issues involved but took steps to establish the nao for some purposes even before important legal issues were resolved .

having conducted a review of the issue , the obama administration terminated the nao , but has not provided detailed information about current procedures for the domestic use of satellites for domestic purposes .

