the federal government owns roughly 640 million acres , more than a quarter of the land in the united states .

these lands are heavily concentrated in 12 western states ( including alaska ) , where t he federal government owns roughly half of the overall land area .

four federal agencies — the national park service ( nps ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and bureau of land management ( blm ) , all in the department of the interior ( doi ) , and the u.s. forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture — administer about 95% of those lands .

no single law provides authority for these four agencies to acquire and / or disposal of lands .

rather , congress provided various acquisition and disposal authorities through laws enacted over more than a century .

this report describes the primary authorities of the four agencies .

the extent to which each of the agencies has authority to acquire and dispose of land , and the nature of the authorities , varies considerably .

some of the agencies have relatively broad authority to acquire and / or dispose of land .

most notably , the blm has relatively broad authority for both acquisitions and disposals .

by contrast , the nps has no general authority to acquire land to create new park units or to dispose of park lands .

the extent of the acquisition and disposal authorities for the fs and the fws are not nearly as broad as the blm's but not nearly as restrictive as the nps's .

the fs authority to acquire lands is mostly limited to lands within or contiguous to the boundaries of a national forest .

the agency has various authorities to dispose of land , but they are relatively constrained and infrequently used .

the fws has various authorities to acquire lands but no general authority to dispose of its lands .

the acquisition authorities differ as to the circumstances in which they apply , and the disposal authorities likewise differ as to their purposes .

thus , where a specific acquisition or disposal by an agency is contemplated , the particular authority at issue should be consulted .

in general , the acquisition authorities are designed to allow federal agencies to acquire lands that could be viewed as benefitting from federal management .

among other circumstances , acquisition might be authorized to bring inholdings or lands adjacent to federal lands into federal ownership to improve or simplify management of federal lands .

acquisitions also might be authorized to conserve species , protect natural and cultural resources , and increase opportunities for recreation .

the disposal authorities generally are designed to allow federal agencies to dispose of land that is no longer required for a federal purpose , might be inefficient to manage , or might be chiefly valuable for another purpose .

for instance , disposal might be authorized to allow lands to be used for agriculture , community development , mineral extraction , or educational purposes .

agencies also acquire and dispose of federal land in exchanges .

exchanges are not discussed separately in this report , as often the authorities to acquire and dispose of lands also apply to land exchange .

however , there are provisions of law particularly applicable to exchanges .

the exchange authorities for the nps and the fws are relatively narrow .

the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ; 43 u.s.c .

§§1701-1781 ) provides broader exchange authority and is the main authority governing exchanges by the blm and the fs .

congress often faces questions on the adequacy of existing acquisition and disposal authorities ; the nature , extent , and location of their use ; the extent of federal land ownership overall ; and the sources and levels of land acquisition funds , among other issues .

the suitability of the acquisition and disposal authorities , and the extent and circumstances of their use by the agencies , forms the backdrop for congressional consideration of measures to establish , modify , or eliminate the use of authorities .

with regard to the establishment of new authorities , for instance , some 115 th congress proposals would authorize states to exchange land grant parcels for federal lands .

other measures would authorize the blm and fs to convey small tracts to adjacent landowners and to govern the use of proceeds from these conveyances .

proposals to modify authorities include measures in the 115 th congress to reauthorize and amend blm authority to sell or exchange land under the federal land transaction facilitation act ( fltfa ; 43 u.s.c .

§§2301 et seq .

 ) , as well as bills to amend the small tracts act ( 16 u.s.c .

§521e ) regarding the type and value of fs lands that can be disposed of and the use of related proceeds .

among the provisions to eliminate the use of authorities are those to prevent the disposal of federal land under the general mining law of 1872 , which have been contained in annual interior appropriations laws since fy1995 .

in addition , congress frequently considers legislation authorizing and governing the acquisition or disposal of specific parcels .

for example , title xxx of p.l .

113-291 contained various provisions to authorize the acquisition and / or disposal of land .

congress may consider such legislation to provide an agency with acquisition or disposal authority in a particular instance because it is lacking .

in other cases , congress directs a particular acquisition or disposal to facilitate the action .

for instance , the legislation may seek to direct an acquisition based on congress's assessment of public needs and priorities .

it may expedite the process for acquiring a parcel of land , such as by limiting the assessments and evaluations that ordinarily would be required under law .

the legislation also might authorize actions not ordinarily permitted , such as the conveyance of land at reduced or no cost rather than at fair market value .

congress also addresses acquisition and disposal policy in the context of deliberations on the role and goals of the federal government in owning and managing land generally .

the extent to which the federal government should own land remains controversial .

many westerners contend that there is excessive federal influence over their lives and economies and that the federal government should divest itself of many lands .

many others support the policy of retaining lands in federal ownership on behalf of the public and sometimes advocate adding more lands to enhance protection .

recent congresses considered diverse bills pertaining to the extent of federal land ownership .

among others , 115 th congress measures would authorize or direct the secretary of the interior and the secretary of agriculture to offer to sell a certain percentage of land in each of several fiscal years .

other bills provide that where a land management agency acquires land , an equal number of acres is to be offered for sale .

as noted above , various laws authorizing and governing specific land acquisitions have been enacted .

in addition , the four federal land management agencies have different standing authorities for acquiring lands .

in general , all four agencies are authorized to accept land as gifts and bequests .

in addition , each generally is authorized to use eminent domain — taking private property , through condemnation , for public use — while compensating the landowner .

however , this practice is controversial , and it is rarely used by the land management agencies .

the primary land acquisition authorities are described below for each of the four federal land management agencies .

in general , the agencies are presented in the order of the breadth of their authorities , with the nps ( the narrowest authorities ) first and the blm ( the broadest authorities ) last .

as noted above , various laws directing the disposal of particular lands sometimes have been enacted .

in addition , the four federal land management agencies have different standing authorities for disposing of lands .

the specific disposal authorities are discussed below for each of the four agencies in the order of their apparent breadth , with the nps ( the narrowest authorities ) first and the blm ( the broadest authorities ) last .

the nps does not have general authority to dispose of national park system lands .

units and lands of the park system that were established by acts of congress can be disposed of only by acts of congress .

preservation of park units is a management goal and provisions of law limit the power of the secretary of the interior to dispose of land in changing park boundaries .

although the secretary can , under specified conditions , make boundary changes that concurrently add and remove land within the boundary , minor boundary revisions solely to remove nps acreage can be made only by congress .

also , the secretary can acquire by exchange lands that are adjacent to a boundary revision , but the secretary cannot dispose of nps land to do so ( 54 u.s.c .

§100506 ( c ) ) .

presidents have modified the boundaries of national monuments established by previous presidential proclamations , in some cases reducing the size of the monument .

however , no president has terminated a monument established by proclamation .

the fws does not have general authority to dispose of its lands .

with certain exceptions , wildlife refuge lands administered by the fws can be disposed only by an act of congress ( 16 u.s.c .

§§668dd ( a ) ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) ) .

for refuge lands reserved from the public domain , flpma prohibits the secretary of the interior from modifying or revoking any withdrawal which added lands to the nwrs ( 43 u.s.c .

§1714 ( j ) ) .

for acquired lands , disposal is allowed only if: ( 1 ) the disposal is part of an authorized land exchange ( 16 u.s.c .

§§668dd ( a ) ( 6 ) and ( b ) ( 3 ) ) ; or ( 2 ) the secretary determines the lands are no longer needed and the migratory bird conservation commission approves the disposal ( 16 u.s.c .

§668dd ( a ) ( 5 ) ) .

in the latter case , the disposal must recover the acquisition cost or be at the fair market value ( whichever is higher ) , and the receipts must be deposited in the migratory bird conservation fund .

the secretary of agriculture has numerous authorities to convey lands within proclaimed nfs boundaries out of federal ownership — through sale or exchange — although previous , broader authorities have been modified or revoked .

many of the authorities put constraints on land disposal , such as applying only to a specific geographical area or to the disposal of particular administrative properties or facilities .

many of the authorities are used in conjunction with flpma and other federal law and as such may place requirements on the sale or exchange of land .

this includes obtaining at least fair market value for the sale of federal lands ; requiring that nonfederal land exchanged for federal land be in the same state ; and requiring exchanged lands to be of equal value , although value may be partially equalized with a cash payment ( 43 u.s.c .

§1716 ) .

the general exchange act of 1922 ( 16 u.s.c .

§485 ) authorizes the exchange of nfs land or timber that was reserved from the public domain if the secretary determines it will be in the public interest .

the nonfederal land must be within the same state and within the exterior boundary of a national forest , and it must be chiefly valuable for national forest purposes , among other provisions .

the weeks act of 1911 allows for similar exchanges for acquired nfs lands ( 16 u.s.c .

§516 ) .

the 1983 small tracts act authorizes the secretary to dispose of nfs land by sale or exchange , generally up to certain specified acreage limits .

the disposal may be to improve management efficiencies where nfs lands are interspersed with nonfederal mineral rights owners , or if the secretary determines the parcels to be inaccessible , physically isolated from other federal land , or to have lost national forest character ( 40 acres maximum ) ; to relieve encroachments including due to erroneous surveys , or encroachments by a permanent habitable improvement if there is no evidence that the encroachment was intentional or due to negligence ( 10 acres maximum ) ; to dispose of unneeded federal rights - of - way substantially surrounded by nonfederal lands ( no specified acreage limitation ) ; and if the parcel is used as a cemetery , landfill , or sewage plant pursuant to a special use authorization for the use and occupancy of nfs land ( no specified acreage limitation ) ( 16 u.s.c .

§521e ) .

the conveyance must be determined to be in the public interest and the tracts may not be valued at more than $500,000 .

the land can be disposed of for cash , lands , interests in land ( such as an easement ) , or any combination thereof for at least the value of the land being sold or exchanged ( 16 u.s.c .

§521d ) plus "all reasonable costs of administration , survey , and appraisal incidental to such conveyance" ( 16 u.s.c .

§521f ) .

in some cases , the proceeds may be used for specified land acquisition purposes .

the 1958 townsites act authorizes the secretary to transfer up to 640 acres of nfs land adjacent to communities in alaska or the 11 western states for townsites , if the "indigenous community objectives ... outweigh the public objectives and values which would be served by maintaining such tract in federal ownership" ( 16 u.s.c .

§478a ) .

public notice of the application for such transfer is required , and upon a "satisfactory showing of need," the secretary may offer the land to a local governmental entity at "not less than the fair market value. .

the education land grant act , also known as the sisk act ( 16 u.s.c .

§479a ) , authorizes the secretary to transfer up to 80 acres of nfs land for a nominal cost upon written application of a public school district .

it provides for reversion of the title to the federal government if the lands are not used for the educational purposes for which they were acquired .

there are a few other specific authorities that allow for the disposal of nfs lands .

for example , the 1911 weeks act authorizes the disposal of nfs lands that are "chiefly valuable for agriculture" but were acquired inadvertently or otherwise , if agricultural use will not injure the forests or streamflows and the lands are not needed for public purposes .

the lands can be sold as homesteads in parcels of up to 80 acres ( 16 u.s.c .

§519 ) .

the bankhead - jones farm tenant act of 1937 ( 7 u.s.c .

§§1010-1012 ) also authorizes the disposal of lands acquired under its authority , although the fs has adopted regulations stating that the bankhead - jones lands comprising the national grasslands will be held permanently ( 36 c.f.r .

§213.1 ( b ) ) .

the blm can dispose of land under several authorities .

they include ( 1 ) exchanges and sales under flpma , ( 2 ) sales or exchanges under the fltfa , ( 3 ) transfers to other governmental units or nonprofit entities for public purposes , ( 4 ) patents under the general mining law of 1872 , and ( 5 ) geographically limited sale authorities .

with regard to exchanges under flpma , the exchanges must serve the public interest , and the federal and nonfederal lands in the exchange must be located in the same state and be of equal value ( with cash equalization payments possible ) , among other requirements ( 43 u.s.c .

§1716 ) .

with regard to sales under flpma , the blm is authorized to sell certain tracts of public land that are identified through the land - use planning process .

such tracts must meet specific criteria ( 43 u.s.c .

§1713 ( a ) ) : ( 1 ) such tract because of its location or other characteristics is difficult and uneconomic to manage as part of the public lands , and is not suitable for management by another federal department or agency ; or ( 2 ) such tract was acquired for a specific purpose and the tract is no longer required for that or any other federal purpose ; or ( 3 ) disposal of such tract will serve important public objectives , including but not limited to , expansion of communities and economic development , which cannot be achieved prudently or feasibly on land other than public land and which outweigh other public objectives and values , including , but not limited to , recreation and scenic values , which would be served by maintaining such tract in federal ownership .

the size of the tracts for sale is determined by "the land use capabilities and development requirements. .

proposals to sell tracts of more than 2,500 acres first must be submitted to congress and can be disapproved by congress .

lands may not be sold at less than their fair market value .

they generally must be sold through competitive bidding , although modified competition and noncompetitive sales are allowed .

fltfa provides for the sale or exchange of blm lands identified for disposal under blm land - use plans .

the law create s a separate treasury account for most of the proceeds ( 96% ) from the sale or exchange , and it provide s for the use of those funds by the secretary of the interior and the secretary of agriculture .

the secretaries may acquire nonfederal lands , specifically inholdings , lands adjacent to federal lands that contain exceptional resources , and areas adjacent to inaccessible lands that are open to recreation .

up to 20% of the funds in the account may be used for administrative costs , and at least 80% of the funds for acquisition are to be in the state in which the funds are generated .

the recreation and public purposes act ( 43 u.s.c .

§869 ) authorizes the secretary , upon application by a qualified applicant , to dispose of any public lands to a state , territory , county , municipality , or other state , territorial , or federal instrumentality or political subdivision for any public purposes , or to a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit association for any recreational or any public purpose consistent with its articles of incorporation or other creating authority .

the lands can be sold or leased , and the act specifies conditions , qualifications , and acreage limitations for transfer .

the price of the land depends on the type of entity that will receive it , for instance , whether a state government or a nonprofit organization .

the price also depends on the intended use of the land , with some sales and leases made at no cost .

although the blm can dispose of lands through patents under the general mining law of 1872 , since fy1995 a series of annual moratoria on issuing mineral patents has been enacted into law .

these moratoria , contained in the annual interior appropriations laws , have effectively prevented this means of federal land disposal .

specifically , the mining law allows access to and development of hardrock minerals on federal lands that have not been withdrawn from entry .

with evidence of valuable minerals and sufficient developmental effort , the mining law allows mining claims to be patented , with full title ( of surface and mineral rights ) transferred to the claimant upon payment of the appropriate fee .

nonmineral lands used for associated milling or other processing operations can also be patented ( 30 u.s.c .

§42 ) .

patented lands may be used for purposes other than mineral development .

the blm also has geographically limited land sale authorities .

the program with the largest revenue stream has been the southern nevada public land management act of 1998 , which allows the secretary of the interior to sell or exchange certain lands around las vegas .

the blm and the local government unit jointly decide on the lands to be offered for sale or exchange .

in general , 85% of the proceeds are deposited into a special account , and are available to the secretary of the interior for land acquisition in nevada and other purposes in the state , such as certain capital improvements and development of parks , trails , and natural areas .

the other 15% of the proceeds are for state or local purposes , specifically the state of nevada general education fund ( 5% ) and the southern nevada water authority ( 10% ) .

other provisions of law similarly provide for blm land sales in particular areas ( mostly in nevada ) , with specific allocations of the proceeds .

further , the blm continues to dispose of land in alaska as required by law , such as through transfers to the state of alaska and to alaska native corporations .

a total of about 150 million acres in alaska will be transferred from federal to state and private ownership .

