as of january 2011 , there have been four directors of national intelligence ( dnis ) .

on april 21 , 2005 , ambassador john negroponte was confirmed as the first dni , a position established by the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108 - 458 ; hereinafter , the intelligence reform act ) .

there was considerable media speculation at the time as to whether the new dni would have the authority necessary to effectively manage the intelligence community , long viewed by observers as more of a loose confederation of 16 separate intelligence entities than an integrated community .

on january 22 , 2007 , ambassador negroponte was nominated as deputy secretary of state , and retired admiral j. michael mcconnell was confirmed as his successor on february 7 , 2007 .

retired admiral dennis c. blair became the third individual to serve as dni when he was confirmed on january 28 , 2009 .

on may 20 , 2010 , blair announced his resignation as dni effective may 28 , 2010 .

on august 9 , 2010 , retired air force lt. general james r. clapper , jr. was sworn in as the fourth dni , having previously served as the under secretary of defense for intelligence .

historically , the director of central intelligence ( dci ) had three primary responsibilities that were codified in the national security act , as amended .

first , the dci was responsible for providing national intelligence ( as opposed to tactical intelligence for military commanders ) to the president and other senior officials , and "where appropriate," to congress .

second , the dci served as head of the intelligence community with authorities to establish priorities for collection and analysis , to develop and present to the president the annual budget for national intelligence programs , and , within tightly prescribed limits , to transfer funds and personnel from one part of the national foreign intelligence program ( nfip ) , renamed the national intelligence program ( nip ) under the intelligence reform act , to another .

and , third , the dci served as head of the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , directing the collection of information by human sources , supervising the wide - ranging analytical efforts of the cia , and , when directed by the president , undertaking covert actions .

many outside observers , members of congress , and various commissions over the years argued that the dci position was unworkable .

they contended that dcis , frustrated by the challenges involved in managing the entire intelligence community , focused narrowly on the cia , and that the result was an ill - coordinated intelligence effort that has poorly served the nation .

some also asserted that dcis lacked adequate legal authorities to establish priorities and to ensure compliance by intelligence agencies beyond the cia .

in particular , it was suggested that major intelligence agencies in the department of defense ( dod ) — the national security agency ( nsa ) , the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) , and the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) — have been more responsive to the needs of the military services than to the requirements of national policymakers .

and , finally , some observers , while conceding that dci authorities under the national security act were limited , nevertheless contended that dcis failed to fully assert their authorities , particularly when their priorities conflicted with those of the secretary of defense , viewed by many as the dominant voice in the intelligence community because of the secretary's control over an estimated 85% of the intelligence budget .

in july 2004 the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) recommended that the dci position be replaced by a national intelligence director to manage the national intelligence program and oversee the agencies that contribute to it .

in response , a number of bills were introduced and , after extended deliberations , congress approved and the president signed on december 17 , 2004 , the intelligence reform act .

it established the new position of dni along with a separate head of the cia .

having accepted this principle , however , there were significant differences of opinion about the particular authorities that should be given to the dni , especially with regard to the preparation and execution of the budgets of the large intelligence agencies in dod .

these differences were addressed by a provision in the act ( §1018 ) requiring that the president issue guidelines to ensure that the dni's authorities are exercised in a way that "respects and does not abrogate the statutory responsibilities" of other departments .

no such guidelines have been issued .

some maintain that this reflects the fact that in asserting his existing authorities , the dni has not done so in a way that has caused dod or other agencies housing intelligence components to call for the issuance of the guidelines .

the intelligence reform act assigns to the dni two of the three principal responsibilities formerly performed by the dci .

the dni will provide intelligence to the president , other senior officials , and congress , and the dni will head the intelligence community .

but , unlike dcis , the dni will not oversee the cia .

rather , the act establishes the new position of director of the central intelligence agency ( dcia ) , who will report to the dni .

the act also restates the major responsibilities of the dcia , which include ( 1 ) collecting intelligence through human sources and by other appropriate means ( but with no police , subpoena , or law enforcement powers or internal security functions ) ; ( 2 ) correlating and evaluating intelligence related to the national security and providing appropriate dissemination of such intelligence ; ( 3 ) providing overall direction for and coordination of collection by human sources outside the u.s. , in coordination with other government departments ; ( 4 ) performing other functions and duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as the president or dni may direct ( a formulation that , some observers believe , is intended to encompass the planning and carrying out of covert actions ) ; and ( 5 ) under the dni's direction , coordinating relationships between u.s. intelligence services and those of other countries .

in april 2007 dni mcconnell reportedly told a conference of federal officials that he lacked sufficient authority to lead the 16-agency intelligence community , citing his lack of direct line management authority over every intelligence agency except cia , because each was a part of another cabinet - level department .

the same month , the executive branch submitted an fy2008 intelligence authorization act that would have strengthened the dni's authorities .

dni mcconnell also announced a "100 day plan," an initiative intended to improve integration and collaboration within the intelligence community by revising "existing statutes , regulations , and directives," as part of an effort to "delineate clearly the roles and responsibilities of the heads of intelligence community components , as well as to clarify dni authority regarding national intelligence agencies. .

in doing so , mcconnell conceded that the intelligence reform act had "significantly clarified and strengthened dni authorities," but that ic leadership had "not fully defined those authorities in guidance" to the intelligence community .

to in part address this deficiency , in 2008 president george w. bush revised executive order ( eo ) 12333 , which generally defines the ic's roles and mission .

during senate confirmation proceedings in january 2009 , dni blair said he would withhold judgment as to whether the dni's authorities were sufficient until he had been confirmed and been able to exercise his authorities .

but he stated that he would exercise those authorities to the fullest and would advise the president and congress if he concluded that he needed more .

similarly , gen. clapper in prepared testimony in july 2010 stated that he had no plan to recommend any "dramatic change to what we have today — but , rather , [i] would work to improve it. .

the two congressional intelligence committees appear to have taken somewhat differing approaches to the issue of dni authorities .

in its version of the fy2008 intelligence authorization act , the senate intelligence committee approved several proposals intended to strengthen the dni authorities , while the house intelligence committee in its version adopted a more limited number of new authorities and expressed disappointment that the dni had not played a more aggressive role in coordinating the intelligence community using his existing authorities .

to strengthen the dni's authority , congress in 2004 approved the intelligence reform act , providing the dni additional powers in certain areas , including in those of personnel , tasking , and acquisition .

arguably , most important , the act enhanced the dni's control over the budgets of the intelligence community's 16 agencies .

according to one observer , the dci through the years had "been pressing his nose against the glass looking in," having never possessed the budget clout some argue the dni now possesses .

other observers acknowledge that the act provided the dni more authority , but question whether this enhanced authority will be sufficient and whether the dni will aggressively assert it in any case .

some commentators have suggested that ambiguities exist within the intelligence reform act that cover complex relationships among disparate agencies with their own statutory authorities .

in such a situation , much will undoubtedly depend on how the dni understands his position , and on the patterns of cooperation and deference that are set in his tenure .

the 112 th congress may be interested in the relationships between the dni and the defense department and the law enforcement community .

whether the dni's authorities under the act are sufficient to meet the responsibilities set forth in the 2004 act is subject to differing assessments .

what is clear , however , is that the statute provides the dni substantially more authority — not only in regard to the budget , but also in the areas of personnel , tasking , and acquisition — than dcis had under the national security act of 1947 , as amended .

just how much more overall authority the dni actually wields will likely depend on several factors .

among them: ( 1 ) will the dni aggressively assert the new authorities ? .

 ( 2 ) will the president and congress back the dni if he does ? .

and ( 3 ) will the dni successfully establish a transparent intelligence community budget process that will permit him to make and effectively enforce informed budget decisions ? .

