in the past three decades , the u.s. government and international community have increasingly recognized violence against women ( hereinafter vaw ) as a human rights problem with far reaching consequences .

prior to the 1970s , many in the international community viewed vaw as a private matter to be dealt with among individuals and not a public matter that merited a national or international response .

in the late 1970s and 1980s , however , the international community began to focus on vaw as a global health problem and violation of human rights .

this shift was driven , in part , by an increasingly effective and well - organized grassroots movement of local , national , and international women's non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) that brought international attention to the plight of vaw victims and created a more public forum for discussion of the issue .

u.s. policymakers have generally addressed vaw as a component of other international development efforts rather than as a stand - alone issue .

congress has authorized and appropriated funds for international programs that address types of vaw , including trafficking in persons and female genital cutting ( fgc ) .

members of congress have also addressed vaw in the context of issues such as hiv / aids prevention and democracy promotion .

similarly , in the last decade past and current administrations have supported initiatives to reduce specific types and circumstances of international vaw through programs addressing humanitarian assistance and healthcare .

the lack of u.s. government - wide coordination or overarching framework for addressing international vaw , however , has led some to suggest that u.s. efforts to address vaw , while important , take a piecemeal approach to addressing the problem .

further , some argue that the united states should re - examine and possibly enhance current efforts to combat violence against women .

this report identifies types of vaw and the direct and indirect consequences of these acts of violence .

it provides examples of completed and ongoing u.s. government programs that — in whole or in part — work to reduce or eliminate international violence against women .

it does not assess the scope of individual programs or a program's success in achieving its goal .

the report also outlines possible policy considerations for the 112 th congress , including the scope and effectiveness of current u.s. programs , further integrating vaw prevention and treatment into u.s. foreign assistance programs , coordinating among u.s. executive branch agencies and departments , and u.s. funding of international anti - vaw programs .

in 1993 , the u.n. general assembly adopted the non - binding declaration on the elimination of violence against women ( devaw ) .

the declaration , which was supported by the u.s. government , describes vaw as "any act of gender - based violence that results in , or is likely to result in , physical , sexual , or psychological harm or suffering to women , including threats of such acts , coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty , whether occurring in public or private life. .

the devaw definition of vaw is broad , encompassing both physical and psychological harm .

it is used in this report because it is one of the most inclusive and widely agreed to international definitions .

in some contexts , vaw may be used synonymously with "gender - based violence" ( gbv ) , which describes violence perpetrated against an individual , regardless of sex , because of his or her gender .

despite the international adoption of devaw , governments , organizations , and cultures continue to define vaw in number of ways , taking into account unique factors and circumstances .

how vaw is defined has implications for policymakers because the definition affects the types of violence that are measured and addressed .

some law enforcement organizations and national criminal codes , for instance , do not consider psychological abuse to be a form a vaw because , while harmful , in many cases it is legal .

others , however , advocate for a broader definition of vaw , contending that physical and psychological harm cannot be separated , and that psychological abuse can be as devastating as physical abuse .

vaw occurs in all geographic regions , countries , cultures , and economic classes .

many experts view vaw as a symptom of the historically unequal power relationship between men and women , and argue that over time this imbalance has led to pervasive cultural stereotypes and attitudes that perpetuate a cycle of violence .

though the specific causes of vaw vary on a case - by - case basis , some researchers have identified community and individual risk factors that may increase rates of violence against women .

community factors can include cultural norms that support male superiority , high crime levels , poor economic conditions , and a lack of political and legal protection from governments .

individual factors that may lead to a high risk of becoming a victim of vaw include living in poverty and a previous history of abuse .

violence against women can include both random acts as well as sustained abuse over time , which can be physical , psychological , or sexual in nature ( see table 1 ) .

some research has found that women are most likely to experience violence at the hands of someone they know , including authority figures , parents , sons , husbands , and male partners .

studies conclude that one of the most common forms of vaw is intimate partner violence , which can include forced sex , physical violence , and psychological abuse , such as isolation from family and friends .

there are many different types of violence against women .

honor killings , for example , occur when women are stoned , burned , or beaten to death , often by their own family members , in order to preserve the family honor .

the practice is most common in middle eastern and south asian countries , though it has been reported in other parts of the world , such as latin america and africa .

dowry - related violence , where victims might be attacked or killed by in - laws for not bringing a large enough dowry to the marriage , is also prevalent in south asian countries such as pakistan , india , and bangladesh .

female genital cutting ( fgc ) , which has also been referred to as female genital mutilation ( fgm ) or female circumcision , is common in some african and middle eastern countries .

the world health organization estimates that between 100 and 140 million women and girls have undergone a form of the procedure , and that about 3 million girls are at risk each year .

some consider child and adolescent marriage , which is particularly prevalent in parts of the middle east and africa , to be a form of violence against women .

in such cases , girls as young as 10 and 12 years old may be married to older men , often with the approval of their parents .

some research indicates that these child brides may face a greater risk of violence .

most u.s. agencies and departments do not track the cost or number of current anti - vaw programs ; therefore , it is unclear how much money the u.s. government , or individual agencies , spends annually on anti - vaw programs .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the department of state ( dos ) are the primary u.s. entities that implement u.s. international anti - vaw programs .

other agencies and departments that support some programs with anti - vaw components include the departments of defense ( dod ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , justice ( doj ) , and labor ( dol ) .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the peace corps also address aspects of violence against women .

 ( see the appendix for a list of selected u.s. offices and bureaus that have anti - vaw programs. ) .

in march 2007 , u.s. agencies and departments provided information to crs on programs that address international vaw either in whole or in part .

approximately 350 u.s. government programs with vaw components across eight agencies have been identified .

capturing the overall u.s. government response to vaw is complicated by the number of programs , the degree to which they focus on vaw or are part of a larger initiative , and overlaps in program budget allocations .

thus , it is possible to generate only a snapshot of activities rather than an all - inclusive list .

the information provided to crs indicated that funding levels for individuals programs in fy2006 and fy2007 ranged from $10,000 to $15 million ; in many cases , the anti - vaw component included only a small portion of total program funding .

of these reported programs , approximately 10% operated globally , 22% in africa , 21% in europe / eurasia , 17% in the western hemisphere , 14% in south / central asia , 14% in east asia / the pacific , and 2% in the near east .

this section describes key vaw issues and discusses examples of related u.s. activities across agencies and departments .

some of the activities have been completed , while others are ongoing .

because the u.s. government does not track anti - vaw programs and funding , it is difficult to determine the extent to which a u.s. initiative , program , or project addresses violence against women .

therefore , the descriptions of u.s. anti - vaw activities in this section are largely anecdotal and , in many cases , implemented only in the context of broader development efforts .

this section does not assess the scope of individual programs , or a program's success in achieving its goal .

 ( for more information , see the " policy issues for congress " section. ) .

international organizations , particularly the united nations and its specialized agencies , support myriad mechanisms and programs that address vaw in all parts of the world .

for more than a decade , congress has demonstrated an ongoing interest in addressing international violence against women .

it has passed legislation addressing specific types of vaw , such as human trafficking and fgc , and has adopted legislation addressing vaw in different regions and countries , particularly in africa and asia .

in some cases , congress has incorporated vaw components into legislation and programs addressing international hiv / aids prevention and foreign military and law enforcement training .

congress has also committed resources to the u.n. trust fund in support of actions to eliminate violence against women , an international mechanism that addresses violence against women .

in both the 110 th and 111 th congresses , members introduced , but did not pass , house and senate versions of the international violence against women act , which sought to coordinate and provide additional funding for u.s. efforts to address violence against women overseas .

when considering u.s. and international efforts to address violence against women , the 112 th congress may wish to take a number of issues into account .

some experts argue that u.s. government programs and initiatives do not sufficiently address international violence against women .

they maintain that current anti - vaw funding levels do not reflect the scope of the problem , and , further , that many of the programs in place are not adequately funded .

others argue that many u.s. anti - vaw programs are short in duration and often not renewed — making it a challenge for programs to have a substantive long - term impact .

some also suggest that when highlighting u.s. efforts to combat vaw , the u.s. government places too much emphasis on programs with vaw components , as opposed to programs solely addressing the issue .

this may create the appearance that the u.s. government commits significant resources to addressing international vaw — when , according to some , the united states does not do enough .

a 2006 usaid report on gender - based violence and hiv / aids , for example , identified 243 pepfar programs that incorporate gender - based violence components in fy2006 .

many are concerned that these components did not constitute a substantial anti - vaw effort .

some also contend that u.s. anti - vaw initiatives that were promised , such as the bush administration's proposed women's justice empowerment initiative ( wjei ) , were not fully funded or implemented .

some experts and policymakers question whether u.s. programs addressing vaw should be further integrated into u.s. foreign assistance programs .

supporters of increased integration maintain that , in addition to receiving attention as a stand - alone global health and human rights issue , vaw should be a component of broader u.s. foreign assistance efforts — including health services , development , human rights , foreign military training and law enforcement training , humanitarian assistance , and legal and political reform .

they argue that additional funding is needed to adequately coordinate government - wide efforts and fund current and future u.s. programs and activities .

some have expressed concern that the u.s. government does not adequately coordinate its anti - vaw efforts .

many argue that in order to effectively combat the issue , the u.s. government should actively track its anti - vaw programs and establish mechanisms that will identify potential gaps and weaknesses in u.s. approaches .

some observers have reportedly found it difficult to assess the adequacy of u.s. efforts in this area because of the lack of anti - vaw program data collection , coordination , and analysis .

some have proposed that the government establish a discrete office or coordinating body to address u.s. efforts to address violence against women .

such actions , they argue , may be a valuable tool for policymakers who wish to prevent the possible duplication of u.s. anti - vaw activities and more effectively disseminate best practices among and within u.s. government agencies .

some experts contend that providing financial and technical support to international organizations that address vaw is a particularly effective use of u.s. resources .

they maintain that such cooperation benefits the united states because it allows the u.s. government to share anti - vaw - related costs and resources with other governments and organizations .

opponents argue that the u.s. government should focus on its own anti - vaw initiatives , and emphasize that u.n. activities addressing vaw , for example , may not always align with u.s. priorities .

were congress to opt to use u.n. mechanisms to combat vaw , there are a number of programs and options that might be considered .

the united nations and its specialized agencies support a range of programs to eliminate violence against women .

un women , for example , administers the u.n. trust fund in support of actions to eliminate discrimination against women , an interagency mechanism to fund and promote u.n. actions on violence against women .

in recent years , some policymakers have recognized the trust fund as a possible tool for combating international violence against women .

for a discussion of u.n. system programs and mechanisms that address vaw , see crs report rl34518 , united nations system efforts to address violence against women , by [author name scrubbed] .

finding ways to address vaw is a significant and ongoing challenge for the u.s. government and the international community .

there may be a number of oversight issues of interest to the 112 th congress .

some governments , particularly those of developing countries , lack the political , legislative , and financial infrastructures to establish and maintain policies and programs to eliminate violence against women .

a 2006 u.n. study on vaw found that 102 of the 192 u.n. member states lack domestic legal provisions addressing intimate partner violence .

in recent years , efforts to address domestic violence have appeared to increase .

a 2011 un women report , for example , found that 125 countries have adopted legislation on domestic violence , including almost all countries in latin america and the caribbean .

despite such improvements , significant obstacles remain .

many countries lacking domestic violence laws often face challenges such as poverty , health epidemics , and political unrest , may not view combating vaw as a policy priority — either because they do not view it as a significant problem or lack the resources to address it .

moreover , in some cases , national governments may pass laws that support anti - vaw policies , but ineffective legal , political , or law enforcement infrastructures may hinder their ability to implement and enforce laws and provide the necessary support services to be effective .

some experts disagree on the most effective methods to address violence against women .

this lack of consensus may pose a challenge for policymakers who determine funding levels for and implementation of anti - vaw programs .

there is debate , for example , over where to draw the line between the need to protect women's rights and to preserve their freedom of choice .

moreover , in the past , some experts have disagreed on how to most effectively allocate scarce resources for anti - vaw programs .

some maintained that anti - vaw programs should focus on providing treatment services for vaw victims , while others contended that programs should focus on prevention and the root causes of violence .

many experts have concluded , however , that the most effective anti - vaw approaches address both prevention and treatment .

local , national , and international governments and ngos implement thousands of anti - vaw programs annually , but few of these programs are evaluated for their effectiveness .

many anti - vaw programs tend to be short in duration ( one to two years ) and have small budgets , which some observers fear may leave little time and financial resources for evaluations .

consequently , some argue , experts and policymakers may have difficulty gauging a program's effectiveness .

some believe that this may lead to scarce resources being allocated to programs with limited impact .

in recent years , some analysts have increasingly recognized the importance of program evaluation , and are taking steps to improve data collection instruments , share existing best practices , and improve coordination among funding and implementing organizations .

some experts have advocated for program donors and members of the policy community to provide additional funding for program evaluations when funding anti - vaw projects and programs or providing technical assistance .

existing vaw research offers little in the way of comparative data .

many researchers use different sampling techniques , methodologies , and criteria for defining vaw and conducting surveys — which may lead to inconsistent and varied findings .

the lack of comparable data may present a challenge to policymakers attempting to identify the scope of the problem and implement programs to address the issue .

some researchers and policymakers have recognized this and are actively working to streamline survey processes and reporting procedures .

some have also called for the creation of comprehensive international indicators for violence against women .

in the past three decades , the level and quality of research addressing vaw have increased as awareness of the problem has grown .

this section highlights some current and emerging areas in vaw research , prevention , and treatment .

in recent years , a number of governments , international organizations , and ngos have increasingly argued that the problem of international violence against women — particularly sexual violence in conflict situations — may be linked to national and international security .

for example , u.n. security council resolution 1820 , unanimously adopted in 2008 , affirmed that "effective steps to prevent and respond to ... sexual violence can significantly contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security. .

in august 2009 , secretary of state hillary clinton stated , "no nation can succeed in ... increasing security if it leaves out or leaves behind more than half of the population. .

supporters of this position argue that the deliberate use of sexual abuse during armed conflict , which is designed to split families and communities apart , threatens public order .

they further contend that sexual violence prolongs armed conflict and may undermine possibilities for long - term peace and security .

many emphasize that women may not fully participate in civil society because they are intimated by violence or the threat of violence .

some also argue that because sexual violence often destabilizes communities , it could create conditions that breed terrorism .

research on vaw has evolved to include not only treatment and prevalence but also root causes .

as a result , many experts and policymakers have increasingly focused on the role of men and boys in preventing violence against women .

some ngos and governments have developed school curricula , services , and public awareness campaigns to educate boys and men on the negative consequences of violence against women .

these efforts range from rehabilitating perpetrators through counseling to establishing curricula for young boys that challenge traditional notions of masculinity .

during the last decade , researchers and policymakers have increasingly explored the relationship between hiv / aids and violence against women .

studies have found that women in developing countries are disproportionately affected by hiv , with the united nations estimating that two - thirds of new infections among people from 15 to 24 years old are among women .

global statistics indicate that women who are victims of violence are more likely to contract hiv than those who are not , leading some experts to conclude that there may be a correlation between rates of hiv in women and violence .

reportedly , women who experience or fear violence appear to be less likely to request or insist on using condoms during sexual encounters , increasing their risk of hiv and other sexually transmitted diseases .

women who are raped are also more susceptible to contracting hiv due to vaginal and anal tearing .

some experts have linked vaw to discrimination .

many in the international community view violence as a form of discrimination against women and maintain that discrimination also causes violence .

to successfully combat vaw , they contend , equal attention should be paid to the causes and impacts of female discrimination .

women who are discriminated against because of their sex may not receive a formal education or have access to healthcare .

in many societies , women may not own property or have inheritance rights .

some analysts argue that these factors may contribute to an unequal power relationship between men and women — which in turn may lead to a cycle of violence .

some developed countries have undertaken studies to determine the economic costs of violence against women .

though the results vary because of differing methodologies , the studies generally found that the cost to society may be significant .

canadian researchers , for example , estimated that the cost of damage incurred by vaw in canada is over $4 billion canadian dollars .

most studies analyze both long - term and short - term cost variables such as treatment and services for women victims of violence ( including healthcare and legal costs ) , and reduced employment and productivity levels because of violence against female employees .

some studies also address the economic impact of pain and suffering inflicted on women by violence , though estimating the costs of such intangibles can present a challenge to researchers .

moreover , many experts generally agree that because of vaw's complex and wide - ranging impact on society , it is likely that existing research underestimates the economic consequences of violence .

