the federal government has played a role in subsidizing housing construction and providing homeownership and rental assistance for lower - income households since the 1930s .

today , congress funds a number of programs to help meet the housing needs of poor and vulnerable populations .

the programs are primarily administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , with some assistance provided to rural communities through the department of agriculture and some tax benefits administered through the department of the treasury .

the modern housing assistance programs include both relatively flexible grants to state and local governments to serve homeless people , build affordable housing , provide assistance to first - time homebuyers , and promote community development ; and more structured , direct assistance programs that provide low - cost apartments and rental vouchers to poor families , administered through local public , quasi - public , and private intermediaries .

the federal government also makes tax credits available to states to distribute to developers of low - cost housing and provides mortgage insurance to lenders that make certain types of mortgages to eligible homebuyers or developers of multifamily housing .

one of the federal government's largest housing benefits , arguably , is the mortgage interest deduction , which is not targeted to lower - income households and is available to homeowners who pay mortgage interest and itemize their deductions .

this report begins with an overview of the history and evolution of federal housing assistance policy .

it then provides descriptions of today's major federal housing assistance programs .

the report concludes with a discussion of issues and trends in federal housing assistance policy .

this report is primarily focused on the federal government's programs and policies that provide housing - related assistance to households and communities to assist lower - income families .

this is a narrower focus than the federal government's role in all aspects of housing and housing finance .

for example , this report does not explore the federal government's regulation of lead - based paint hazards in residential structures , assistance to communities in responding to mass displacement immediately following natural disasters , or financial industry regulations as they affect both residential and commercial lending .

it also does not provide an in - depth discussion of the federal government's role in facilitating a secondary market for mortgages through the government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) fannie mae and freddie mac or the government agency ginnie mae .

today's system for providing housing assistance to low - income families is made up of programs that fall into three main categories: rental housing assistance , federal assistance to state and local governments , and housing finance and homeownership assistance .

these categories are not necessarily mutually exclusive .

for example , some assistance provided to states and local governments can in turn be used to provide various types of housing finance or homeownership assistance .

rental assistance is provided primarily through rent vouchers that families can use in the private market ; below - market rental units owned by phas or private landlords under contract with the federal government ; and , to a limited extent , construction of new below - market rental units .

assistance to state and local governments comes in several forms , including broad , flexible block grants that can be used for rental , homeownership , or community development purposes ; special purpose block grants ; and programs based in the tax system .

housing finance and homeownership assistance can include direct assistance to defray home buying costs , tax incentives , and mortgage insurance programs to help provide incentives for the private market to meet the needs of underserved segments of the population .

such assistance may help finance single - family housing , which can assist eligible homebuyers in obtaining mortgages to purchase homes , or multifamily housing , which can assist housing developers in obtaining financing to develop affordable rental housing .

this section provides a description of the major housing assistance programs that fall into the three aforementioned categories .

the following tables present data on federal spending ( outlays ) on selected housing assistance programs as well as data on the number of rent - assisted units , since 1980 .

 table 15 presents spending , or outlays , for selected housing assistance programs , in both real and nominal dollars .

this table does not include any spending information related to loan commitments or obligations , nor does it include tax expenditures or expenditures from non - appropriated sources ( such as the national housing trust fund ) .

as can be seen in table 15 , outlays for the selected programs have increased , in both real and nominal dollars ( a 449% increase in nominal dollars , a 108% increase in real dollars ) , over the more than three decades presented .

 table 16 and figure 1 present the total number of units eligible for payment / households served under selected rental assistance programs from fy1980 to fy2016 .

the rental assistance programs reflected in these data are a subset of a group of housing assistance programs for which spending data are presented in table 15 .

as shown , units / households in the rental assistance programs has grown by 66% over the more than three decades presented .

most of that growth happened in the 1980s and early 1990s .

since the early 1990s , the number of units eligible for payment has gone up and down from year to year , with an overall decline in units from fy2001 to fy2009 .

hud stopped publishing "units eligible for payment" data after fy2009 .

beginning with fy2010 , the data shown reflect hud's report of the number of households served by various hud programs , taken from their annual performance reports .

between fy2010 and fy2016 , there was some modest and uneven growth in the number of assisted households , with increases in vouchers offsetting decreases in other forms of assistance .

table 16 also helps to illustrate the trend away from public housing and other housing assistance toward rental assistance ( eg , section 8 vouchers ) discussed earlier in this report .

the number of units assisted under the other housing assistance programs has been on the decline since the nixon moratorium in the 1970s .

for many of those units , once the family leaves the program , it receives a voucher .

in the case of public housing , the number of units continued to increase until the mid - 1990s , as contracted units became available .

since the mid - 1990s , through the hope vi program and other authority , phas have been demolishing and disposing of many of their public housing developments .

some replacement public housing units have been built in their place , but many of the units were replaced with section 8 vouchers .

