in 1990 , the state of washington passed a law that allows for the civil commitment of sex offenders .

civil commitment , as it relates to sex offenders , is when a state retains custody of an individual , found by a judge or jury to be a "sexually dangerous person," by involuntarily committing the person to a secure mental health facility after the offender's prison sentence is done .

the state of washington law requires the state to prove that such offenders suffer from a mental abnormality or personality disorder that would make them likely to engage in predatory acts of sexual violence unless they are confined .

the law allows for civil commitment after an offender completes a prison sentence for his or her crime ( s ) .

since 1990 , 19 states have passed similar legislation , and in 2006 , congress passed legislation ( p.l .

109-248 ) that allows the attorney general to civilly commit federal inmates who are found to be sexually dangerous persons .

every state has "civil commitment" laws that allow for the involuntarily hospitalization of people with serious mental illness .

generally speaking , people can be civilly committed when they are a danger to others .

when a person's symptoms begin to remit , the individual is discharged and typically referred to aftercare services .

hospital stays for individuals under a civil commitment order for mental illness rarely exceed 30 days .

however , in this report , "civil commitment" refers to civil commitment laws targeted at the hospitalization or commitment to a secure institution of "sexually violent persons" after they are released from prison .

with respect to sex offenders , civil commitment laws allow states , and now the federal government , to civilly commit sexually dangerous persons .

for the most part , discussions about sexually dangerous persons treat sex offenders as a homogenous group , sometimes making a distinction between "rapists" and "child molesters. .

however , sex offenders are a heterogeneous group of offenders ; under many state statutes , sex offenses range from rape to child molestation to exhibitionism .

an issue for congress is whether civil commitment is a sustainable policy for dealing with sexually dangerous persons , or whether there is a different way to manage this population effectively .

the issue of civil commitment raises a series of concomitant questions: how much do civil commitment programs cost ? .

how dangerous are sex offenders ? .

is sex offender treatment effective ? .

can sexually dangerous persons be defined and identified ? .

are there less restrictive alternatives for managing sex offenders ? .

this report begins with an outline of the history of civil commitment laws , followed by a review of two cases , kansas v. hendricks and kansas v. crane , in which the supreme court addressed constitutional issues involving civil commitment .

this review is followed by a summary of the recently enacted legislation governing the federal civil commitment program .

the report then discusses research on sex offender recidivism and treatment .

it concludes with an evaluation of some of the issues surrounding civil commitment .

this section describes the history of civil commitment laws in the united states , two supreme court rulings on the constitutionality of civil commitment programs , and a description of the federal civil commitment program .

the common perception of sex offenders is that they are more dangerous than other criminals .

for some , it is not a matter of if sex offenders will re - offend , but when they will re - offend .

the civil commitment of sex offenders hinges on the belief that sex offenders are more likely to recidivate .

this section evaluates the threat that sex offenders pose to the public by reviewing four studies of sex offender recidivism .

one of the key tenets of civil commitment is the belief that sex offenders can be treated ; for if they cannot , it is likely that there will be a burgeoning population of civilly committed sex offenders that will never be released .

however , questions linger about the efficacy of sex offender treatment .

recent research provides evidence that sex offender treatments might reduce recidivism , but the degree to which the treatments are effective is uncertain .

notwithstanding the supreme court's rulings that addressed constitutional issues , there are issues that could influence the long - term viability of civil commitment laws .

these issues include ( 1 ) the ability of the government to determine which offenders should be civilly committed , ( 2 ) the use of less restrictive alternatives to civil commitment , ( 3 ) the use of indeterminate sentences to punish sex offenders , and ( 4 ) the cost of civil commitment programs .

the public outrage towards sex crimes , especially sex crimes against children , has resulted in demands for harsher penalties for sex offenders and better methods for managing them in the community .

recent media coverage of high - profile sex crimes may have increased the public's fear that all sex offenders are dangerous .

elected officials in 19 states and the federal government have turned to civil commitment as a means of trying to ensure the public's safety from sex offenders .

yet , there is a growing controversy about whether civil commitment is the best policy for protecting the public from sex offenders .

notwithstanding the supreme court's rulings on civil commitment , issues remain that continue to fuel the debate over civil commitment .

some of these issues include the following: are sex offenders the threat most people believe them to be ? .

there is some evidence that they may not be , but evidence also shows that a select group of sex offenders are at a high risk to re - offend .

data on sex offender recidivism is not conclusive .

the rate of recidivism among sex offenders varies depending on the study , which , along with the limitations of recidivism data , makes it difficult to conclude that sex offenders are not the threat many think they are .

can sex offenders be treated ? .

studies show that there are promising methods for treating sex offenders , but certain traits found in some sex offenders , especially those who are candidates for civil commitment , may make them more resistant to treatment .

a review of the literature on the efficacy of sex offender treatment indicates that no consensus exists regarding whether treatment can reduce recidivism among sex offenders .

questions persist regarding whether "dangerousness" can be accurately predicted .

this can make civil commitment a problematic endeavor because for it to be effective , only the most dangerous offenders should be committed , and they should be released when it is safe to do so .

the potentially high cost of establishing and maintaining a civil commitment program continues to be a concern .

if , however , few civilly committed offenders are released , costs will likely continue to grow as the population of committed offenders increases .

these issues raise questions central to the debate on civil commitment .

if sex offenders are not at a greater threat to recidivate than other violent offenders , should they be subject to civil commitment ? .

if sex offenders cannot be treated , is civil commitment a viable method for managing sex offenders ? .

would it be better for sex offenders to be managed by the criminal justice system rather than requiring mental health professionals to work with offenders that are not responsive to treatment ? .

are there more cost - effective measures for managing sex offenders that also protect communities from repeat sex crimes ? .

this appendix provides an overview of the state laws governing the civil commitment of sexually dangerous persons .

it does not review state laws governing civil commitment of individuals with serious mental illness .

