rising energy prices and concern over greenhouse gas emissions have focused congressional attention on energy alternatives , including wind power .

although wind power currently provides only a small fraction of u.s. energy needs , it is growing more rapidly than any other electricity source .

wind energy already plays a significant role in several european nations , and countries like china and india are rapidly expanding their capacity both to manufacture wind turbines and to integrate wind power into their electricity grids .

this report describes utility - scale wind power issues in the united states .

the report is divided into the following sections: background on wind energy ; wind resources and technology ; industry composition and trends ; wind power economics ; and policy issues .

three policy issues may be of particular concern to congress: should the renewable energy production tax credit be extended past its currently scheduled expiration at the end of 2009 , and , if so , how would it be funded ? .

the economic analysis suggests that the credit significantly improves the economics of wind power compared to fossil and nuclear generation .

should the congress pass legislation intended to facilitate the construction of new transmission capacity to serve wind farms ? .

as discussed below , sites for wind facilities are often remote from load centers and may require new , expensive transmission infrastructure .

texas and california have implemented state policies to encourage the development of new transmission lines to serve wind and other remote renewable energy sources .

legislation before the congress would create a federal equivalent .

should the congress establish a national renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) ? .

as discussed in the report , the economics of wind are competitive , but not always compelling , compared to fossil and nuclear energy options , and because wind power is dependent on the vagaries of the weather it is not as reliable as conventional sources .

some benefits of wind power cited by proponents , such as a long - term reduction in demand for fossil fuels , are not easily quantified .

to jump - start wind power development past these hurdles , many states have instituted rps programs that require power companies to meet minimum renewable generation goals .

a national rps requirement has been considered and , to date , rejected by congress .

other policy questions , such as federal funding for wind research and development , and siting and permitting requirements , are also outlined .

the modern wind industry began in the early 1980s when the first utility - scale turbines were installed in california and denmark .

wind power then , as today , was driven by high energy prices , energy insecurity , and concern about environmental degradation .

early wind turbines , installed primarily at altamont pass outside of san francisco in california , were primitive compared to today's machines , and suffered from poor reliability and high costs .

like most new technology , early wind turbines had to go through a process of "learning by doing," where shortcomings were discovered , components were redesigned , and new machines were installed in a continuing cycle .

today's wind industry is notably different from that in the early 1980s .

wind turbines now are typically 100 times more powerful than early versions and employ sophisticated materials , electronics , and aerodynamics .

costs have declined , making wind more competitive with other power generation options .

large companies and investment banks now drive most wind power activity compared to the early days of collaborating scientists , inventors , and entrepreneurs .

from the mid - 1980s to the late 1990s the u.s. wind industry stagnated due to low energy prices and the technology's reputation for high cost and low reliability .

but researchers continued to make improvements in the technology , driving down costs and improving reliability .

new federal and state incentives encouraged developers to focus on the production of electricity at wind plants ( also known as wind farms ) and not just installing the equipment .

in 1999 , the u.s. industry began a period of rapid expansion , slowed occasionally by expiring federal incentives .

strong growth continues to this day , but whether that growth will continue in the face of the current financial crisis is unclear .

this section begins with a description of how wind turbines work .

it then provides information on wind resources in the united states , both on and offshore .

finally , the section outlines technology trends in the wind power sector .

within the united states , texas is now the dominant state for wind power , followed by california , minnesota , iowa , washington , and colorado .

total installed wind capacity for each state at the end of 2007 is shown in figure 6 .

california's early lead in wind power has been eclipsed by rapid growth in texas .

wind power installations are also growing rapidly in the pacific northwest states of washington and oregon , as well as in colorado , minnesota , iowa , illinois , and the dakotas .

most of these states have good wind resources , renewable portfolio standards , and local government proponents to help overcome construction barriers .

these state and local incentives supplement the federal production tax credit incentive .

the southeastern region of the united states is noticeably empty of wind power projects due primarily to poor wind resources .

this issue may also influence the region's general opposition to a national rps .

a more detailed map showing the location of each existing and planned wind plant in north america by size is presented in figure 7 .

although planned wind projects far surpass the number of existing ones , there is no guarantee that they will all be constructed .

comparing wind resources from figure 3 with existing and planned wind plants in figure 7 shows significant potential to continue tapping some of the best wind sites in the upper great plains region .

limited transmission capacity is one of the reasons high - quality wind regions like this are not seeing greater wind plant development .

numerous complex variables affect the economics of wind power .

this section includes a financial analysis that compares the cost of building and operating wind plants with competing technologies ( coal , natural gas , and nuclear power ) .

the financial analysis provides an indicative picture of how the economics of wind compare with other bulk power sources .

a comprehensive analysis for a specific project would take many other factors into consideration , including the cost of any necessary transmission upgrades and other options ( eg , purchased power or demand reduction ) .

the following analysis was conducted before the financial crisis hit in late summer 2008 .

this section of the report discusses government policy issues related to wind power .

some issues , such as permitting , are primarily state and local issues , but still may be a concern to congressional constituents .

other issues , such as the extension of the renewable production tax credit , are clearly federal issues .

wind power in the united states is growing rapidly .

although it currently supplies only about 1% of the country's electricity needs , some states and regions have a much higher level of wind penetration .

furthermore , the amount of proposed new wind plants either under construction or waiting to be built is significant , and could soon make wind the largest source of new power supply at the national level .

continued expansion of wind power in the united states could be slowed by the current financial crisis , lack of transmission capacity , or expiration of the federal renewable production tax credit on december 31 , 2009 .

on the other hand , federal policy on climate change , expected by many in the 111 th congress , would likely put a value on carbon dioxide emissions and give wind power additional advantages compared to coal - and natural gas - based electricity .

congress will need to carefully consider the interactive nature of energy and climate legislation when crafting future policy .

the financial analysis of power plant costs in this report estimates the operating costs and required capital recovery of each generating technology for an analysis period through 2050 .

plant operating costs will vary from year to year depending , for example , on changes in fuel prices and the start or end of government incentive programs .

to simplify the comparison of alternatives , these varying yearly expenses are converted to a uniform annual cost expressed as 2008 present value dollars .

similarly , the capital costs for the generating technologies are also converted to levelized annual payments .

an investor - owned utility or independent power project developer must recover the cost of the investment and a return on the investment , accounting for income taxes , tax law ( depreciation rates ) , and the cost of money .

these variables are encapsulated within an annualized capital cost for a project computed using a "capital charge rate. .

the financial model used for this study computes a project - specific capital charge rate that reflects , for example , the assumed cost of money and the applicable depreciation schedule .

in the case of publicly owned utilities the return on capital is a function of the interest rate .

a "capital recovery factor" reflecting each project's cost of money is computed and used to calculate a mortgage - type levelized annual payment .

combining the annualized capital cost with the annualized cash flows yields the total estimated annualized cost of a project .

this annualized cost is divided by the projected yearly output of electricity to produce a cost per mwh for each technology .

by "annualizing" the costs in this manner it is possible to compare alternatives with different year - to - year cost patterns on an apples - to - apples basis .

inputs to the financial model include financing costs , forecasted fuel prices , non - fuel operations and maintenance expense , the efficiency with which fossil - fueled plants convert fuel to electricity , and typical utilization rates ( see table a - 1 , table a - 2 , and table a - 3 ) .

most of these inputs are taken from published sources , such as eia's assumptions used to produce its 2007 and 2008 long - term energy forecasts .

overnight power plant capital costs — that is , the cost to construct a plant before financing expenses — are estimated by crs based on a review of public information on recent projects .

government incentives are also an important part of the financial analysis .

epact05 created or extended federal incentive programs for coal , nuclear , and renewable technologies .

this study assumes the following incentives: a renewable energy production tax credit of 2.0 cents per kwh , with the value indexed to inflation .

the credit applies to the first 10 years of a plant's operation .

the base case analysis assumes that the tax credit , which is currently scheduled to expire at the end of 2008 , will be extended ( as has happened in the past ) .

the credit is available only to wind power production that is sold to an unaffiliated third party .

under most circumstances this requirement effectively limits the production tax credit to independent power producers .

a utility that owns a wind plant and uses the power to serve its own load would not qualify .

the credit is currently available to new wind , geothermal , and several other renewable energy sources .

new solar energy systems do not qualify , and geothermal systems can take the production tax credit only if they do not use the renewable investment tax credit ( discussed below ) .

a nuclear energy production tax credit for new advanced nuclear plants of 1.8 cents per kwh .

the credit applies to the first eight years of operation .

unlike the renewable production tax credit described above , the nuclear credit is not indexed to inflation and therefore drops in real value over time .

this credit is subject to several limitations: it is available to plants that begin construction before january 1 , 2014 , and enter service before january 1 , 2021 .

for each project the annual credit is limited to $125 million per thousand megawatts of generating capacity .

the full amount of the credit will be available to qualifying facilities only if the total capacity of the qualifying facilities is 6,000 megawatts or less .

if the total qualifying capacity exceeds 6,000 megawatts the amount of the credit available to each plant will be prorated .

for example , eia assumes in its 2007 annual energy outlook that 9,000 megawatts of new nuclear capacity qualifies ; in this case the credit amount drops to 1.2 cents per kwh .

the base case for this study follows eia in using the 1.2 cent per kwh assumption for the effective value of the credit .

loan guarantees for carbon - control technologies , including nuclear power .

under final doe rules , the loan guarantees can cover up to 80% of the cost of a project .

guarantees are made available based on a case - by - case evaluation of applicants and are dependent on congressional authority ( in april 2008 , the department of energy announced plans to solicit up to $18.5 billion in loan guarantee applications for nuclear projects ) .

entities receiving loan guarantees must make a "credit subsidy cost" payment to the federal treasury that reflects the net anticipated cost of the guarantee to the government , including a probability of default .

the guarantees are , under current rules , unlikely to be available to public power entities .

energy investment tax credit .

tax credits under this program are available to certain renewable energy systems , including solar and geothermal electricity generation , and some other innovative energy technologies .

wind energy systems do not qualify .

the credit is 10% for systems installed after january 1 , 2009 .

geothermal projects that take the investment tax credit cannot take the renewable production tax credit .

the results of the analysis are shown in the main body of the report .

note that these estimates are approximations subject to a high degree of uncertainty over such factors as future fuel and capital costs .

the rankings of the technologies by cost are therefore also an approximation and should not be viewed as a definitive estimate of the relative cost - competitiveness of each option .

also note that site - specific factors would influence an actual developer's choice of generating technologies .

for example , coal may be less costly if a plant is close to coal mines , and the economics of wind depend in part on the strength and consistency of the wind in a given area .

