paraguay is a landlocked south american country bordering argentina , bolivia , and brazil and has a population of about 6.5 million , predominately concentrated in and around the capital city of asunción .

the majority of the population is of mixed spanish and guaraní indian descent .

both spanish and guaraní are the official languages , with over 90% of the population fluent in guaraní .

paraguay's per capita income was $1,400 in 2006 , according to the world bank , one of the lowest in south america , while about 60% of the people live in poverty and 32% live in extreme poverty , according to the u.n. economic commission for latin america and the caribbean .

the current political context in paraguay has been shaped by the country's turbulent political history .

in the late 19 th century , a two - party system emerged with the formation of the colorado party and the liberal party , but the colorado party soon became the dominant political force , ruling between 1887 and 1904 .

paraguay was defeated in the war of the triple alliance ( 1864-1870 ) against argentina , brazil and uruguay and lost 25% of its territory and over half of its population .

this defeat led to an extensive period of political instability , with three civil wars in the first half of the 20 th century and a war with bolivia between 1932-1935 , the chaco war , that further weakened political institutions and hindered economic development .

the liberals ruled from 1904 until 1940 , until the military assumed control with a succession of authoritarian leaders .

the colorado party returned to power in 1946 , and has remained in power until the present day , making it the longest - ruling political party in the world .

in the late 1940s , the party began to assume greater control over state institutions and the bureaucracy to the point where party membership was a prerequisite for civil service positions and promotion in the military , further perpetuating the colorado party's dominance .

general alfredo stroessner , who was a member of the colorado party , staged a coup in 1954 , and consolidated power in a repressive military dictatorship that lasted 35 years .

the key to the stroessner regime's longevity was an alliance among the military , dominant economic groups , and the colorado party .

the military regime was characterized by strong political repression , the personalization of authority , ultra - nationalist and anti - communist rhetoric , and widespread corruption .

with democratic advances occurring in other south american countries , stroessner ultimately was overthrown in a 1989 coup and fled to brazil , where he lived until his death in 2006 .

in 2004 , a truth and justice commission ultimately was set up to investigate human rights abuses that occurred under the stroessner regime .

the overthrow of the stroessner regime initiated a process of democratization , with the enactment of a new constitution in 1992 and competitive elections held for the first time in 1993 .

despite the democratic transition , however , many characteristics of the country's extensive period of military rule have persevered .

although opposition parties have held a majority in congress , the dominance of the colorado party has remained intact , including its control over the state apparatus .

the political culture has remained a product of the country's authoritarian past with pervasive corruption and clientelism .

nascent democratic institutions have been weak and almost every post - stroessner president has faced some legal troubles .

in 1996 , army commander general lino oviedo revolted after president juan carlos wasmosy ordered him to step down .

oviedo resigned , but attempted to run in the 1998 presidential elections as the colorado party's candidate .

oviedo's candidacy was nullified after the supreme court upheld his conviction and ratified a 10-year prison term for his barracks revolt .

oviedo's running mate , raúl cubas , was elected president in 1998 and defied the supreme court by freeing oviedo from prison as one of his first acts in office .

this action led to the initiation of impeachment proceedings against the president , and intensified the rivalry between vice president luis maria argaña and president cubas and oviedo .

argaña was assassinated in march 1999 and blame was placed on both cubas and oviedo , sparking widespread demonstrations and violence in asunción .

president cubas was forced to resign , and both he and oviedo fled the country .

as a result , luis gonzalez macchi , the president of the senate , completed the presidential term and attempted to establish a government of national unity , but constant infighting within the coalition led to a weak government that was marred by corruption and inefficiency .

nicanor duarte frutos of the colorado party ( national republican association or anr ) was elected president on april 27 , 2003 , defeating julio césar franco of the opposition authentic radical liberal party ( plra , related to the original liberal party ) as well as three other candidates in an election that observers judged to be free and fair .

the colorado party also captured 37 seats in the 80-member chamber of deputies , the largest block , and 16 of 45 seats in the senate , while the largest opposition party , the plra , won 21 seats in the lower house and 12 seats in the senate .

three smaller parties won the remaining seats .

during the campaign , duarte portrayed himself as a strong leader , and he promised to implement widespread institutional reforms , prioritize the fight against corruption and establish a transparent government .

as discussed below , president duarte has enacted reforms that tackle tax evasion and corruption .

since his election , however , the president's popularity has declined because of public concerns about rising crime and unemployment .

as a result , he has resorted to more populist rhetoric as a means of retaining support for the colorado party .

the paraguayan economy , which remains heavily dependent upon its traditional agricultural exports of soybeans , cotton , and meat , grew by 4.3% in 2006 , and 6.4% in 2007 , fueled by soybean production .

paraguay lacks significant mineral and petroleum resources , but possesses vast hydroelectric resources , including the world's largest hydroelectric generation facility , the itaipú dam , built and operated jointly with brazil .

remittances from paraguayans living abroad have significantly contributed to sustained economic growth .

according to the inter - american development bank , remittances totaled some $700 million in 2007 .

paraguay experienced an economic recession for several years in the aftermath of a succession of bank failures from 1996-1998 that wiped out half of paraguay's locally owned banks .

when elected in 2003 , president duarte inherited a government that had defaulted on $138 million in debt , primarily as a result of low tax revenue .

under president duarte , the economy rebounded , due in part to the implementation of reforms that include anti - corruption initiatives , which have increased revenue , strengthened institutions , and created a more favorable environment for foreign investment .

paraguay is heavily influenced by the economic conditions of its larger neighbors , argentina and brazil , which are fellow members of the common market of the south ( mercosur ) .

as one of the smaller countries of mercosur , paraguay has complained that its exports face significant restrictions entering argentina and brazil .

paraguay's industrial sector is still largely underdeveloped , with much of the population still employed in subsistence agriculture .

economic growth tends to be limited by paraguay's imports of manufactured goods , as well capital goods that are necessary to supply the industrial and investment requirements of the economy .

paraguay's informal sector is very large , estimated at about half of the country's gross domestic product , and is estimated to employ over 40% of wage - earning workers .

a significant part of the country's commercial sector consists of importing goods from the united states and asia for re - export into neighboring countries .

most of these imported goods are not declared at customs , preventing the government from obtaining substantial tax revenue .

counterfeit trade and smuggling are prevalent in the country's border regions .

paraguay and the united states have good relations , cooperating extensively on counternarcotics and counterterrorism efforts .

the united states strongly supports the consolidation of paraguay's democracy and continued economic reforms .

president duarte is viewed by many observers as very pro - u.s. and became the first paraguayan head of state to be received at the oval office .

as noted above , after the april 2008 election , u.s .

ambassador to paraguay james cason congratulated lugo and the apc on their victory and expressed a commitment to work and strengthen bilateral relations .

u.s. imports from paraguay totaled about $60 million in 2007 while in the same year , the value of u.s. exports to paraguay was over $1.2 billion , according to department of commerce trade statistics .

machinery and electrical machinery account for the lion's share of u.s. exports to paraguay .

the protection of intellectual property rights ( ipr ) has been a u.s. concern , especially piracy , counterfeiting , and contraband .

the duarte government has made significant efforts to improve ipr protection , but the united states trade representative maintains that the country continues to have problems due to its porous border and ineffective prosecutions .

in 2003 , u.s. and paraguayan officials signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to strengthen legal protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights in paraguay .

in december 2007 , the mou was revised and extended through 2009 .

the united states provided about $12.5 million in aid to paraguay in fy2007 and an estimated $11.6 million in fy2008 .

for fy2009 , the administration has requested $11.8 million in assistance , with $2.7 million to support child survival and health , $5.1 million in development assistance , $350,000 in international military education and training ( imet ) , $300,000 in international narcotics control and law enforcement assistance , and $3.4 million for the continuation of a peace corps program in the country , with an estimated 183 volunteers .

in past years , paraguay had faced restrictions in terms of receiving economic support funds ( esf ) and imet assistance because the paraguayan government has not signed a bilateral immunity ( article 98 ) agreement that would give u.s. soldiers immunity from international criminal court prosecution .

in the fall of 2006 , however , president bush waived the article 98 restrictions for imet and esf for paraguay .

in addition to regular foreign assistance funding , paraguay signed a $34.65 million threshold program agreement with the millennium challenge corporation in may 2006 , with the funds targeted specifically at programs to strengthen the rule of law and build a transparent business environment .

paraguay also signed an agreement with the united states in 2006 under the tropical forest conservation act that provides paraguay with $7.4 million in debt relief in exchange for the paraguayan government's commitment to conserve and restore tropical forests in the southeastern region .

paraguay is a major transit country for illegal drugs destined primarily for neighboring south american states and europe .

the chaco region in the northwestern part of the country is a major transshipment point of illegal drugs , along with the tri - border area ( tba ) with neighboring argentina and brazil .

a 1987 u.s. - paraguay bilateral counternarcotics agreement was extended in 2006 .

u.s. counternarcotics efforts in paraguay have focused on providing training , equipment and technical assistance in order to strengthen the capacity of the country's national anti - drug secretariat ( senad ) , along with initiatives to help combat money laundering and corruption .

the united states assisted in the completion of a helicopter pad and support facilities in order to increase senad's capacity to disrupt trafficking networks .

according to the state department's march 2008 international narcotics control strategy report , senad made record seizures in marijuana and cocaine , disrupted transnational criminal networks in cooperation with international law enforcement agencies , and arrested several high - profile drug traffickers .

the united states is particularly concerned about illicit activities in the tba , where money laundering , drug trafficking , arms smuggling , and trade in counterfeit and contraband goods are prevalent .

such activities thrive in the tri - border region due to porous borders , a lack of surveillance , weak law enforcement and pervasive corruption by local officials , especially in the paraguayan border city of ciudad del este .

the united states has worked closely with the governments of the tba countries on counterterrorism issues through the "3+1" regional cooperation mechanism , which serves as a forum for discussions , and the united states has provided anti - terrorism and anti - money - laundering support to paraguay .

u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) sent a team of specialists to the tri - border region to investigate trade - based money laundering in 2006 , and has assisted the paraguayan government in developing a trade transparency unit that will examine discrepancies in trade data in order to determine cases of customs fraud , trade - based money laundering or the financing of terrorism .

u.s. treasury officials have held workshops in the region to encourage more banking sector involvement in efforts against money laundering while the u.s. embassy's legal adviser in asunción held training courses for local investigators and prosecutors in charge of combating possible terrorism links .

for a number of years , the united states has had concerns that the radical lebanon - based hezbollah and the sunni muslim palestinian group hamas have used the tba for raising funds among its sizable muslim communities by participating in illicit activities and soliciting donations .

nevertheless , according to the state department's annual terrorism report for 2007 ( issued april 30 , 2008 ) , there is no corroborated information that these or other islamic extremist groups have an operational presence in the tba .

the state department's 2007 terrorism report stated although paraguay was generally cooperative on counterterrorism efforts , its judicial system remained severely hampered by a lack of strong anti - money - laundering and counterterrorism legislation .

in december 2007 , paraguay's congress approved anti - money laundering legislation as part of an overall on the country's penal code , which will improve the government's ability to obstruct and prosecute money laundering and terrorist financing , especially in ciudad del este .

however , according to the terrorism report , counterterrorism legislation that has been introduced , but not yet approved , will be critical to keep paraguay current with its international obligations .

the terrorism report also maintained that paraguay did not exercise effective immigration or customs control on its borders , and efforts to address illicit activity in the tba were uneven because of a lack of resources , and corruption within customs , police , and the judiciary .

the government's secretariat for the prevention of money laundering reportedly improved its progress during the second half of 2007 .

