half the nation's electricity comes from coal , and most of that coal is delivered to power plants by railroads .

the reliable supply of coal by rail is therefore important to the electric power system .

concern over reliable deliveries of coal and other commodities , limited rail system capacity , and related issues such as rail rates , sparked several congressional hearings in 2006 .

this report provides background information and analysis on coal transportation by rail to power plants .

the report discusses: problems since 1990 with the rail delivery of coal .

implications of rail capacity limits on service reliability .

the role of coal inventories as a backstop to reliable coal deliveries .

proposed legislation intended , in part , to improve the quality of rail service to coal - fired plants and other shippers .

the report also identifies data and analysis gaps that complicate measuring the scope of rail service and capacity issues , determining the need for federal action , and evaluating the possible efficacy of proposed legislation .

this section of the report will review trends in rail rates .

although rates are not the primary subject of this report , the relationship between rail system capacity and rates is important for evaluating legislation intended to expand capacity and improve service .

the rail rate environment since 2004 has been described as a railroad "pricing renaissance" due in part to limited rail capacity ... rates are rising for the first time since the early 1980s .

rates were up on the order of 10% in 2005 , which is a major change from the prior 20 years... .

the reversal of a 20-year trend suggests a very significant change.... the driving factors supporting higher rail rates are the shortage of capacity in the rail system coupled with rising rates for trucking during a time when demand is growing , most notably for coal and for containerized imports .

since service quality has declined , the higher rates certainly do not reflect faster or more reliable trip times ! .

for the first time in a generation , the railroads are able to raise rates , so they do .

the recent increases in rail rates follows a long period in which average rates declined .

rail rate indices computed by gao show that measured in nominal dollars , average rates declined by about 20% between 1985 and 2004 ; converting the indices to real terms shows a 49% drop , followed by a 5.5% real dollar increase in 2005 .

rates for coal dropped more than the all - traffic average .

gao's average coal rate index declined by 40% between 1985 and 2004 ; in real terms the decline was 62% .

in 2005 real coal rates increased by 13.3% , more than twice as much as the industry - wide average .

 ( see figures 17 and 18 . ) .

coal and other rail rates declined until the middle of this decade due to: railroad productivity gains ; competition between railroads , particularly between up and bnsf for the growing prb coal market .

efforts by railroads to compete with other modes , such as barges and trucks , and to expand new markets with growth potential , such as transportation of prb coal ; at the outset of the post - staggers period , surplus capacity on the rail system ; the staggers act allowing the railroads to enter into customized , multi - year contracts with shippers , permitting more efficient planning and operations than public tariff rates .

transfer of some costs from railroads to shippers , as discussed above .

the swing from declining or relatively stable rates to increasing rates happened abruptly , around 2004 , due to the confluence of several factors .

as noted above , rail capacity began to tighten in the mid - 1990s .

after peaking in 1998 , railroad capital spending declined for several years and did not return to 1995 real dollar levels until 2005 .

coincident with the slow recovery in capital spending , intermodal traffic , which is especially capacity - intensive , was rapidly increasing .

intermodal shipments grew by 27% between 2000 and 2005 ( see table 1 in the section of the report on " railroad productivity and efficiency trends ," above ) .

intermodal traffic grew in part because trucking capacity was also limited .

new hours - of - service rules effective in january 2004 cut the number of hours drivers could work between breaks , effectively reducing trucking capacity .

trucking companies also found it very difficult to recruit and retain drivers .

rising fuel costs have increased truck rates , and growing highway congestion has degraded service .

these circumstances threw long - haul traffic from truck to intermodal rail and reduced the importance of the truck option as a check on rail rates .

this shift may represent the leading edge of a long - term trend favorable to the rail industry .

according to standard & poor's: due to a combination of driver shortages , rising fuel prices , and cost differentials , the trucking industry appears to be gradually moving away from long - haul , cross - country routes , and towards shorter hauls .

many t[ruck] l[oad] carriers are allocating an increasing number of their trucks to intermodal pickup and deliveries — allowing railroads to carry containers the longest distances , with the t[ruck] l[oad] carrier then performing the "last - mile" delivery to the customer .

consequently , some carriers are increasing their purchases and ownership of rail intermodal containers , chassis , and trailers .

rates have also increased in response to higher fuel costs , an issue that has been contentious between railroads and shippers .

a final consideration in rail rate increases is the consolidation of the rail industry into seven large carriers of which four are dominant .

one press review of the rail industry noted that growth in demand combined with industry consolidation "has done wonders for pricing. .

this nexus of factors has allowed railroads to broadly increase rail rates for coal shipments .

according to the electric power research institute , comparing 1999 and 2005 , rates for new coal transportation agreements increased by 20% to 40% for shippers with competitive alternatives and by 40% to 70% for captive shippers .

figure 19 shows an estimate of the long - term trend in rates for new prb rail transportation agreements for service to customers with competitive rail access .

rates in real terms generally declined after 1984 , when the up began to compete with bn for prb business .

but from 2004 to 2006 , estimated rates increase by 100% ( constant 2000 dollars ) .

whether this trend will continue is unknown .

the increase in rates extends beyond coal traffic .

as of late 2006 , new rail transportation rates generally were reportedly running 10% to 30% above pre - 2004 levels , with contract renewals for coal showing some of the largest rate increases .

in the view of the rail industry , higher rates are needed to secure the financial viability of the industry and to justify capacity expansion .

railroads have reportedly told power companies that "constrained capacity and the need to raise more money for capital investments" require higher rail rates .

as explained by the up railroad , "we cannot invest for the future unless we provide service that justifies what we call reinvestible rates — rates that are sufficient to allow us to replace the infrastructure that we use to provide the service... .

if government acts in a manner that allows us to obtain market - based , reinvestible rates , our ability to invest in capacity will grow , and the amount of traffic we can carry will expand .

it's that simple. .

coal shippers have characterized the rate increases as unreasonable .

they have also criticized the stb's rate appeals process as an ineffective deterrent to or remedy for unreasonable rate increases , a concern shared by gao .

the rate increases in themselves do not necessarily signify an unreasonable exercise of market power .

as discussed below , the railroads have arguably never achieved the financial adequacy goal established by the staggers act , in which case higher rates may be a financial necessity .

a 2006 gao study of rail rates concluded , in respect to captive shippers , that its findings "may reflect reasonable economic practices by the railroads in an environment of excess demand , or they may indicate a possible abuse of market power. .

as discussed later in this report , at gao's urging the stb plans to conduct a study of rail competition and rates .

as noted earlier , two types of legislative proposals have been put before the 110 th congress to address rail service and rate issues: tax incentive bills and regulatory restructuring legislation .

this section of the report describes and analyzes the tax incentive proposals from the perspective of improving the reliability of coal transportation to power plants .

the rail regulatory restructuring bills before the 110 th congress are intended to deal with a host of concerns , raised by coal and other shipper interests , over rail service and rates .

this discussion will focus on how the proposals could affect the reliability of coal transportation to power plants .

the restructuring bills fall into two categories: comprehensive restructuring and repeal of railroad antitrust exemptions .

the two categories of bills are summarized below , followed by an analysis of their potential impacts .

note that a legal analysis of the bills , and in particular on disagreements concerning the current application of the antitrust laws to the railroad industry , is beyond the scope of this report .

s. 953 , the railroad competition and service improvement act of 2007 ( rcsia ) , was introduced on march 21 , 2007 , and its house counterpart ( h.r .

2125 ) on may 3 , 2007 .

similar legislation was introduced in the 109 th congress without receiving further consideration , including the railroad competition acts of 2005 ( s. 919 ) and 2006 ( s. 2921 ) , and the railroad competition improvement and reauthorization of act of 2005 ( h.r .

2047 ) .

according to the preambles , the bills are intended to "ensure competition in the rail industry , enable rail customers to obtain reliable rail service , and provide those customers with a reasonable process for challenging rate and service disputes. .

rcsia would make major changes to federal rail regulation , as summarized below .

the existing policy ( 49 u.s.c .

§ 10101 ) would be amended to put additional emphasis on ensuring head - to - head competition between railroads , establishment of reasonable rates , and "consistent , efficient , and reliable rail transportation service" ( rcsia section 101 ) .

from a regulatory perspective , a rail bottleneck is a situation in which more than one railroad can originate the traffic required by a customer , such as prb coal , but only one railroad has physical access to the customer , such as a power plant .

the bottleneck carrier is then in a position to direct all shipments over its lines and to charge relatively high rates for service over what may be a very short distance .

the stb has the authority to use "reciprocal switching" and joint terminal access to open bottlenecks ( 49 u.s.c .

§ 11102 ) , but it has construed this authority relatively narrowly ; specifically , to situations where a shipper can demonstrate that a bottleneck carrier has engaged in anti - competitive behavior , or when the shipper has , in certain defined circumstances , entered into a contract with another railroad for the non - bottleneck part of the haul .

according to gao no shipper has successfully pursued the anti - competitive option before the board .

one shipper was successful using the contract option .

rcsia sections 102 ( requiring rail carriers to quote rates and provide service between any two points on their systems ) and 104 ( directing the stb to order reciprocal switching between railroads if in the public interest or if necessary to provide competitive service ) would give shippers wide latitude to open bottlenecks and create competitive rail access .

by doing so , rcsia would appear to reverse a long - standing policy of permitting railroads , under most circumstances , to keep a shipment on its own tracks rather than forcing it to interchange .

long - hauls and single - line hauls are the most economical modes of rail operations , in contrast to short - hauling .

section 105 of rcsia , "areas of inadequate rail competition," addresses rail competition across a much wider scope .

as described in a summary of the bill , this section of rcsia: allows a governor to petition the stb to have all or part of his or her state designated as an "area of inadequate rail competition. .

to qualify , the area must be served by essentially one carrier , most of the rates must exceed 180 percent of the direct cost to the railroad of the transportation and the state or area of the state must have suffered significant economic adversity because of this lack of competition .

within 60 days after the stb so designates a state or area of the state , the stb shall fashion a remedy for this lack of rail competition .

the remedies specified in section 105 include reciprocal switching , expedited arbitration of rate disputes , expedited review of whether rates are discriminatory , requiring a rail carrier to provide rail service on its system on behalf of another railroad , and "other remedies authorized by law. .

when a railroad sells or leases track to a short line railroad , the transfer agreement may restrict the short line from interchanging certain traffic with other carriers .

the object is to allow the class i railroad to remain ( in conjunction with the short line ) the only railroad serving a market .

these restrictions are referred to as "paper barriers" or "interchange commitments. .

rcsia would ban paper barriers in the future and , upon review by the stb , make current interchange commitments unlawful ( section 103 ) .

this is another means of introducing more competition into the rail system .

effectuating this ban on interchange commitments would likely be complex and contentious .

the existing sale and lease agreements that contain paper barriers presumably have sale prices , lease rates , and perhaps other terms predicated in part on the traffic and revenues the class i railroad expects to receive consequent to the interchange restrictions .

eliminating the papers barriers could therefore change the economic basis of the agreements , with impacts on rates , operations , and possibly even the viability of the transactions that are difficult to predict .

rcsia has several provisions that directly address rail service quality .

the bill would require the stb to post information about rail service complaints and their resolution on its website and submit an associated annual report to congress ( section 201 ) ; require rail transportation subject to the jurisdiction of the stb to be "reliable and efficient" ( section 202 ) ; qualify the precedence that contract service has over common carrier service under current law ( section 102 ) ; state that a rail carrier may be liable for payment of damages "due to failure of timely delivery" ( section 203 ) ; and create an office of rail customer advocacy within dot , to be appointed in consultation with the secretary of agriculture .

the advocate would "accept rail customer" complaints , participate in stb proceedings , have the ability to initiate stb proceedings , and would have the power to collect information and have access to the data collected by the stb ( section 204 ) .

 ( under section 304 of rcsia shippers agricultural products can demand binding arbitration to resolve service and rate issues .

this option is not available to shippers of coal or other goods. ) .

the current stb rate appeal process has been widely criticized by coal and other shipper interests .

gao concluded in 2005 that the stb's rate appeal process is "ineffective. .

the rate appeal process is of particular interest to power companies because almost all rate cases since the passage of staggers have involved coal shipments to power plants .

this is because coal shipments are one of the few categories of regulated traffic that have enough volume and revenue at stake , and the prerequisite lack of competitive service , to justify the cost ( several million dollars ) and time ( typically more than three years ) necessary to pursue a rate appeal .

section 302 of rcsia directs the stb to develop a new rate appeal process based on a railroad's cost of service , akin to the process used in electric utility rate cases .

the process is to take no longer than nine months , "shall not require excessive litigation costs," and puts the burden of proof on the railroad to demonstrate that the rate is reasonable ( currently the burden of proof is on the complainant to show that a rate is unreasonable ) .

it also explicitly bans any rate appeal process that relies , like the current procedure , on the cost of a hypothetical competitor .

 ( as noted above , section 304 of rcsia gives agricultural shippers an option , unavailable to other shippers , of opting - out of the rate appeal process altogether and relying on binding arbitration to resolve rate disputes. ) .

the rate appeal process , and the proposal to change it , is a point where major threads of rail policy intersect .

the existing process is deliberately designed to allow railroads to charge rates to captive customers that will include a large share of the system - wide "non - attributable" costs that cannot be specifically tied to any individual rail movement .

this allows the railroads to charge lower rates ( but never lower than direct cost ) to customers who have competitive alternatives and are price sensitive .

a cost - based rate appeal process — that is , rates based primarily on the costs that can be directly tied to a specific movement — could sharply reduce the amount of non - attributable costs chargeable to captive customers .

if the railroad industry is still not revenue adequate , or if the high rates charged to captive customers are a cornerstone of the rail industry's financial stability , then cost - based rate appeals could detrimental to the financial stability of the rail industry .

however , under other circumstances — such as , the industry is revenue adequate , there are relatively few captive customers , and / or the higher rates captive shippers are charged are not central to the financial integrity of the rail industry — a cost based rate appeal process may be feasible .

as discussed elsewhere in this report , the information available on rail competition , rail rates , and the revenue adequacy of the railroad industry is deficient .

this makes it difficult to judge whether a cost - based rate appeal process would pose financial risks to the rail industry .

the board currently has authority to initiate investigations "only on complaint" ( 49 u.s.c .

§ 11701 ) .

section 401 would allow the stb to begin investigations on its own initiative .

it also allows the board to suspend railroad practices that it believes may be in violation of the law .

section 201 of the bill requires the stb to respond within 90 days to complaints requesting injunctive relief against railroad practices alleged to be unlawful ( excluding allegations of unreasonable rail rates ) .

s. 772 , the railroad antitrust enforcement act of 2007 , was introduced on march 6 , 2007 , and its house counterpart ( h.r .

1650 ) on march 22 , 2007 .

similar legislation was introduced in the second session of the 109 th congress but did not receive further consideration ( s. 3612 , the railroad antitrust enforcement act of 2006 ) .

according to the preambles , the bills are intended to "amend the federal antitrust laws to provide expanded coverage and to eliminate exemptions from such laws that are contrary to the public interest with respect to railroads. .

the railroad industry historically has had limited exemptions from the antitrust laws .

the exemptions were predicated on the assumption that normal market forces could not operate in the rail industry , and accordingly allowed the rail industry to operate in ways , such as the coordination of rates , that would have been unacceptable in a free market .

the exemptions also reflected the notion that the comprehensive regulation of rates , service , market entry and exit , and mergers by the icc effectively replaced the usual antitrust oversight of the department of justice and federal trade commission .

in its most recent revision to rail regulation , the icc termination act of 1995 , the congress chose to continue these exemptions .

the key exemptions include: the stb has sole jurisdiction over railroad mergers .

railroads are the only regulated industry whose mergers cannot be challenged by department of justice ( doj ) .

railroads generally cannot be sued for injunctive relief for antitrust violations by private parties .

"railroads are generally exempt from sherman act antitrust actions for treble damages if common carrier rates 'approved by the [government]' are involved. .

joint rates established by two or more railroads which have been approved by the stb are exempt from antitrust review .

while these exemptions do not block all possible avenues for antitrust inquiry , they are significant .

in 2004 , doj noted that bottleneck rates and interchange commitments might be areas of interest for antitrust review , but because these transactions were approved by the stb they may not be subject to the antitrust laws .

on the other hand , doj at the same time expressed interest in reviewing for possible antitrust violations the practice of the western rail carriers of publicly disclosing certain rates .

the status of this review , if underway , is not known .

the proposed legislation would eliminate these exemptions .

advocates apparently anticipate that shippers will use these new openings to attack bottleneck rates and paper barriers , and perhaps seek to add what they view as pro - competitive conditions to existing rail merger terms .

proponents also believe that if new mergers are proposed between the class i railroads , perhaps to create trans - continental carriers , doj would take a broader view of market power and competitive effects than the stb has done .

the proposal to eliminate the stb's jurisdiction over mergers is consistent with the recommendations of the federal antitrust modernization commission .

the railroads oppose the antitrust proposals , noting that: the implication of proponents that the "railroads can engage is conduct over which there is no government oversight ... is false. .

the railroads are subject to other aspects of the antitrust laws and extensive regulation by the stb .

the limited exemptions that apply to the railroads are "narrowly applied," are intended to avoid dual jurisdiction between the stb and other parts of the government , and in some cases reflect special circumstances .

for example , according to the aar the exemption from private demands for injunctive relief is intended to prevent interruptions in rail system operations .

the proposed changes to the law are unnecessary .

for example , "the stb has the authority to enforce certain provisions of the antitrust laws in lieu of the federal trade commission .

moreover , the federal government is not precluded from seeking injunctive relief , and the federal antitrust provisions permitting private parties to sue for damages contains no exclusion for railroads. .

in the view of the aar , proponents of this legislation basically do not like certain decisions made by the stb and are seeking to move decisions to a different forum .

the aar argues that "limited antitrust exemptions for the railroads exist because railroads are subject to economic regulation ... .

if one is to assess whether the antitrust exemption should be eliminated , one should also assess whether the remaining regulatory regime should be treated likewise. .

the regulatory restructuring bills before the 110 th congress are the latest in a series of legislative proposals dating from 1983 to substantially change federal rail regulation .

the antitrust and rail competition bills described above are intended by proponents to improve coal and other service .

drive down rail rates , by giving shipper interests new avenues to force head - to - head competition between railroads .

simplify the rate appeal process and tie prescribed rates to costs .

encourage improved service by creating new legal obligations for railroads to provide good service , and by highlighting service issues through the web posting process , annual report to congress on service , and creation of the rail customer advocate .

the railroad industry characterizes these proposals as "re - regulation. .

it argues that the proposals would inhibit the pricing and operational freedom that has been important to the revival of the rail industry , and would cause the industry's finances and service quality to regress .

according to the aar: reregulation would deprive u.s. freight railroads of several billion dollars in revenue each year , making it impossible for them to fund the rail capacity improvements our country needs .

the result would be a shrunken rail network , higher shipping costs , more gridlock and environmental degradation as freight that otherwise would move by rail moved on the highways instead , and eventually a government bailout .

it would be foolhardy to destroy the best freight rail system the world has ever seen in order to move toward a discredited system that failed in the past and would fail again in the future .

critics of rail industry service have suggested that in a more competitive environment the railroads will be more innovative and attuned to customer demands .

the rail industry contends that it has been on the leading edge of technological innovation ; critics claim it has been slow to implement new processes and technologies that could improve service and reduce costs .

in 2004 the national industrial transportation league commented , in relation to its assertion at the time that more competition was needed in the rail market: competition drives efficiencies and innovation .

it leads to a fundamental shift in thinking , away from a static and ultimately counterproductive effort to protect a "franchise," toward a positive effort to grow business opportunities and eliminate costs .

competition promotes cooperation between transportation providers and their customers as both become partners in an effort to eliminate inefficiencies and improve their market opportunities .

the result of these efforts is increased demand for the service — that is , growth .

the current restructuring proposals aim at improving service by heightening competition .

the emphasis on competition is consistent with an underlying principal of the current regulatory regime , which is "to allow , to the maximum extent possible , competition and the demand for services to establish reasonable rates for transportation by rail ; " though , as discussed below , it is not certain that more reliance on market forces would be the actual outcome from the proposals .

the bills would not require the government to develop and enforce specific rail service standards , as has been proposed in the past .

the bills also do not directly address the limited information on rail service and capacity discussed earlier in this report .

without more information , aspects of the proposed legislation are difficult to evaluate .

for example , the emphasis on rate relief and greater competition in the bills presumes that high rail rates , especially for captive shippers , is a significant national issue .

this may or may not be the case .

no thorough analysis exists on the degree to which rail traffic is captive or of the rates paid by these shippers .

according to a 2006 study by gao , there is: ... a reasonable possibility that shippers in selected markets may be paying excessive rates related to a lack of competition in these markets .

while our analysis of available measures shows that the extent of captivity appears to be dropping in the freight railroad industry , shippers that may be captive are paying substantially over the statutory threshold for initiating a rate relief case .

this situation may simply reflect reasonable economic practices ... or it may represent an abuse of market power .

our analysis provides an important first step in assessing competitive markets nationally , but it is imperfect given the inherent limitations of the carload waybill sample [an stb data set] and the proxy measures available for weighing captivity .

a more rigorous analysis of competitive markets nationally is needed — one that identifies the state of competition nationwide and inquires into pricing practices in specific markets .

the gao recommended that the stb conduct a comprehensive study of rail competition and rates , a suggestion the stb initially rejected based on gao's inconclusive findings and its own lack of resources .

in june 2007 the stb reversed itself and said it would hire a contractor to conduct such a study to be completed by late 2008 .

gao commended the stb "for taking this action , [but] it remains to be seen whether these analysts would have stb's statutory authority and sufficient access to information to determine whether rail rates in selected markets reflect justified and reasonable pricing practices or an abuse of market power by the railroads. .

the effect of the bills , particularly rcsia , is also difficult to evaluate because the outcomes will largely depend on how the legislation is implemented .

implementation may produce results that differ from the apparent objectives of its supporters .

for example: under reciprocal switching or other avenues for opening rail bottlenecks , the new competing railroad would be required to pay the incumbent railroad a fee for the use of the incumbent's tracks .

for example , a new competing railroad delivering coal to a previously captive power plant might pay a trackage rights fee to the incumbent for each ton of coal it delivers .

a study performed for the fra suggests that the fee should be designed to , in effect , include all of the profit the incumbent carrier had earned before the bottleneck was opened .

the report suggests that this and other aspects of its recommended approach would yield the most efficient outcome and keep incumbent railroad financially whole , but such a large fee could , in many cases , eviscerate the competitive value of reciprocal switching .

rcsia requires the stb to replace its current rate appeal process with a cost of service approach "similar to the rate regulatory systems of [state] public service commissions and the federal energy regulatory commission. .

however , traditional utility rate cases can be complex , time consuming to prepare and litigate , and very expensive .

while rcsia puts a nine month time limit on rate cases , it may nonetheless have less impact on the accessibility and affordability of the process than its proponents intend .

as noted above , section 105 of rcsia authorizes the stb to designate areas of inadequate rail competition and implement within those zones numerous remedies , not all of which are specified in the legislation ( "other remedies authorized by law" ) .

this provision is so broad that its potential geographic and regulatory scope , and its impact on rail rates , revenues , service , and profits , are very difficult to judge .

section 105 is probably the part of rcsia with the greatest potential for reintroducing pervasive regulation into the rail industry .

in general it is unclear how complex and intrusive a regulatory framework the stb would have to create to implement rcsia .

a related issue is the practical ability of the stb to timely handle the additional workload rcsia would assign to the agency .

the board is a small agency , with 137 full time equivalent staff and a budget of $26.1 million in fy2006 .

it may be difficult for the board to effectively execute the proposed additional duties without more resources .

an important question concerning the rail restructuring proposals is the impact they would have on a central goal of the staggers act , returning the rail industry to financial health .

by reducing the number of captive shippers and otherwise driving down rail rates , the restructuring proposals would likely cut railroad revenues and profits for some period of time .

the railroad industry's position is that the financial impact would be crippling , particularly since the railroads have still not achieved the objective of revenue adequacy established by staggers .

if this is the case service would likely deteriorate for coal and other shippers .

the issue of the financial impact of the restructuring proposals is particularly apt because the proposals could have the effect of changing the existing approach to railroad rate setting .

this approach , called "constrained market pricing," was developed by the icc in 1985 with coal traffic at the forefront .

constrained market pricing is predicated on two principles: the railroad industry is not revenue adequate , and to achieve revenue adequacy the railroad industry must be able to differentially price its services based on the price sensitivity of various groups of customers .

for instance , when trying to win business that has a truck alternative , the railroad might price the movement to recover little more than the costs directly attributable to that movement , and few or none of the system - wide "non - attributable" costs ( such as yard expenses ) incurred by the railroad .

on the other hand , it may set rates to move coal to a captive power plant at a price that recovers all the attributable costs of the movement plus a substantial share of the non - attributable system - wide expenses .

demand - sensitive differential or "strategic" pricing is widely used in american industry .

in the case of the rail industry , where potential competition is limited by high barriers to entry , rates to the captive customers are , in principle , ultimately "constrained" by the shippers' option to appeal to the stb .

rates can be appealed if the shipper can demonstrate that it is captive and that rates exceed 180% of the direct costs of the movement .

if a protested rate meets these initial criteria , the stb then determines whether the rate exceeds the costs of a hypothetical most - efficient competitor ( a "stand - alone" railroad ) .

the costs of the stand - alone railroad represent , according to the underlying theory , the highest reasonable rate ceiling ; if the rate is ultimately determined by the stb to exceed stand - alone costs , a new rate is prescribed based on this ceiling .

in short , constrained market pricing is designed to help the rail industry achieve financial recovery by allowing it to charge relatively high rates to captive customers and relatively low rates to customers who have competitive options .

the rail restructuring proposals , by providing avenues for reducing the number of captive shippers and the rates they pay , would chip away at a pillar of the constrained market pricing system .

however , this may be more or less of a concern depending on whether or not the rail industry has reached the staggers goal of revenue adequacy .

in summary , it can be hypothesized that if the railroad industry is revenue adequate , it may be better able to withstand the stronger dose of competition and regulation the proponents of regulatory restructuring propose , and may be better positioned to respond to more intense competition with lower costs , greater efficiency , and better service .

if the industry is not revenue adequate , then the regulatory status quo may be the better course of action .

in particular , should the regulatory restructuring proposals , if implemented , undermine the industry's finances , then the results of regulatory change could be deterioration in rail service for coal and other traffic .

there is arguably a contradiction between demands for both lower rates and better service .

this point is made by norfolk southern: [the norfolk southern ceo testified at an stb hearing] that he hears three things from rail customers .

"they want more capacity ; they want better service ; and they want lower rates .

and i don't know how you do all three".... [h]is summary of the three themes he hears from rail customers was reinforced by subsequent witnesses with no one even trying to reconcile the irreconcilable... .

unfortunately , many parties fail to see that infrastructure investment , better service , and rates are three legs to one stool .

no one wants to pay ; everyone wants someone else to pay .

the counter - argument , noted above , is that more competition will force innovation , efficiency gains , and traffic growth that will leave the railroads whole or better off .

because of these considerations it would be useful to know if the rail industry is achieving the staggers act objective of revenue adequacy .

as required by statute , the stb makes an annual determination of revenue adequacy for each class i railroad .

however , for the reasons discussed below , the reliability of these determinations is problematic .

the icc's methodology for determining revenue adequacy was defined in a 1981 decision .

the test selected by the icc is whether a railroad's return on investment was at least equal to its cost of investment capital .

as explained by the icc: ... "adequate" revenues are those which provide a rate of return on net investment equal to the current cost of capital ( i.e. , the level of return available on alternative investments ) .

this is the revenue level necessary for a railroad to compete equally with other firms for available financing in order to maintain , replace , modernize , and , where appropriate , expand its facilities and services .

if railroads cannot earn the fair market rate of return , their ability both to retain existing investments and obtain new capital will be impaired , because both the existing and prospective funds could be invested elsewhere at a more attractive rate of return .

the icc "emphasize[d] that revenue adequacy is a long - term concept that calls for a company , over time , to average a return on investment equal to its cost of capital. .

therefore , while a railroad might be revenue adequate in one year , it would not be deemed to have met the staggers act objectives for financial performance until it had achieved this threshold for a period of time .

however , the icc declined to specify "what period of time may be sufficiently representative in every case .

this will vary depending upon the carrier's traffic base and the relative stability of the economy at the time. .

the icc also noted that "we want to make clear that we will not and cannot guarantee any railroad a return equal to the cost of capital .

a railroad , like any other firm , should earn such a return only if it provides a desired service in an efficient manner .

we want to take great care , however , not to deny railroads the opportunity to earn the cost of capital. .

the icc applied this approach retroactively to 1979 and subsequently .

using this standard , the financial performance of the railroad industry has been poor .

as shown in figure 20 , over 27 years the class i railroad industry as a whole has never once been revenue adequate .

the difference between the industry's return on investment and cost of capital narrowed from 1979 to 1990 , but the gap has not subsequently been closed or consistently narrowed ( figure 20 ) .

during this period the icc and stb made 445 individual determinations of revenue adequacy for railroad companies .

it found railroads to be revenue adequate in just 32 instances , of which just over half were for two companies , the illinois central ( now part of canadian national ) and norfolk southern .

including subsidiaries and merger partners , the union pacific had one finding of revenue adequacy in 27 years by the stb's reckoning , csx three findings , and bnsf four findings .

under the economic theory underpinning the board's revenue adequacy test , the consistent inability of the railroad industry as whole , or even individual carriers , to achieve revenue adequacy for over a quarter century should result in significant capital shortages and even disinvestment in the rail industry .

according to testimony relied upon by the icc in developing its revenue adequacy test: in the final analysis , the only valid test of adequacy of a railroad's revenues is that they yield a rate of return equal to the opportunity cost of capital .

failing that , regulation will result in service deterioration as a result of disinvestment .

... any firm that earns less than this amount [its cost of capital] will be unable to compete in the market for funds .

its owners will neither wish nor be able to keep the enterprise's capital intact .

they will withdraw their capital as quickly and as expeditiously as they can .

the icc concluded that "railroad management has little incentive to reinvest funds generated by ratepayers in continued rail uses if greater returns are available elsewhere .

railroads are private companies whose stockholders would not permit such reinvestment .

thus , even retained earnings will not be invested in the company if they cannot earn a rate of return equal to the cost of capital. .

nonetheless , the railroads continued to invest billions of dollars in their systems over the years , even as they consistently fell short of the regulatory standard for revenue adequacy .

this discrepancy between the failure to achieve revenue adequacy and the continued availability of investment capital has been explained as a consequence of optimistic investors putting money into the rail industry in anticipation of financial results that were not realized .

other observers have suggested that the icc's methodology for measuring railroad revenue adequacy does not comport with the true state of the industry .

the icc itself made adjustments to the details of its methodology in 1986 after observing that its approach "does not appear to produce a realistic picture of the state of the rail industry. .

according to standard and poor's , writing , respectively , in 1995 and 1999: ... until it earns at least its cost of capital , the rail industry is considered unhealthy — at least in the technical sense .

we think the industry is actually fit as a fiddle , so how can this be ? .

we believe that the [icc's] definition of cost of capital is at fault .

... the industry technically remains "revenue inadequate"... .

the fact that the industry may not achieve revenue adequacy is not particularly meaningful , however , given the many flaws in the design of this financial test .

the revenue adequacy conclusions drawn by the stb are contradicted at times by statements made by railroads to financial analysts .

the stb determined that ns was revenue adequate in 2004 , but the railroad told investment analysts that it had not achieved its cost of capital .

up , which according to the stb analysis has been revenue adequate only once since 1979 , told wall street that it "did achieve our cost of capital in many years and even exceeded. .

these contradictions can perhaps be explained by differences which may exist between the financial measurement methods specified by the stb for regulatory filings versus those used by individual companies for their own purposes .

nonetheless , a situation in which the board's metric of revenue adequacy — which in essence is a measure of how willing investors should be to put money into the railroad industry — differs from the rail industry's own reports to the investment analysts who advise those same investors , creates some uncertainty about the utility of the stb determinations .

critics who claim that the stb's methodology understates the rail industry's actual financial performance have raised numerous technical objections to the board's approach .

one criticism that appears to have particular significance relates to the methodology used by the board to determine the rail industry's cost of equity capital , a component of the overall cost of capital .

the stb uses a "single - stage discounted cash flow" ( dcf ) model to estimate the cost of equity .

a key input into this method is an earnings growth rate that is assumed to continue , unchanged , indefinitely .

the assumption of an unchanging growth rate is workable for steady - state industries with growth rates that roughly mirror the growth of the overall economy .

however , if an industry has been growing rapidly — as has recently been the case for the railroads — and this current high growth rate is used in the dcf formula — as the stb has done — the dcf model will produce an overstated cost of equity .

this methodological pitfall is documented in the financial literature ; for example , one standard text notes that "the simple constant - growth dcf formula is an extremely useful rule of thumb , but no more than that .

naive trust in the formula has led many financial analysts to silly conclusions ... resist the temptation to apply the formula to firms having high current rates of growth .

such growth can rarely be sustained indefinitely , but the constant - growth dcf formula assumes it can. .

this problem was pointed out to the stb at least as early as 1997 .

in august 2007 the stb proposed changing the approach used to estimate the cost of equity from the dcf model to an alternative "capital asset pricing model" ( capm ) methodology .

the board's sample capm calculations show that application of the new method could cut its estimate of the railroad industry's overall cost of capital in 2005 by more than a third , from 12.2% to 7.5% .

using these new estimates , the railroad industry as a whole was revenue adequate in 2005 .

the significant change in revenue adequacy that results from what is , in essence , a technical adjustment , points at a broader possible problem with the stb's revenue adequacy methodology .

this is the stb's effort to peg the financial state of the railroad industry to a single , relatively simple to calculate measure that can be determined with a minimum of judgment .

this objective may be difficult to achieve .

financial analysis is often not as cut - and - dried as running numbers through a model and receiving clear results .

for example , the board noted that the literature on estimating just the equity component of the cost of capital is "vast ... covering the fields of finance , economics , and regulation. .

another source notes that "there is no generally accepted definition of the cost of equity capital , but only a number of competing theories that are more or less capable of being applied numerically. .

in a situation with this degree of methodological uncertainty , it is not clear that an essentially mechanical determination of revenue adequacy based on one financial ratio will necessarily yield reliable results .

note that in traditional utility rate hearings the appropriate rate of return is typically set through a contested hearing process , not through the mechanical application of a formula and procedure .

according to one source , for a public utility commission: it is appropriate to use the results of mathematical financial models to provide a 'zone of reasonableness' for the [return on equity or roe]... .

however , the determination of the roe is not an exact science .

judgment is inherent and certainly used by financial analysts when applying financial models .

certainly , a commission needs to exercise similar judgment to evaluate the overall results of those models and select an appropriate roe... .

in contrast to the current use of a single financial ratio to determine revenue adequacy , prior to passage of the staggers act the icc relied on a qualitative evaluation of multiple financial indicators .

when it adopted its current methodology in 1981 , the commission rejected a "multi - faceted standard" because it would require "a considerable amount of subjectivity in terms of selecting the mix of indicators to use and the performance standards applicable to each indicator.... based on the record , we must reject a multi - indicator standard ... because no practical way has been shown to implement it objectively. .

the stb later noted that an advantage of the icc's method for computing the key cost of equity component is that "the simple dcf method required few inputs and few judgment calls...." however , it may be difficult to avoid introducing considerable judgment into the revenue adequacy determination .

for example , the capm approach the stb has proposed using in its future revenue adequacy determinations requires its own set of assumptions ; the stb notes that "there are disputes over how to apply the model and whether newer methods are superior. .

according to a survey of finance practitioners , there are "substantial disagreements" on how to estimate all three of the key inputs to the capm model .

as one text observes , "finance is in large part a matter of judgment , and we simply must face this fact. .

financial analysis of a firm or industry for revenue adequacy purposes may require the use of multiple measures , and the application of judgment in weighing the indicators and arriving at a final assessment .

there is no consensus on whether or not the railroad industry has achieved revenue adequacy .

there is a large body of opinion that the railroad industry has not achieved returns equal to its cost of capital or perhaps has done so only recently , or question how long current favorable financial trends will continue .

for example , the financial times reported in 2007 that industry consolidation "along with solid demand ... has done wonders for pricing , allowing the sector to earn its cost of capital and more for a change .

it is far from clear , however , how long that trend can continue. .

a study for the electric power research institute concluded in 2005 that the rail industry returns were approaching but had not yet reached the industry cost of capital .

a transportation investment analyst testified to congress in 2001 that "the bottom line is the railroads don't earn their cost of capital ... they destroy capital every year. .

in summary , opinion on the regulatory restructuring proposals may hinge in part on views of the railroad industry's financial condition .

for the reasons discussed above , the stb's revenue adequacy determinations may be of uncertain value in developing such a view .

the following issues may be of interest in evaluating the regulatory restructuring proposals: are the coal and other rail service ( and related rate and competitive access ) issues the restructuring bills address of sufficient import to justify extensively revising the current regulatory framework ? .

existing data on service , capacity , rates , and the degree to which captive coal and other shippers are subject to market power are incomplete at best .

should the executive agencies be directed to gather and analyze additional data in these areas on an ongoing basis ? .

as of mid - 2007 the stb plans to conduct a study of rail competition and rates , but this will apparently be a one - time analysis .

what is the actual financial state of the railroad industry ? .

congress's view of the restructuring proposals may depend in part on an evaluation of the financial condition of the railroads ; in particular , whether they have achieved the regulatory goal of revenue adequacy .

a financially robust industry may be able to respond to enhanced competition with the innovation and service improvements suggested by proponents .

a weaker industry may contract in response to more intense competition , and service could deteriorate .

there are other perspectives: if the railroads have achieved revenue adequacy then it might be unwise to make major changes ; if it has not , then more competition may be needed to jump - start the industry .

a predicate for reaching any of these conclusions is a rigorous analysis of the financial state of the railroads , and this does not currently appear to be available .

would the restructuring proposals actually achieve substantial service improvements ? .

rcsia leaves implementation details undefined , making the outcomes from the law uncertain .

these implementation issues include , for example , the fees for bottleneck service , how a cost of service rate appeal process could be economically managed , and operation of the remedies proposed for areas of inadequate competition .

service focus : as an alternative to extensive revision of the current regulatory regime , could more limited changes result in material improvements in coal rail service ? .

if otherwise desirable , a more limited agenda might include elements of current proposals , including giving rail service problems and their resolution greater public visibility ; creation of a rail public advocate ; and new requirements in the law for reliable rail service .

appendix a .

significant disruptions in deliveries of coal to power generators since 1990 appendix b .

costs and other consequences of the 2005-2006 disruption in rail transportation of coa .

