most large dams and water diversion structures in the west were built by , or with the assistance of , the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) within the department of interior .

reclamation's mission is to manage , develop , and protect water and related resources in an environmentally and economically sound manner in the interest of the american public .

in most cases , this means developing water supplies primarily for irrigation to reclaim arid lands in the west .

reclamation has constructed a significant number of assets since it was founded in 1902 .

it has over three - fourths of the department of the interior's ( doi's ) constructed assets , making the agency a manager of significant infrastructure and supporting assets .

reclamation manages water resource facilities in 17 western states with an original development cost of approximately $21.2 billion .

citing engineering indices , the agency has estimated that the replacement value of all reclamation infrastructure would be over $78 billion .

reclamation's inventory of assets includes 480 dams and dikes that create 348 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre - feet of water .

through its assets , reclamation serves more than 31 million people , and provides irrigation water for 10 million acres of farmland that produce 60% of the nation's vegetables and 25% of its fruits and nuts .

reclamation is also the nation's seventh - largest producer of hydroelectric power , with 58 hydroelectric power plants that provide an average of more than 44 billion kilowatt - hours of energy each year .

reclamation is over 100 years old , and most of its facilities are more than 50 years old .

 ( the average age of reclamation's dams is provided in figure 1 ) .

as with other structures , as these facilities reach their design lifetime , maintenance requirements tend to increase , and in some cases , the likelihood of failure also increases .

few large new projects are currently being built by reclamation , and the bureau has in recent years increased its emphasis on responsibilities to operate , maintain , and repair its existing facilities .

assuming limited budgetary resources as this infrastructure continues to age , maintenance needs are likely to increase , as is competition for limited funding .

an additional problem faced by reclamation is the ability of project beneficiaries and / or sponsors to finance some major repairs and upgrades .

while issues at facilities with the capacity for immediate repayment ( such as power facilities ) may receive prompt attention , issues that arise at other facilities , such as water supply and delivery facilities where there is limited ability to pay for large repair costs , may not always be acted upon .

reclamation's unique ownership and contractual responsibilities impact its approach to infrastructure management .

approximately one - third of reclamation's facilities are owned , operated , and maintained by reclamation ( "reserved works" ) , with project beneficiaries responsible for repaying the federal government for construction and maintenance costs .

these projects are typically multipurpose facilities .

in contrast , the remaining two - thirds of reclamation's facilities are also owned by reclamation ( i.e. , reclamation has title to the facilities ) , but their operation and maintenance has been transferred to a nonfederal entity ( "transferred works" ) .

transferred works are often "single purpose" projects that must pay maintenance costs in the same year in which they are incurred .

both classes of projects are known to sometimes have difficulty in financing major maintenance costs .

previous legislation has attempted to address issues associated with reclamation's aging infrastructure .

the rural water supply act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-451 ) established a loan guarantee program for reclamation's reserved and transferred works .

the omnibus public lands management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , subtitle g ) authorized actions to address reclamation's aging infrastructure issues , including authorization of a program to conduct inspections at reclamation - owned facilities in urban areas .

the same bill provided reclamation with authority to advance funds for emergency extraordinary operation and maintenance work on both reserved and transferred infrastructure .

this report discusses reclamation's approach to managing aging infrastructure .

it notes potential issues with this approach , as well as recent funding trends in this area .

it also discusses alternative approaches that have recently been proposed or enacted to deal with the issue of reclamation's aging infrastructure , and the status of these efforts .

it concludes with a discussion of how reclamation's approach compares to other water resource agencies , and analysis of issues for congress .

concerns with reclamation's aging infrastructure have led to congressional efforts to address needs both at individual projects and at reclamation's facilities in general .

in some instances , the rehabilitation and maintenance of specific reclamation projects has been addressed directly by legislation that alters the required cost shares and repayment periods for these facilities .

additionally , a number of other efforts that would provide additional options to address aging infrastructure have been recently proposed or enacted by congress .

this section provides a summary of these efforts .

two other federal agencies associated with significant inventories of dams and other water resources infrastructure are the u.s. army corps of engineers and the u.s. department of agriculture's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) .

they have different roles and responsibilities regarding o&m and rehabilitation .

the corps is an active federal dam operator , while nrcs was a partner in the construction of many agricultural dams that are the responsibility of local entities , and is now a partner in their rehabilitation .

the o&m prioritization programs for the corps and nrcs are summarized below .

there is a process within reclamation for identifying and prioritizing rehabilitation funding needs of the water resources infrastructure that the agency has constructed since it was created in 1902 .

however , as a result of increasing needs , constrained budgets , and the unique nature of the ownership arrangements for reclamation projects , many view the current process as inadequate .

outside of the dam safety program , aging infrastructure that is owned and maintained by reclamation ( i.e. , reserved works ) is generally selected for expenditure either by internal criteria determined on the regional level , or else through directed spending by congress that provides support to individual projects .

for infrastructure that is owned by the federal government but maintained by nonfederal interests ( i.e. , transferred works ) , there is no formal process to identify and assist in paying for major upgrades .

other agencies , including the corps ( with regard to levees ) and the nrcs ( with regard to small dams ) face similar problems with the upkeep of infrastructure that was built by the federal government but is now maintained by nonfederal interests .

as reclamation's maintenance needs increase , the prioritization process for aging infrastructure may receive increasing attention .

an overarching question for congress is whether the efforts of reclamation and other agencies to identify and prioritize aging infrastructure are adequate .

as previously noted , current practices within the corps , reclamation , and nrcs have generally provided limited funding for aging water resource projects that are owned and operated by the federal government , and have provided limited or no funding for upgrades to projects that are operated by nonfederal partners .

due to potential needs for costly repairs and upgrades on reclamation facilities , the question of who should pay and how much , at both transferred and reserved works , will likely be raised repeatedly in the coming years .

the question may be of particular concern for rehabilitation projects at transferred facilities , which the administration has generally refused to support in the past , and which have on occasion experienced major failures and subsequently received attention from congress .

some claim that it is in the nation's best interests for the federal government to provide increased support for all facilities that are federally owned ( regardless of the operator ) because there are major societal costs to allowing these facilities to deteriorate .

additionally , these interests argue that the difficulty that private entities have financing these upgrades necessitates aid by the federal government .

on the other side of this issue , some ( including the current administration ) note that allowing nonfederal entities to renege on their contractual responsibilities sets a troubling precedent , and that a major influx of federal funding is not practical in light of constrained budgets .

additionally , due to the inherently decentralized and at times sporadic documentation of needs to date , the actual extent of current needs is not well defined .

although numerous entities supported recently passed provisions that extended the repayment period for extraordinary maintenance expenses at both reserved and transferred works , to date few beneficiaries have taken advantage of these terms .

this may call into question the urgency of some calls for aid from the federal government .

congress has recently enacted programs and funding for individual projects that fall outside of reclamation's regular budget process for extraordinary maintenance needs at reserved facilities .

for instance , it capped the total amount of o&m responsibility to be borne by water users at one reserved facility ( arrowrock dam ) .

in another case , the st. mary rehabilitation project , congress chose to authorize funding ( and a 75% federal cost share ) for another federal agency ( in this case , the corps ) to do the work instead of reclamation .

funding for this project has yet to be initiated , and may conflict with existing statutory requirements in ยง 4 ( a ) of the reclamation safety of dams act of 1978 .

rehabilitation of jackson gulch dam is an example of federal authorization and funding for a recapitalization effort at a transferred work .

although the administration has refused to fund this project in its budget requests , congress provided initial funding for the project in fy2010 enacted appropriations .

while many argue that direct involvement by congress is an acceptable way to designate high - priority projects and circumvent the executive branch prohibition on funding for transferred works , recent conference rules concerning earmarks could be problematic for this strategy .

with or without a ban on these spending items , questions remain regarding whether an ad - hoc process in which funds are obtained for projects individually will be sustainable as needs for upgrades proliferate .

other means for funding aging infrastructure , including loan programs and dedicated funding from the reclamation fund for aging infrastructure , are often raised as potential solutions , but have encountered setbacks within the executive branch and the appropriations process that have hindered implementation or enactment .

in the future , congress may be called upon to reconsider these and other proposals which attempt to address the issue of reclamation's aging infrastructure .

