on april 2-4 , 2008 , nato held a summit in bucharest , romania .

a principal issue was consideration of the candidacies for membership of albania , croatia , and the former yugoslav republic of macedonia ( fyrom ) .

the allies issued invitations to join the alliance to albania and croatia .

greece blocked an invitation to macedonia because of a dispute over macedonia's name .

the invitations initiated the third round of enlargement in the post - cold war era .

in 1997 , nato invited poland , the czech republic , and hungary to join the alliance ; they were admitted in 1999 .

in 2002 , the allies invited bulgaria , romania , lithuania , latvia , estonia , slovenia , and slovakia to join the alliance ; they were admitted in 2004 .

these last two rounds of enlargement were "strategic" in the sense that the new members' territory lay in regions that russia once deemed critical to its own national interest , and in the sense that the region had been intensely involved in conflict for much of modern european history .

in addition , several of these countries are sizeable , with considerable armed forces and significant resources .

albania and croatia are small countries , with correspondingly small militaries .

croatia was part of the former yugoslavia , a communist state that kept the soviet union at arms' length and had reasonably friendly relations with the west .

albania , also once a communist state during the cold war , was for many years the most isolated country in europe .

with the collapse of yugoslavia and the end of the cold war , these countries put themselves on the path to democracy and made commitments to join western institutions .

the two countries had aspirations to join both the european union and nato .

albania and croatia , in the sense of their military importance and their general resources , would not represent a "strategic" presence in the alliance , although their consistent contributions to nato operations have been lauded .

however , due to the continuing instability in the region , further stirred by serbia's and russia's sharply negative reaction to kosovo's independence , the two countries are a potential factor for stabilization in southeastern europe .

today , nato's purpose extends well beyond the mission of collective defense of the cold war era .

although collective defense remains a core function , the allies now undertake missions against terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

a global military reach is necessary for such missions .

the former bush administration had pressed the allies to develop more mobile forces , ones able to deploy over long distances and sustain themselves .

some smaller member states , such as albania and croatia , as nato members are expected to develop "niche" capabilities , such as special forces or troops able to contain a chemical weapons attack or to participate in nato collective security missions , such as its stabilization and peacekeeping operation in kosovo although both have contributed troops to the nato mission in afghanistan .

several allied governments believe that the overall pace of nato enlargement is too compressed and for the future wish to consider first how to resolve a complex range of issues .

these governments tend to argue that other issues — the calming of nationalist emotions in serbia , an overall improvement in nato - russian relations , and coming to grips with the wide - ranging problems in energy security — must first be resolved before considering new countries for membership .

the washington treaty of 1949 , nato's founding instrument , does not describe detailed qualifications for membership .

it does require that member states be democracies and follow the rule of law .

it also requires that they take steps to strengthen their militaries and refrain from the use of force in settling disputes outside the treaty framework .

article x of the treaty leaves the door open to any states able to meet the general qualifications for membership , including a contribution to the security of other member states .

the process by which governments interested in membership may join has been refined since the end of the cold war .

in 1994 nato established the partnership for peace ( pfp ) , a program in which non - member states might train with nato forces , participate in peacekeeping or other allied activities , and seek avenues to draw closer to the alliance .

some countries , such as austria , participate in the pfp program but are not necessarily interested in membership .

in 1995 nato published a study on nato enlargement .

the report remains the most detailed public roadmap for governments wishing to enter nato .

it describes the need for candidate states to develop democratic structures and a market economy , respect human rights and the rights of ethnic minorities , and build a military capable of contributing to collective defense .

in the 1995 study , nato included other requirements , principally the need to settle all disputes , such as border demarcations , with neighboring countries .

the balkan conflicts of the 1990s gave this requirement special significance .

with the collapse of the soviet union , nato has also become a collective security as well as a collective defense organization .

prospective members must develop military forces trained for peacekeeping and state - building , as well as for collective defense .

after the admission of poland , the czech republic and hungary in 1999 , the allies , led by the united states , developed a more detailed process for prospective members .

this process , called the membership action plan ( map ) , lays out in considerable detail specific steps that a government must follow to become a member .

such steps might include laws designating its parliament as having civilian oversight of the military , or the downsizing and professionalization of a large military , or the settlement of a border dispute with a neighbor .

each country's map is classified , as is its evaluation by the allies .

during the 2003-2004 round of enlargement , the map was made available to the united states senate for review .

some allies have criticized the map process .

they contend that it is primarily a creation of the united states and that the ultimate decision on whether map requirements are met is made principally in washington .

they say , for example , that the full range of qualifications outlined in the map in the 2003 round of enlargement was not adequately assessed for several states that became members of the alliance .

they contend , therefore , that designation of candidate states as prospective members is above all a political process and that actual accomplishment of requirements is secondary to the will of the alliance's leader .

u.s. officials dispute this characterization .

for a candidate state to have been invited to join the alliance at bucharest , consensus among the 26 member governments was necessary to approve an invitation .

each candidate was considered separately .

one or more votes against a state would have blocked that state's progress to the next stage in the process of becoming a member .

it was greece's opposition to macedonia that resulted in skopje's failure to obtain an invitation .

in march 2008 , greek prime minister karamanlis said , "no solution — no invitation. .

there were other issues under discussion as well .

according to some officials in allied states , albania and macedonia continued to have problems of governance and issues detrimental to internal political comity .

at the same time , the three governments had evidently made considerable progress in military reform , and their populations generally supported nato membership , although by a somewhat narrow majority in croatia .

after issuing official invitations to albania and croatia at the april bucharest summit , on july 9 , 2008 , the allies signed accession protocols for their entry into nato .

the protocols outlined nato's expectations of the two prospective members .

the protocols were deposited with each allied government and member governments began their constitutional processes to amend the washington treaty and admit a new state or states .

in some member states , such as the united kingdom , the government had the authority to determine whether the executive alone may decide to admit a state nominated for entry , or instead , if issues of broad significance are involved , may send the protocol to parliament for approval .

at the other end of the spectrum , the netherlands has a meticulous , time - consuming process involving a parliamentary study and debate before a final vote is taken .

nato hoped to admit prospective candidate states at its 60 th anniversary summit scheduled to be held on the french - german border on april 4-5 , 2009 .

by the end of march 2009 , all 26 member states had ratified the accession protocols .

croatia did have a maritime border dispute with slovenia and although slovenia's parliament had ratified the protocols , there had been a movement in the parliament to hold a national referendum on croatia's accession not only to nato but also to the eu in response to the unsettled maritime border dispute .

that issue was resolved just before the nato summit .

on april 1 , 2009 , in a ceremony at the department of state , the ambassadors of albania and croatia deposited the ratified documents with the united states and officially became the 27 th and 28 th members of the alliance .

in a ceremony at the nato summit in strasbourg , france on april 4 , the two newest members took their seats at the nato table .

the united states senate has the constitutional authority to give its advice and consent by a two - thirds majority to the amendment of any treaty .

in the case of nato enlargement , it must decide whether to amend the washington treaty to commit the united states to defend additional geographic territory .

the senate foreign relations committee is the committee that holds the initial authority to consider the issue .

for an enlargement of the nato treaty , both the senate foreign relations committee and the full senate may decide whether to vote on candidate states separately or all together .

during the previous two rounds of enlargement , house and senate committees held hearings on enlargement .

one purpose of the hearings is to create more widespread knowledge of possible pending new obligations of the united states government .

in the past , committees have also discussed such issues as the costs of enlargement , the qualifications of the candidate states , regional security implications of enlargement , implications for relations with russia , and new issues in nato's future , such as the viability of new missions .

on september 10 , 2008 , the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on the accession of albania and croatia to nato .

in his opening remarks , senator dodd , acting chairman of the committee , congratulated both candidates for the progress they had made in attempting to secure nato membership and stated that both albania and croatia would be a force for stability in the balkans .

he reminded the committee that "to undertake a commitment to mutual defense is one of the more serious steps any government can take .

therefore we must consider ... the nature of the allies we are embracing. .

senator dodd was particularly interested in whether both candidates had achieved acceptable levels of reform in the areas of democratic elections , rule of law , treatment of minorities , economic development , civilian control of the military , and the resolution of all territorial disputes with their neighbors .

appearing before the committee , daniel fried , assistant secretary of state for european and eurasian affairs , stated that both albania and croatia had made "enormous steps forward in becoming stable democracies and instituting significant reforms" in many of the areas highlighted by senator dodd .

on september 25 , 2008 the senate , by division vote ( treaty number 110-20 ) , ratified the accession protocols .

nato member states contribute to the activities of the alliance in several ways , the chief of which is through the deployment of their own armed forces , funded by their national budgets .

certain commonly conducted activities , however , are paid for out of three nato - run budgets .

these three accounts — the civil budget , the military budget , and the security investment program — are funded by individual contributions from the member states .

the countries' percentage shares of the common funds are negotiated among the members , and are based upon per capita gdp and several other factors .

during the period leading up to first round of enlargement in central and eastern europe in 1999 , analysts estimated the cost of adding new members at between $10 billion and $125 billion , depending upon different threat scenarios and accounting techniques .

some members of congress expressed concern over these cost projections and were also worried that the united states might be left to shoulder a large share of the expenditures ; they questioned whether existing burdensharing arrangements should continue and suggested that the european allies should be encouraged to assume a larger financial share for the security of the continent .

however , a nato study estimated that enlargement would require only $1.5 billion in common funds expenditures over 10 years , and dod concurred .

it was further forecast that the 2004 round of enlargement would cost a similar amount , "with greater benefits" to u.s. security .

in addition , the inclusion of ten new contributors to the nato common funds actually reduced the percentage shares of the established members — including the united states .

in preparation for the nato summit in april 2009 , nato staff prepared estimates of the total cost and the cost - sharing implications of a new round of enlargement .

nato staff concluded , and allies informally agreed , that the methodologies and assumptions used to estimate costs and cost sharing arrangements in prior rounds of enlargement were still valid , and that the addition of new members in 2009 would not entail significant costs .

the main expenses likely to be charged directly to the alliance's common military budget would be for air defense upgrades , improvement of in - country facilities , mainly airfields , for deployment , and the procurement of secure communications between nato headquarters in brussels and mons , and capitals of the new member countries .

any other common - funded projects in new member states would be assessed and funded in terms of their contributions to nato capabilities or support to ongoing missions and are not directly attributable to enlargement .

in recent years , the cost issue in general has received relatively little attention from policymakers and the media .

the focus has instead been on 1 ) specialized capabilities that new — and existing — members can bring to the alliance , and 2 ) member states' willingness to contribute military assets to alliance operations , particularly in afghanistan .

the former bush administration , and apparently the new obama administration , reflected the general nato view that the door to nato must remain open to qualified states .

since the clinton administration , u.s. officials have supported the idea of a europe "whole and free. .

while nato remains an organization for the defense of the united states , canada , and the european allies , it has increasingly developed a political agenda .

for example , nato allies have routinely discussed such matters as energy security , piracy , and disaster relief , and , until august 2008 , a range of political issues with russia through the nato - russia council .

the united states designed the map process , and takes a leading role in requiring candidate states to develop a professional military , democratic structures , a transparent defense budget process , civilian control of the military , and free market structures .

the former bush administration also supported the entry of new european nato member states into the european union as a means to build stability .

like the former administration , the new obama administration supported invitations to albania , croatia , and macedonia .

while u.s. officials acknowledged that all three states must continue to improve their militaries and their political institutions , they also believe that each state had made considerable progress over the last several years .

u.s. officials also contended that the three governments would contribute to the political stabilization of southeastern europe .

the former bush administration viewed nato's long - term membership roster in terms broader than that of some allies .

for instance , the united states strongly supported the entry of countries such as georgia and ukraine and argued that georgia and ukraine should be invited to join the map process .

in the days leading to the bucharest summit , former president bush made a highly visible tour of georgia and ukraine , where he touted their qualifications for the map .

while some allies appeared to view russia's august 2008 invasion of georgia and ongoing political instability in ukraine as cause to further oppose granting the map to these countries , the administration continued to advocate for a map for georgia and ukraine .

administration officials argued that although both countries faced significant challenges to meeting the requirements for full nato membership , they should be granted a clear roadmap to membership as offered by the map .

during the 2008 u.s. presidential campaign , both candidates expressed their support for georgia and ukraine and both candidates expressed the desire to see both nations offered membership action plans at the nato foreign ministers meeting in december 2008 , an action that was not taken by the ministers .

as with the former administration , the obama administration also appears to support the idea of a "nato with global partners. .

this idea does not necessarily imply membership for countries beyond the euro - atlantic region .

instead , the former and current administrations have sought , for example , to engage such countries as australia , new zealand , and japan in the effort to stabilize afghanistan , but do not actively promote their membership in the alliance .

the allies have extended partnership for peace status to a number of central asian governments , a move that successive u.s. governments have supported .

there are several reasons for this policy , even though some of these governments are not democratic: the pfp was originally intended as a mechanism to better integrate former soviet republics into the west and the united states and its allies wished to encourage greater respect for human rights and nascent democratic practices in central asia ; these governments have since provided logistical support to allied operations in afghanistan ; and several of these countries are key to the development of greater energy security because of their oil and natural gas resources and the pipelines that cross their territory .

as in previous rounds of enlargement , a range of political factors attends consideration of the candidate states' application for membership .

beyond the qualifications achieved by a candidate state in the map process , such matters as the stabilization of southeastern europe , russia's voice in european security , and bilateral relations between a member state and a candidate state also come into play .

stability in southeastern europe is an issue of great importance both to nato and the european union , and current member governments believe that enlargement can serve this goal .

nato's decision to go to war against serbia in 1999 to stop ethnic cleansing in kosovo , and the alliance's subsequent creation of its kosovo force ( kfor ) to contribute to kosovo's stability are evidence of this point .

further evidence is the eu's decision to lead kosovo's "supervised independence. .

both serbia and russia reacted strongly against kosovo's independence , declared on february 17 , 2008 .

the united states and most eu governments recognized kosovo's independence the following week .

on february 21 , 2008 the u.s. embassy in belgrade was attacked , as was the croatian embassy , and part of the slovenian embassy was sacked and burned .

serbian police reportedly stood by while mobs carried out these attacks .

serbian government leaders have vowed never to accept kosovo's independence , and some may be complicit in stirring up unrest among the serbian minority in northern kosovo .

nonetheless , despite strong disagreement with eu and nato member states over kosovo , serbia seeks integration into europe through eu membership and supports building closer relations with nato through the partnership for peace program .

however , as indicated earlier , public opposition within serbia to full nato membership means political support for an intensified dialogue with nato may be lacking .

as discussed earlier , russia's opposition to the candidacies of ukraine and georgia for the map has been shrill and threatening .

prime minister putin has said that russia will target nuclear weapons on ukraine should it ever become a member of nato .

russia has reduced natural gas supplies to ukraine and georgia several times in the last several years , ostensibly because the two countries would not agree to pay a market price , but also as a likely act of intimidation .

russia has also posed other obstacles to improved relations with nato .

estonian officials contend that cyber attacks on computers in estonian banks and governmental offices in spring 2007 originated from within the russian government .

georgian officials also allege that cyber attacks on georgian government websites during the august 2008 conflict originated in russia .

the august 2008 conflict between russia and georgia has also led to renewed discussion within nato over the alliance's collective defense clause , enshrined in article 5 of the north atlantic treaty .

article 5 , considered by most to be the defining feature of the alliance , obligates allies to defend against an armed attack on nato soil .

observers disagree as to whether russia would have invaded georgian territory had georgia been a nato member , and as to how nato would have responded in the case of such an event .

however , the conflict has provoked more serious consideration both of the possibility of armed conflict between nato and russia and of nato's willingness to respond in the event of a similar attack on a nato ally .

the baltic states and poland have voiced particular concern regarding the credibility of article 5 as a guarantor of collective defense .

debate over article 5 stands to intensify as nato considers further enlargement within areas considered by russia as falling within its traditional sphere of influence and as russia seeks to exert influence in these areas .

most allies seem to believe that although albania's and croatia's militaries and resources are modest , both countries' membership in the alliance could lead to greater stability in southeastern europe , especially given the independence of kosovo and the enduring hostility to nato of important political factions in serbia .

additionally , the united states and several other leading governments in the alliance expect new member states to develop niche capabilities to contribute to nato operations around the world .

more broadly , u.s. officials continue to view nato as the primary institutional mechanism to ensure transatlantic security .

they argue that although nato's primary purpose is the defense of its members , the alliance has become a force for peace throughout europe .

nato is facing current and future challenges that may shape any following rounds of enlargement .

an ongoing strategic concern of the alliance is the stabilization of afghanistan , which has become the alliance's most important mission .

in addition , nato faces other issues such as global terrorism , cyber - attacks , and strategically , two of the most important , energy security and relations with russia .

gazprom , russia's national energy company , has been making strong efforts to control parts of europe's oil and natural gas distribution network .

even without such control , much of europe and the caucasus depend upon russia for portions of their energy supply .

gazprom's repeated supply disruptions to customer countries underscore a stark reality: russia can cut off a vital lifeline if it so desires .

countermeasures — new pipelines skirting russia and drawing supplies from a range of sources , and conservation — will require years of planning and implementation , probably at great expense .

some allies believe that energy security must be enhanced before new members in succeeding rounds may be extended invitations to join , particularly if they are vulnerable to russian pressure .

concurrent efforts to improve relations with russia are likely to be a centerpiece of european allies' policy during this period .

appendix a .

legislation on enlargement in the 109 th and 110 th congresses the senate has assented to all five rounds of nato enlargement .

congress has played a particularly active role in shaping the alliance's eastward expansion since the end of the cold war .

in the nato participation act of 1994 ( title ii of p.l .

103 - 447 ) , congress for the first time authorized the president both to assist designated former soviet bloc countries to become full nato members and to provide excess defense articles , international military education and training , and foreign military financing assistance to these countries .

in subsequent legislation in 1996 , 1998 , and 2002 , congress further encouraged and endorsed nato's eastward enlargement , while outlining the conditions under which such enlargement should take place .

before ratifying the treaty protocols enabling the alliance's 1998 and 2004 enlargements , the senate broke with past practice , subjecting its approval of the protocols to several conditions .

one such condition , as articulated in the senate's resolutions of ratification for both enlargements , requires the president to submit to the appropriate congressional committees a detailed report on each country being actively considered for nato membership before beginning accession talks and to submit updated reports on each country before signing any protocols of accession .

specifically , these reports are to include an evaluation of how a country being actively considered for nato membership will further the principles of nato and contribute to the security of the north atlantic area ; an evaluation of the country's eligibility for membership , including military readiness ; an explanation of how an invitation to the country would affect the national security interests of the united states ; a u.s. government analysis of common - funded military requirements and costs associated with integrating the country into nato and an analysis of the shares of those costs to be borne by nato members ; and a preliminary analysis of the budgetary implications for the united states of integrating that country into nato .

members of the 109 th and 110 th congresses expressed continued support for nato enlargement .

on september 29 , 2006 , toward the end of the 109 th congress , senator richard lugar introduced s. 4014 , the freedom consolidation act of 2006 .

the bill , expressed support for nato enlargement and designated albania , croatia , georgia , and macedonia as eligible to receive assistance under the nato participation act of 2004 , passed the senate on november 16 , 2006 .

s. 4014 was referred to the house international relations committee but was not taken up before the end of the 109 th congress .

in the 110 th congress , both chambers passed successor bills to the bill that passed the senate in the 109 th congress .

the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 , introduced by senator lugar on february 6 , 2007 , passed the senate by unanimous consent on march 15 , 2007 .

a companion bill , h.r .

987 , introduced by representative john tanner in the house on february 12 , 2007 , passed the house on march 6 .

president bush signed it into law ( p.l .

110 - 17 ) april 9 , 2007 .

the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 reaffirmed the united states' "commitment to further enlargement of the north atlantic treaty organization to include european democracies that are able and willing to meet the responsibilities of membership..." the act called for the "timely admission" of albania , croatia , georgia , the "republic of macedonia ( fyrom ) ," and ukraine to nato , recognizes progress made by albania , croatia , and macedonia on their membership action plans ( maps ) , and applauds political and military advances made by georgia and ukraine while signaling regret that the alliance has not entered into a map with either country .

congress also affirms that admission of these five countries into nato should be "contingent upon their continued implementation of democratic , defense , and economic reform , and their willingness and ability to meet the responsibilities of membership in [nato] and a clear expression of national intent to do so. .

in addition to expressing support for the candidacies and potential candidacies of albania , croatia , georgia , macedonia , and ukraine , the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 authorized fy2008 appropriations for security assistance to each of these countries .

this assistance would be consistent with the conditions set by the nato participation act of 1994 , which limit the types of security assistance offered by the united states to prospective nato member states to the transfer of excess defense articles ( as determined under section 516 and 519 of the foreign assistance act ) , international military education and training ( as determined under chapter 5 of part ii of the foreign assistance act ) , and foreign military financing assistance ( as determined under section 23 of the arms export control act ) .

according to the nato participation act , security assistance should encourage joint planning , training , and military exercises with nato forces , greater interoperability , and conformity of military doctrine .

both the senate and house expressed further support for a strengthening of allied relations with georgia and ukraine , passing companion resolutions expressing strong support "for [nato] to enter into a membership action plan with georgia and ukraine. .

the resolutions drew attention to contributions made by georgia and ukraine to the collective security of the alliance , and highlighted progress made in each country towards a stronger relationship with nato .

in what could have been an effort to address some european allies' concern that a map would be understood as a guarantee of future nato membership , the resolutions explicitly stated that a map did not ensure membership .

on september 9 , 2008 , in response to the august conflict between russia and georgia , representative john shimkus ( il ) introduced h.con.res .

409 , expressing the support of the congress for awarding a membership action plan ( map ) to georgia and ukraine at the nato foreign ministers meeting in december 2008 .

although the u.s. government continued to express its support for such a decision , some european allies reinforced their position that it would not be an appropriate time to extend such as invitation .

they cited the uncertainty over the georgian political situation as well as the internal political turmoil within the government coalition in ukraine .

as noted earlier , a map was not extended to either georgia or ukraine in 2008 and is not on the agenda for nato thus far in 2009 .

neither the nato freedom consolidation act nor the accompanying senate foreign relations committee report directly addressed potential concerns regarding burden - sharing within the alliance or the effect a further round of enlargement might have on relations with russia .

however , members of the 110 th congress had expressed such concerns in several congressional hearings , and members on the united states congressional delegation to the nato parliamentary assembly are said to have discussed these issues with their european counterparts , as well as with officials in albania , croatia , and macedonia .

