prior to the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , standards with respect to drivers' licenses and personal identification cards were determined on a state - by - state basis with no national standards in place .

in fact , prior to september 11 , 2001 , legislation aimed at discouraging national standards for identification documents had gained bipartisan support and was thought likely to pass .

congressional action regarding national standards for state - issued identification documents before september 11 , 2001 , had proved to be highly controversial .

for example , § 656 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 provided federal standards for state drivers' licenses and birth certificates when used as identification - related documents for federal purposes .

under this provision , a state had two choices .

the state could require that each of its licenses include the licensee's social security number in machine - readable or visually readable form .

alternatively , a state could more minimally require that each applicant submit the applicant's social security number and verify the legitimacy of that number with the social security administration .

the section became subject to widespread public criticism shortly after its enactment with opponents most frequently alleging that it could be construed as a step toward a national identification card system .

in response , congress prohibited funding to implement regulations aimed at assisting the states to adopt the social security number requirements , and the underlying requirement itself was subsequently repealed in § 355 of the department of transportation and related agencies appropriations act 2000 .

after the events of september 11 , 2001 , the prevailing view of national standards for so - called "breeder documents," which includes , but is not limited to , drivers' licenses and personal identification cards , changed .

specifically , the final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) recommended that "the federal government should set standards for the issuance of birth certificates , and sources of identification , such as drivers' licenses. .

responding to this recommendation , in 2004 congress enacted the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ) .

this act delegated authority to the secretary of transportation , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , empowering them to issue regulations with respect to minimum standards for federal acceptance of drivers' licenses and personal identification cards .

pursuant to the irtpa , the secretary was required to issue regulations within 18 months of enactment requiring that each driver's license or identification card , to be accepted for any official purpose by a federal agency , include the individual's ( 1 ) full legal name , ( 2 ) date of birth , ( 3 ) gender , ( 4 ) driver's license or identification card number , ( 5 ) digital photograph , ( 6 ) address , and ( 7 ) signature .

in addition , the cards were required to contain physical security features designed to prevent tampering , counterfeiting , or duplication for fraudulent purposes ; as well as a common machine - readable technology with defined minimum elements .

moreover , states were required , pursuant to implementing regulations , to confiscate a driver's license or personal identification card if any of the above security components were compromised .

the statute also required that the implementing regulations address how drivers' licenses and identification cards were issued by the states .

specifically , the regulations were required to include minimum standards for the documentation required by the applicant , the procedures utilized for verifying the documents used , and the standards for processing the applications .

the regulations were , however , prohibited from not only infringing upon the "state's power to set criteria concerning what categories of individuals are eligible to obtain a driver's license or personal identification card from that state," but also from requiring a state to take an action that "conflicts with or otherwise interferes with the full enforcement of state criteria concerning the categories of individuals that were eligible to obtain a driver's license or personal identification card. .

in other words , it appeared that if a state granted a certain category of individuals ( i.e. , aliens , legal or illegal ) permission to obtain a license , nothing in the implementing regulations was to infringe upon that state's decision or its ability to enforce that decision .

in addition , the regulations were not to require a single uniform design , and were required to include procedures designed to protect the privacy rights of individual applicants .

finally , the law required the use of negotiated rulemaking pursuant to the administrative procedure act .

this process was designed to bring together agency representatives and concerned interest groups to negotiate the text of a proposed rule .

the rulemaking committee was required to include representatives from ( 1 ) state and local offices that issue drivers' licenses and / or personal identification cards , ( 2 ) state elected officials , ( 3 ) department of homeland security , and ( 4 ) interested parties .

in 2005 , congress again addressed the issue of national standards for drivers' licenses and personal identification cards by passing the real id act of 2005 ( real id ) .

real id contains a number of provisions relating to improved security for drivers' licenses and personal identification cards , as well as instructions for states that do not comply with its provisions .

in addition , real id repealed certain overlapping and potentially conflicting provisions of the irtpa .

in general , although real id does not directly impose federal standards with respect to states' issuance of drivers' licenses and personal identification cards , states nevertheless appear to need to adopt such standards and modify any conflicting laws or regulations to continue to have such documents recognized by federal agencies for official purposes .

real id contains a statutory definition of the phrase "official purpose. .

for purposes of the act , an "official purpose" is defined as including , but not limited to , "accessing federal facilities , boarding federally regulated commercial aircraft , entering nuclear power plants , and any other purposes that the secretary [of homeland security] shall determine. .

in addition , real id contains a provision that specifically repealed § 7212 of the irtpa , which had contained the preexisting law with respect to national standards for drivers' licenses and personal identification cards .

both at the time that real id was debated in congress , and during the regulatory comment period , questions about the constitutionality of the statute were raised .

there have been four main constitutional arguments made against real id .

first , because real id cannot be premised on congress's power to regulate interstate commerce , it is a violation of states' rights as protected by the tenth amendment .

second , the requirement that real ids be used to board federally regulated aircraft impermissibly encroaches on citizen's right to travel .

third , specific requirements such as the digital photograph potentially violate the free exercise clause of the first amendment .

finally , real id infringes upon a citizen's right under the first amendment to freely assemble , associate , and petition the government .

according to some advocacy groups , state and federal elected officials — including numerous commentators to the proposed regulations — and others , real id imposes an unconstitutional "unfunded mandate" on the states .

generally speaking , the term "unfunded mandate" refers to requirements that one unit of government imposes on another without providing funds to pay for costs of compliance .

in this instance , the argument has often been advanced that the federal government has imposed the requirements of real id on the states without providing adequate funding to cover the implementation costs .

arguments related to "unfunded mandates" typically take two forms .

first , is the argument that unfunded mandates are unconstitutional as violations of the tenth amendment .

as indicated above , jurisprudence with respect to the tenth amendment is limited , and the federal courts have not to date specifically addressed the "unfunded mandate" issue .

second , "unfunded mandate" arguments refer to the statutory requirements of the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( umra ) .

umra contains both legislative and regulatory reform provisions designed to limit or prohibit the number of unfunded mandates adopted by congress and the regulatory agencies .

the legislative reforms establish requirements for committees and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) to study and report on the magnitude and impact of mandates in proposed legislation .

in addition , the reforms include point - of - order procedures by which the requirements can be enforced , and by which the consideration of measures containing unfunded intergovernmental mandates can be blocked .

with respect to regulations , umra requires federal agencies to prepare written statements identifying the costs and benefits of any federal mandate in excess of $100 million annually ( adjusted annually for inflation ) imposed through the rulemaking process .

the written assessments must identify the law authorizing the rule , anticipated costs and benefits , the share of costs to be borne by the federal government , and the disproportionate costs on individual regions or components of the private sector .

additionally , the law requires that the assessments include estimates of the effect on the national economy , descriptions of consultations with non - federal government officials , and a summary of the evaluation of comments and concerns obtained throughout the promulgation process .

moreover , umra requires that federal agencies consider "a reasonable number" of policy options and select the most cost - effective or least burdensome alternative .

judicial review under umra is limited to ensuring that the agency complies with the procedural requirements of the statute .

courts may compel the agency to comply with the statute , but failure to do so cannot be used as a basis for invalidating a rule .

although it appears that real id requires significant expenditures by the states to comply with its requirements , umra arguably exempts the real id regulations from the statute's requirements .

specifically , section 4 of umra excludes from the scope of the law final regulations that are "necessary for the national security. .

in addition , umra excludes regulations that "incorporate requirements specifically set forth in law. .

dhs relies on both of these provisions in its explanation as to why real id is not an unfunded mandate .

nevertheless , in its explanatory statement accompanying the final rule , dhs indicated that it complied with the provisions of umra , noting that it analyzed the cost to the states , considered alternatives , and solicited input from state and local governments .

in accordance with the effective date of the statute , on may 11 , 2008 , all drivers' licenses and personal identification cards from non - compliant states will no longer be accepted by federal officials for "official purposes," which includes access to federal facilities , boarding federally regulated commercial aircraft , entry into nuclear power plants , and such other purposes as established by the secretary of homeland security .

this general rule will take effect unless a state has requested an extension from dhs .

extensions of the may 11 , 2008 , deadline are authorized by § 205 ( b ) of the real id statute , specifically "to meet the requirements of [the act]. .

according to the final rule , however , the states requesting such an extension must have notified dhs by march 31 , 2008 .

if granted , all extensions will be valid until december 31 , 2009 .

as of the writing of this report , 49 states and the district of columbia have been granted the initial extensions .

the only state that has not yet received the extension is maine .

an issue that has arisen regarding the extensions is what constitutes "to meet the requirements of [the act]. .

several states have made clear in their letters requesting the extension that either due to existing state law , or other concerns regarding real id in general , that their request for an extension is not to be viewed as an indication that they intend to fully implement the requirements of real id .

although it would appear that such an indication would arguably make the state ineligible for the extension , dhs has , to date , granted each of these extensions , despite such language in the state's request letter .

in addition to the initial extension , states may request a second extension if , by october 11 , 2009 , states file with dhs a "material compliance checklist" that demonstrates that the state is in "material compliance" with all of the benchmarks established by the final rule .

this extension , if granted , will be valid until may 10 , 2011 .

the final regulation does not indicate precisely what dhs considers to be "material compliance" ; therefore , it appears that the decision to grant a second extension is solely at the discretion of the secretary or his designee .

according to the final rule , states must meet all of the real id requirements by december 1 , 2014 , for drivers' licenses and personal identification cards issued to persons born after december 1 , 1964 , and by december 1 , 2017 , for persons born before december 1 , 1964 .

since its adoption in 2005 , real id has been a highly contested issue among state legislatures and governors .

prior to the publication of the nprm in 2007 , however , there was little activity at the state lawmaking level , primarily because officials were uncertain as to precisely what the implementation requirements were going to necessitate , either in terms of cost or potential changes to state law .

since the publication of the nprm in 2007 , there has been a dramatic increase in state responses to real id and its requirements .

to date , it appears that only six states — indiana , nevada , ohio , tennessee , virginia , and wisconsin — have affirmatively enacted legislation that in some form adopts , or requires to be adopted , the federal minimum standards that are articulated in real id .

these statutes , however , vary in type , and arguably in effectiveness .

for example , in both tennessee and virginia , the language appears in annual appropriations acts , which arguably means that compliance may have to be reaffirmed during the state's next appropriations cycle , or it can be eliminated .

conversely , in nevada , the legislature adopted into law new provisions of the state's motor vehicle code that appear to be intended to bring the state into full compliance with real id .

it also appears that an additional 12 states have statutory language pending that would require the appropriate state departments to come into compliance with the requirements of real id .

conversely , there are nine states — georgia , idaho , maine , montana , nebraska , new hampshire , oklahoma , south carolina , and washington — that have adopted state statutes that appear to indicate a refusal to comply with the requirements of real id .

these statutes vary in their terms and effectiveness as well .

montana , for example , appears to have adopted the strongest non - compliance law , which directs the montana department of justice and the motor vehicle administration not to participate in the federal real id act and to report to the governor any attempts by dhs to secure implementation of real id .

in other examples , the idaho legislature appropriated $0 for implementation in 2008 , whereas the georgia legislature authorized the governor to delay implementation unless certain conditions are met .

in addition to the statutes directly prohibiting compliance , the legislative chambers in 15 states have adopted non - binding resolutions or memorials that urge congress to either amend or repeal real id , and / or that indicate the state's intent to not comply .

all told , 24 states have passed legislation that either prohibits state compliance with the act or urges congress to amend or repeal real id .

in addition to those states that have enacted either statutory commands or non - binding resolutions , there are a number of states that have such matters pending before their state lawmakers .

currently , it appears that 11 states have bills that would prohibit compliance pending before their legislatures , whereas another 20 states and the district of columbia have non - binding resolutions or memorials awaiting action .

the ramifications of having several states that do not opt to comply with the terms of real id are far from clear .

as previously discussed , the act itself is voluntary , binding only on federal agencies , not on the states .

thus , the statute contains no penalty for non - compliance .

to the extent that there is a penalty for non - compliance by a state , it appears to be borne by the citizens of the non - compliant state .

for example , after may , 11 , 2008 , the citizens of a state such as montana — which has passed a law prohibiting compliance and has refused to file for an extension — will not be able to use their state - issued drivers' licenses or personal identification cards for official purposes .

therefore , after may 11 , montana citizens will not be able to show their montana licenses to board a federally regulated aircraft or enter a federal building .

although this does not mean that citizens of the non - compliant states cannot engage in interstate travel via airplane — as many other forms of identification are acceptable by the transportation security administration ( tsa ) ( i.e. , passport , military id , other forms of state or federally issued identification ) — or enter a federal court house or other federal building , it arguably does impose an additional burden on the citizen because the state has chosen not to comply .

in addition , non - compliant states would apparently create holes in the scheme of state - to - state data sharing that is an integral part of real id .

presumably , non - compliant states will not participate in the database creation or information - sharing system envisioned by the real id regulations .

thus , it would appear that potential problems may arise if , for example , an applicant in a compliant state presents a document ( i.e. , birth certificate or other required paperwork ) that requires verification from a non - compliant state .

at this early stage of implementation , however , it is unclear precisely what effect this may have .

moreover , the existence of non - compliant states presents the potential for conflicts among the states , in addition to those between the non - compliant states and the federal government .

for example , will a non - real id - compliant driver's license or personal identification card issued by montana continue to be a valid form if identification in indiana , a state that has a specific compliance law in place ? .

the converse question also exists ; namely , will montana accept forms of identification that comply with real id as valid within its own jurisdiction ? .

currently , neither real id itself , nor the existing state laws appear to expressly address these questions ; however , they appear likely to arise as implementation advances .

finally , it has been noted that several of the states that have adopted statutes prohibiting compliance with real id have also filed requests for extensions from dhs .

according to dhs , georgia , nebraska , oklahoma , and washington have all requested the extensions .

although it appears possible to distinguish between a request for an extension and non - compliance , as indicated above , dhs's response to several states suggests that it is not strictly interpreting the statutory language that requires that extensions be granted only to those states evidencing an intent to comply .

the final regulations promulgated by dhs on january 29 , 2008 , contained over 280 pages and responded to over 21,000 comments .

this section contains a summary description and analysis of several of the major elements of the real id regulations .

the western hemisphere travel initiative , which can be found at § 7209 of the irtpa , requires that the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , expeditiously develop and implement a plan requiring that all travelers , including citizens of the untied states , produce a passport , other document , or combination of documents , "deemed by the secretary of homeland security to be sufficient to denote identity and citizenship ," when entering the united states .

the use of the conjunctive "and" generally indicates that both elements , identity and citizenship , must be denoted by the documents presented .

although real id contains increased security requirements for state - issued drivers' licenses and personal identification cards , these requirements appear to be focused on ensuring that the documents accurately reflect identity .

real id does not appear to require that the licenses or identification cards in any way "denote citizenship" in the united states .

in fact , as noted above , real id contains specific provisions that permit the issuance of licenses and identification cards to non - citizen residents of the united states who , by producing the required documentation and having it verified as authentic by the issuing agency , can demonstrate lawful presence in the country .

given the absence of requirements relating to citizenship , it does not appear that standing alone a driver's license or personal identification card would satisfy the statutory standard established by § 7209 for acceptable documents to be shown upon entrance to the united states .

at this time , however , it remains unclear whether or not a driver's license or personal identification card , in conjunction with other presented documents may be considered sufficient to "denote identity and citizenship" as required by the statute .

it should be noted , however , that the use of state - issued drivers' licenses or personal identification cards is not included in the final whti land / sea rule issued by the state department and dhs on march 27 , 2008 .

to implement whti , dhs and the department of state have pursued the development of alternative identification documents that satisfy the standards as required by congress .

most notably , whti requires that the documents shown denote "both identity and citizenship" to be compliant .

at the time whti was enacted , the only u.s. - issued document that satisfied this requirement was a passport .

since whti's adoption , several jurisdictions have expressed interest in creating and issuing a document known as an enhanced driver's license ( edl ) .

edls will contain on the face of the license as well as in the electronic components information relating to the holders citizenship ; therefore , making the document whti compliant .

currently , the state of washington has a pilot program in place that permits the issuing of edls to persons who provide verifiable proof of citizenship and pay an additional fee when they apply for issuance or renewal of their washington driver's license .

according to dhs's final rule for whti land / sea entry , new york , vermont , and arizona are also states that have signed memoranda of understanding with dhs for edl pilot programs of their own .

although edls and real id are being implemented by the same agency , there are two major differences between the programs .

first , unlike real id , edls require that the cardholder be a u.s. citizen .

second , edls will implement radio - frequency identification ( rfid ) technology , whereas real ids are only required to use a two - dimensional bar code system .

thus , although the two programs are related , they are not interchangeable .

it may be possible , however , for an edl to also qualify as a real id , provided that the document satisfies the requirements of both programs .

on the other hand , just because individuals have a real id , it does not automatically follow that they qualify for an edl , or can use their real id as part of the whti program .

one way of thinking about the relationship between these two programs may be that some edls will comply with real id , but not all real ids will qualify as whti - compliant edls .

in other words , only after a careful review of the issuing requirements and document contents will one be able to determine whether a specific state - issued driver's license or personal identification card qualifies under neither , both , or only one of the two programs .

