nepal has undergone a radical transformation in recent years as the nation ended its civil war , abolished the monarchy , and established a multi - party democratic republic .

the former maoist insurgents are once again part of the government and the country is moving forward to try to formulate a new constitution for the new republic that takes into account regional groups' aspirations .

while trends are positive at present , significant challenges remain to be overcome .

a february 2011 compromise that led to the election of a new government in nepal has given many political observers some degree of cautious optimism that the country may be continuing on its path from a hindu monarchy to a representative democracy .

however , enormous challenges remain as the new government of prime minister jhala nath khanal , of the communist party of nepal united marxist - leninists ( cpn uml ) , seeks to draft a constitution before a may 2011 deadline .

before february 2011 , nepal had been in a political vacuum for seven months due to a deadlock in the constituent assembly , where no party or coalition was able to attain majority support .

that logjam was loosened when maoist candidate prachanda withdrew from consideration for prime minister , and the constituent assembly ( ca ) first formed in 2008 to create a new government .

they elected khanal as prime minister , with backing from the maoists , though the maoists remained outside the government until march 2011 .

details of a "secret" deal between the cpn uml and the maoists , which broke the political stalemate that had prevented the forming of a new government , have now emerged .

disagreements over the interpretation of the seven - point deal hindered the beginning of the new government in february 2011 , but the entry of several maoists into the government in march 2011 appears to indicate that another impasse has been averted .

while maoists have taken up several ministries including peace and reconstruction , they have not been given the home ministry .

the maoists will reportedly be given 11 ministries in total as part of the power sharing deal with the cpn - uml .

prime minister khanal also reportedly agreed to consider all options with regard to the future disposition of the 19,000 former maoist combatants .

this potentially signals less resistance to the integration of maoist forces into the army by the cpn - uml than they demonstrated before .

it has also been reported that the two parties have agreed to lead the government by turns .

the agreement between the two parties was a positive step , but analysts note that the stability of the government will likely be tested by upcoming decisions that could expose widely differing interests between the two parties .

the government faces the challenge of completing the peace process that began in 2006 by drafting a constitution before a may 2011 deadline .

the government may not meet that deadline , as it faces two large challenges as the deadline approaches: completion of the peace process and crafting a new federal structure as part of the new constitution .

the ca may well decide to extend the deadline once again should the government not finish its work in time .

political parties and militant groups representing the madhes minority of the southern terai region have put the government on notice that the new constitution and federal structure must take into account their political aspirations and concerns .

religion has long been an important factor for nepal's 29.3 million inhabitants , where 81% of the population is hindu and 11% of the population is buddhist .

nepali is the official language , though there are over 100 regional and indigenous languages spoken in nepal .

the main geographic division in the country is between the low - lying and agriculturally productive terai region , found adjacent to the southern border with india , and the more mountainous parts of the country .

nepal has been an independent kingdom since 1768 .

never colonized , the country was almost totally isolated from outside influence until the early 1950s .

a transition from strict rule by the king to constitutional monarchy began in 1959 , when then - king mahendra issued a new constitution and held the country's first democratic elections .

in 1960 , however , the king declared the parliamentary system a failure , dismissed the fledgling government , suspended the constitution , and established a partyless system of rule under the monarchy .

although officially banned , political parties continued to exist and to agitate for a return to constitutional democracy .

in february 1990 , student groups and the major political parties launched the movement for the restoration of democracy .

the centrist nepali congress ( nc ) party joined with the leftist parties to hold peaceful demonstrations in nepal's urban centers .

in april 1990 , after more than 50 people were killed when police fired on a crowd of demonstrators , then - king birendra turned power over to an interim government .

this government drafted a constitution in november 1990 establishing nepal as a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional monarch as head of state .

the king at that time retained limited powers , including the right to declare a state of emergency with the approval of a two - thirds majority of parliament .

in february 1996 , the leaders of the underground cpn - m launched a "people's war" in the mid - western region of nepal , with the aim of replacing the constitutional monarchy with a one - party communist regime .

the uprising appears to have been fueled by widespread perceptions of government corruption and failure to improve the quality of life of citizens , including providing access to cultivable land .

the maoists ran a parallel government , established their own tax system , burned land records , and redistributed seized property and food to the poor , in 45 districts .

the insurgency was waged , in part , through torture , killings , and bombings targeting police , the military , and public officials .

a number of bank robberies , combined with "revolutionary tax" revenue , made the nepali maoists one of the wealthiest rebel groups in asia .

the kathmandu government faced additional turmoil in june 2001 , when crown prince dipendra shot and killed his parents , king birendra and queen aishwarya ; seven other members of the royal family ; and himself , reportedly after a disagreement over whom he should marry .

this incident did much to undermine the legitimacy of the monarchy .

king gyanendra , the former king's brother , was crowned on june 4 , 2001 , and he appointed a commission to investigate the assassinations .

by mid - june , the country began returning to normal following rioting and widespread refusal to believe official accounts of the massacre .

in july 2001 , prime minister girija prasad koirala stepped down amid fears of continuing instability and his government's failure to deal with the growing maoist insurgency .

he was replaced by nc leader sher bahadur deuba , who then became the head of nepal's 11 th government in as many years .

over the years both the maoists and security forces have committed numerous human rights violations .

that said , some progress in the areas of human rights and political freedoms have been achieved since the early 1990s .

the king's dismissal of government in 2005 led to many abuses and curtailments of civil rights .

this setback was reversed by the reinstatement of parliament in 2006 .

trafficking in women and children and indentured domestic work remain problems in nepal .

nepal also suffers from widespread corruption .

nepal ranked 146 out of 178 countries in the 2010 global corruption perceptions index by transparency international .

the tibetan community in nepal has , according to human rights watch , been subject to numerous abuses at the hands of nepali authorities as nepal has reportedly come under pressure from china to quell any protests in nepal over chinese rule in tibet .

nepali authorities reportedly made an estimated 8,350 arrests of tibetans , out of an estimated total population of some 20,000 tibetan refugees , exiles , and asylum seekers , during the period between march 10 and july 18 , 2008 .

nepal is a key transit route for tibetans seeking to reach india .

human rights watch accused the government of nepal of unnecessary and excessive use of force , arbitrary arrest , sexual assault of women during arrest , arbitrary and preventative detention and beatings of tibetans in detention , and unlawful threats to deport tibetans to china .

nepal home ministry spokesman modraj dotel stated in march 2008 that "we have given the tibetans refugee status and allow them to carry out culture events .

however , they do not have the right for political activities ... we will not allow any anti - china activities in nepal and will stop it. .

nepal is one of the world's poorest nations .

average per capita income in nepal is $427 with 55% of the population living on $1.25 per day or less .

inflation is estimated to be 8.4% and an estimated 75% of the people are engaged in agriculture .

this insulates nepal to a large degree from international economic factors , though tourism remains vulnerable to global economic downturns .

major crops include rice , wheat , maize , jute , sugarcane , and potatoes .

nearly a quarter of the national budget is externally funded through foreign aid .

nepal's gdp is expected to grow by 3.5% to 4% in 2011 .

political instability and insurgency - related violence of recent years has undermined the country's economy .

political uncertainty and continued reliance on subsistence farming could keep nepal poor for many years to come .

though the industrial base is small , nepal produces carpets , garments , and , increasingly , textiles , which now account for a majority of merchandise exports .

other major revenue sources are tourism and remittances , including those from nepal's famed gurkha soldiers serving in the british and indian armies .

nepal also has substantial hydropower potential .

government efforts to increase foreign trade and investment have been impeded by political instability , corruption , the resistance of vested interests , the small size of the economy , its remote and landlocked location , the lack of technological development , and frequent natural disasters , including floods and landslides .

nepal's infrastructure is poor and it has few commercially exploitable resources other than hydro power and cement grade limestone deposits .

nepal also suffers from low rates of investment and domestic savings .

firewood supplies an estimated 76% of total energy consumed in nepal and is used for heating and cooking .

nepal's key export partners include most significantly india , as well as the united states and germany .

while india remains nepal's key trading partner , nepal has made an effort to develop trade relations with sri lanka and pakistan .

according to the state department background notes on nepal , u.s. policy objectives toward nepal center on helping nepal build a peaceful , prosperous , and democratic society .

since 1951 , the united states has provided more than $1.2 billion in bilateral development assistance to nepal .

in recent years , annual bilateral u.s. assistance through the u.s. agency for international development and the department of state has averaged $54 million .

nepal is the united states' 161 st - largest goods trade partner , with two - way trade totaling $86 million in 2009 .

promotion of democracy and regional stability are key u.s. interests in nepal .

the united states seeks to promote democracy and civil society in nepal and provide developmental assistance to its people .

the united states has viewed the maoists' past plans to institute a one - party republic , collectivize agriculture , re - educate "class enemies" and export revolution as undermining regional stability as well as the promotion of democracy and development for nepal .

the extent to which the cpn - m remains committed to these goals is unclear .

nepal is a landlocked geopolitical buffer state , like bhutan , that is caught between the two asian giants , india and china .

india and china fought a border war in 1962 in the mountains near nepal , which led to ongoing territorial disputes .

tensions along the border have mounted from time to time with concomitant troop buildups , as was the case in december 2007 , when india moved some 6,000 troops to reinforce the india - bhutan - china border in the area of bhutan and arunachal pradesh to the east of nepal .

nepal is heavily dependent on india as the primary source of imports , its main market for exports , and for access to the sea through the port of calcutta .

a significant percentage of all foreign investment in nepal also comes from india .

moreover , the himalayan mountain range along nepal's northern border limits access to china , whereas the 500-mile southern border with india is relatively open .

india has considered nepal a strategic link in its northern border defenses .

new delhi has viewed nepali instability as a potential catalyst for the destabilization of india's own troubled northeastern states .

it is feared by some that maoist success in nepal may have a negative impact on india's own maoist problem , which has increased in recent years .

some sectors of the nepali leadership have long resented indian economic influence and have sought to establish a more independent foreign policy , which could draw nepal closer to china .

kathmandu has at times "played the china card" in seeking to counterbalance what it considers undue pressure from india .

beijing has contributed economic aid to nepal .

nepal borders tibet , whose spiritual leader , the dalai lama , has sought a degree of autonomy from beijing for the tibetan regions within china .

56 contrary to historical precedent , former prime minister prachanda made his first trip abroad as prime minister to china .

observers in india believe that china targeted the maoists as the political faction with whom china can best gain political favor .

that said , china appears to still be pressing the cpn - uml government to reach agreement on issues related to tibetan refugees and border management .

