human rights conditions in the people's republic of china ( prc ) remain a central issue in u.s. - china relations .

for many u.s. policy - makers , progress in this area represents a test of the success of u.s. engagement with china , particularly since permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status was established in 2000 .

some analysts contend that the u.s. policy of engagement with china has failed to produce meaningful political reform , and that without fundamental progress in this area , the bilateral relationship will remain unstable .

others argue that u.s. engagement has helped to accelerate economic and social change and build social and legal foundations for democracy and the advancement of human rights in the prc .

many observers argue that violations of civil liberties and cases of political and religious persecution in china have increased in recent years , the leadership remains authoritarian , and economic development , based largely upon trade with the united states , has strengthened the communist government rather than empowered the people .

other analysts and many chinese citizens contend that economic and social freedoms have grown considerably , the government's control over most aspects of people's lives has receded , opportunities for providing opinions on policy have increased , and rights activism has sprouted .

disagreements over whether progress has been made often stem from differences over which indicators are emphasized , such as central government policies , local government actions , civil society , or short - term versus long - term trends .

in many ways , growing government restrictions on political , religious , and other freedoms and greater assertion of civil rights have occurred simultaneously .

the past few years have witnessed a mixed picture regarding human rights conditions in china .

on the one hand , human rights organizations and commissions have reported worsening and deteriorating conditions in china .

none of the groups known to suffer the greatest persecution by the prc government has experienced real improvement in overall treatment , according to reports .

these groups include tibetans and ethnic uighur ( uygur ) muslims , leaders of unsanctioned christian churches , falun gong practitioners , political dissidents , and human rights defenders .

the nobel committee's award of the 2010 peace prize to jailed dissident liu xiaobo , which the prc government denounced as a western political ploy to weaken china , highlighted the chinese leadership's deep resistance to change .

on the other hand , the prc government has continued to enact laws and policies aimed at reducing some of the most egregious human rights abuses , protecting property and labor rights , and promoting government transparency and citizen input .

moreover , the official press has become more critical of some human rights abuses .

the extent of religious freedom and activity in china varies widely by region and jurisdiction .

hundreds of millions of chinese openly practice one of five officially recognized religions ( buddhism , protestantism , roman catholicism , daoism , and islam ) and religious organizations are playing growing roles in providing social and charitable services .

the prc constitution protects "normal" religious activities and those that do not "disrupt public order , impair the health of citizens or interfere with the educational system of the state. .

the government officially disapproves of religious groups that are not incorporated into official bodies .

although in many localities , unsanctioned religious congregations receive little state interference , they still are vulnerable to arbitrary restrictions and possible shutdown by authorities .

the prc government imposes especially draconian policies and measures upon many unofficial christian churches , tibetan buddhists , uighur muslims , and falun gong practitioners , largely due to the potential for these groups to become independent social forces and cultivate foreign support .

the department of state has identified china as a "country of particular concern" ( cpc ) for "particularly severe violations of religious freedom" for 12 consecutive years ( 2000-2011 ) .

in the past two decades , successive u.s. administrations have developed a comprehensive array of tactics and programs aimed toward promoting democracy , human rights , and the rule of law in china , but their effects have been felt primarily along the margins of the prc political system .

the u.s. government has pressured china from without through monitoring and openly criticizing the country's human rights record and calling upon the prc leadership to honor the rights guaranteed in its constitution , bring its policies in line with international standards , release prisoners of conscience , and undertake political reforms .

washington also has supported programs within china that aim to strengthen the rule of law , civil society , government accountability , and labor rights .

it has supported u.s. - based ngos and internet companies that monitor human rights conditions in china and help enable chinese internet users to access voice of america , radio free asia , and other blocked websites .

some experts argue that diplomatic and economic engagement with china have failed to set any real political change in motion .

in this context , some observers believe , u.s. efforts to promote democracy and human rights have been largely ineffectual .

many policy makers suggest that tangible improvements in prc human rights policies should be a condition for full diplomatic and economic relations with china as well as cooperation on other issues .

other observers counter that washington has little direct leverage on china's internal policies , and that u.s. engagement and human rights efforts have helped to set conditions in place that are conducive for progress .

they contend that sanctions and linking bilateral cooperation to prc improvements in human rights have not been very effective .

many u.s. experts and policy makers have disagreed over the best policy approaches , priorities , and methods to apply toward promoting democracy and human rights in china .

differing u.s. goals include effecting fundamental political change in china , on the one hand , and supporting incremental progress , on the other .

possible approaches range from placing human rights conditions upon the bilateral relationship to inducing change through bilateral and international engagement .

policy tools include private discussions ; sanctions ; open criticism of prc human rights policies ; coordinating international pressure ; support of and contact with dissidents ; bilateral dialogue ; human rights , democracy , and related programs in the prc ; promoting internet freedom ; public diplomacy efforts ; and monitoring and highlighting human rights abuses .

many u.s. sanctions on the prc in response to the tiananmen military crackdown in 1989 remain in effect , including some foreign aid - related restrictions , such as required "no" votes or abstentions by u.s. representatives to international financial institutions regarding loans to china ( except those that meet basic human needs ) .

since 2004 , congress has required that u.s. representatives to international financial institutions support projects in tibet only if they do not encourage the migration and settlement of non - tibetans into tibet or the transfer of tibetan - owned properties to non - tibetans .

foreign operations appropriations measures have prohibited assistance to the united nations population fund from being used to support related programs in china .

some analysts argue that the u.s. government should take principled stands against china's human rights abuses more frequently , openly , and forcefully , while others believe that such methods can undermine human rights efforts .

many prominent dissidents and former prisoners of conscience have claimed that international pressure or attention protected them from harsher treatment by prc authorities .

while some members of civil society groups have welcomed a more assertive u.s. human rights policy , others have cautioned that the chinese government often has restricted their activities when they were viewed as tied to foreign democracy efforts .

in some cases , the prc government has made small concessions in order to help reduce or avoid open u.s. or global criticism .

some analysts suggested that beijing's agreement to restart the u.s. - china human rights dialogue in 2008 was linked to the u.s. state department's decision not to include the prc in a list of "worst human rights violators. .

in other cases , the chinese leadership has reacted angrily or responded in a "tit for tat" manner when the u.s. government has publicly denounced its human rights policies , as when beijing suspended the human rights dialogue in 2004 after the bush administration sponsored an unsuccessful u.n. resolution criticizing china's human rights record .

congressional actions publicizing china's human rights violations have included numerous resolutions , bills , hearings , and visits to the prc .

various resolutions have called attention to the imprisonment and detention of political , religious , and minority figures ; persecution of tibetans , uighurs , and falun gong adherents ; censorship of the internet and other mass media ; coercive abortions ; and china's deportation of north korean refugees .

some bills have aimed to restrict u.s. - china trade on the basis of prc human rights abuses .

in july 2008 , representatives chris smith and frank wolf traveled to beijing in an effort to discuss human rights issues with prc and u.s. officials .

they also attempted to meet with several chinese human rights lawyers , whom prc security personnel prevented from seeing the congressmen .

in the 112 th congress , among other actions , representative chris smith introduced the china democracy promotion act of 2011 ( h.r .

2121 ) , "to deny the entry into the united states of certain members of the senior leadership of the government of the people's republic of china and individuals who have committed human rights abuses in the people's republic of china , and for other purposes. .

senator robert menendez introduced a resolution calling for an end to the persecution of falun gong practitioners in china ( s.res .

232 ) .

on may 13 , 2011 , the subcommittee on africa , global health , and human rights of the house committee on foreign affairs held a hearing entitled "china's latest crackdown on dissent. .

representative kevin brady has publicly called for the release of u.s. citizen xue feng , a constituent from houston , who remains imprisoned in china .

the prc remains highly sensitive to foreign criticism , but has often been able to employ its soft power — diplomatic and economic influence — in international fora in order to reduce international pressure to improve its human rights policies .

the united nations human rights council was formed in 2006 to replace the u.n. commission on human rights ( unchr ) , which had been faulted for being unduly influenced by non - democratic countries .

the united states had sponsored several resolutions at the unchr criticizing china's human rights record , but none were successful ; china was able to thwart voting on most resolutions through "no - action motions. .

the bush administration had opposed the formation of the council and declined to become a member , arguing that it did not offer improvements over the unchr and that it placed too much focus on israel .

the obama administration sought and was granted a seat on the human rights council in june 2009 .

the united nations established the universal periodic review ( upr ) mechanism by which the human rights council would assess the human rights records of all u.n. members once every four years .

the upr working group conducted a periodic review of china in february 2009 .

representatives of some countries voiced serious concerns about china's human rights record , while representatives of some developing and non - democratic countries expressed support of china .

the united states participated as an observer , but not yet a member , of the council during china's review .

the u.s. - china human rights dialogue was established in 1990 .

it is one of eight government - to - government dialogues between china and other countries on human rights .

beijing formally suspended the process in 2004 after the bush administration sponsored an unsuccessful u.n. resolution criticizing china's human rights record .

the talks were resumed in may 2008 , the first round in six years .

the obama administration has participated in two rounds , the fourteenth round held in may 2010 in washington and the fifteenth round in may 2011 in beijing .

both were co - chaired by u.s. assistant secretary of state for democracy , human rights , and labor michael posner and prc ministry of foreign affairs , department of international organizations director general chen xu .

in the 2010 meetings , topics included chinese political prisoners , freedom of religion and expression , labor rights , the rule of law , and conditions in tibet and xinjiang .

the chinese delegation also visited the u.s. supreme court and were briefed on ways in which human rights issues are handled in the united states .

during the 2011 talks , assistant secretary posner raised the obama administration's deep concerns about the prc crackdown on rights defenders and government critics .

discussions of china's "backsliding" on human rights reportedly dominated the talks , which the u.s. side described as "tough" and chinese officials portrayed as "frank and thorough. .

posner characterized the dialogue process , however , as a forum for candid discussion , not negotiation .

although no breakthroughs or concrete outcomes were reported during the latest rounds , administration officials have continued to perceive the dialogue as an important means by which to emphasize and reiterate u.s. positions on human rights issues .

they have suggested that , given the deep disagreements on human rights and other contentious issues , the holding of the dialogue and the agreement to continue them represent positive steps .

furthermore , some observers have contended , the absence of the dialogue would undermine other u.s. efforts to promote human rights in china .

some analysts have expressed concern that separating the human rights dialogue from the comprehensive security and economic dialogue ( s&ed ) has marginalized human rights issues .

some human rights experts have argued that the talks , which the prc government has referred to as serving to "enhance mutual understanding," enable beijing to deflect international criticism on human rights .

they have suggested that the dialogue should be more transparent and made conditional upon measurable human rights improvements in china .

during the past decade , the u.s. department of state and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) have administered a growing number and range of programs in china using foreign assistance funds .

between 2001 and 2010 , the united states government authorized or made available nearly $275 million for such programs , of which $229 million was devoted to human rights , democracy , rule of law , and related activities , tibetan communities , and the environment .

u.s. program areas include the following: promoting the rule of law , civil society , and democratic norms and institutions ; training legal professionals ; building the capacity of judicial institutions ; reforming the criminal justice system ; supporting sustainable livelihoods and cultural preservation in tibetan communities ; protecting the environment ; and improving the prevention , care , and treatment of hiv / aids in china .

the direct recipients of state department and usaid grants have been predominantly u.s. - based non - governmental organizations and universities .

established by the u.s. government in 1983 to promote freedom around the world , the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) is a private , non - profit organization that receives an annual appropriation from congress .

ned has played a major role in promoting democracy in china since the mid - 1980s .

activities of ned and its core institutes include supporting chinese pro - democracy organizations in the united states and hong kong , helping to advance the rule of law in china , promoting the rights of workers and women , and assisting the development of tibetan communities .

the endowment's china programs have received support through the annual foreign operations appropriation for ned ( an estimated $118 million in fy2010 ) and congressional earmarks to ned for democracy - related programs in the prc and in tibet .

in addition , the department of state has provided direct grants to ned's core institutes .

the u.s. government has encouraged prc adherence to international labor standards .

u.s. officials monitor prc compliance with the 1992 u.s. - china memorandum of understanding and 1994 statement of cooperation on safeguarding against the export of products made by prison labor .

in 2000 , the law granting permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status to china authorized the department of labor to establish programs to promote rule of law training and technical assistance related to the protection of worker rights .

since 2002 , the department of labor has supported the following activities in china: rule of law development , labor rights , legal aid , labor dispute resolution , mine safety , occupational safety and health , and hiv / aids education .

in addition , the governments of the united states and china , including the u.s .

departments of state and labor , the prc ministry of human resources and social security , and the all china federation of trade unions , have conducted exchanges and discussions on wage and hour ( payroll ) administration , unemployment insurance , pension security , labor market statistics , law enforcement , collective bargaining , and other issues .

the u.s. government has undertaken efforts to promote internet freedom , particularly in china and iran .

in 2006 , the bush administration established the global internet freedom task force ( gift ) .

continued under the obama administration , gift's duties are to monitor internet freedom around the world ; respond to challenges to internet freedom ; and expand global access to the internet .

congress appropriated $50 million for global internet freedom efforts between 2008-2010 and $20 million in 2011 .

program areas include censorship circumvention technology , internet and mobile communications security , media training and advocacy , and public policy .

the principal or target countries of such efforts are china and iran .

the broadcasting board of governors supports counter - censorship technologies that help enable internet users in china , iran , and other countries to access voice of america and other censored u.s. governmental and non - governmental websites .

in march 2010 , representatives chris smith and david wu launched the global internet freedom caucus to promote online freedom of information and expression , followed by the founding of the senate global internet freedom caucus , chaired by senators ted kaufman and sam brownback .

on april 6 , 2011 , the global online freedom act of 2011 ( h.r .

1389 ) was introduced , "to prevent united states businesses from cooperating with repressive governments in transforming the internet into a tool of censorship and surveillance , to fulfill the responsibility of the united states government to promote freedom of expression on the internet , to restore public confidence in the integrity of united states businesses , and for other purposes. .

u.s. public diplomacy programs expose chinese educated elites and youth to u.s. politics , society , culture , and academia ; sponsor exchanges ; and promote mutual understanding .

according to the department of state , approximately one - third of all chinese citizens participating in u.s. - sponsored professional exchange programs work in field related to democracy , rights , and religion .

in 2009 , 541 u.s. citizens and 948 prc citizens participated in u.s. educational and cultural and exchange programs .

the voice of america ( voa ) and radio free asia ( rfa ) provide external sources of independent or alternative news and opinion to chinese audiences .

the two media services play small but unique roles in providing tastes of u.s. - style broadcasting , journalism , and public debate in china .

voa , which offers mainly u.s. and international news , and rfa , which aims to serve as a source for domestic news that chinese media are prevented by censorship from covering , often have reported on critical world and local events to chinese audiences .

the prc government regularly jams and blocks voa and rfa mandarin , cantonese , tibetan , and uighur language broadcasts and internet sites , while voa english services receive less interference .

both voa and rfa are making efforts to upgrade their internet services and circumvention or counter - censorship technologies .

surveys commissioned by the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) have confirmed that its reach in china is relatively narrow but significant .

based upon 2009 data , the bbg estimates that roughly 0.1% of china's population listens to or views voa radio , television , and internet programs , or about 1.3 million people weekly .

voa "special english" international news programs , aimed at intermediate learners of english , are popular with many young , educated , and professional chinese .

rfa's more targeted , politically oriented audience is estimated to be one - third to one - half of voa's .

among foreign broadcasters , phoenix ( hong kong ) satellite television enjoys the greatest public awareness ( 46% ) , followed by voa ( 12% ) .

rfa is viewed in many dissident and ethnic minority communities in china as a vital source and outlet for news .

