congress passed the america creating opportunities to meaningfully promote excellence in technology , education , and science act ( p.l .

110-69 ) , known as the america competes act , in august 2007 .

in response to concerns about u.s. competitiveness , the act invest in science and engineering research , and science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education today so that the united states can enhance its potential to be more competitive with other nations in the future .

when the act passed congress , much of the fy2008 appropriations debate had already taken place .

as a consequence , fy2008 appropriations largely failed to address the new priorities enacted in the america competes act .

the fy2009 budget cycle is the first time congress debated funding for america competes act programs from the beginning of the appropriations process .

the purpose of this report is to compare the president's fy2009 budget request to the fy2009 authorized levels provided by the america competes act , and discuss congressional budget and appropriation activities .

for more general information on the america competes act , see crs report rl34328 , america competes act: programs , funding , and selected issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

the america competes act was a response to concerns that the united states may not be able to compete economically with other nations in the future .

the act mainly addresses concerns about insufficient investment in science and engineering research ; stem education ; and stem workforce development .

the america competes act authorizes an increase in federal science and engineering research funding and support for kindergarten through postdoctoral education .

the act authorizes funding increases for the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) laboratories , and the department of energy ( doe ) office of science through fy2010 .

the act also authorizes the establishment of the advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) and discovery science and engineering innovation institutes at doe .

the act also established new stem education programs at doe and the department of education ( ed ) , and enhances the authorization level for nsf stem education programs .

the america competes act is an authorization act .

new programs established by the act will not be initiated unless funded through subsequent appropriations .

similarly , increases in the authorization level of existing programs may or may not translate into increased funding .

the following section discusses some of the america competes act programs in relation to the president's fy2009 budget submission .

the fy2009 request information is based on the bush administration fy2009 congressional budget request documents from the doe and the nsf .

the ed fy2009 request information is based on the its budget summary .

the nist fy2009 request information is from the fiscal year 2009 budget of the u.s. government and a series of amendments to that budget submitted by president bush on june 6 , 2008 .

 table 1 summarizes fy2009 appropriations for america competes act programs for which the act provided an authorization of appropriation .

this section discusses several aspects of the implementation of programs funded by the fy2009 appropriations by federal agencies that members of congress might wish to monitor .

the primary challenge federal agency funds face regarding fy2009 funding is the speed with which they will be able to obligate those funds .

this is particularly true for funds provided through the arra .

at doe , the acting director of the office of science ( sc ) indicates that the following actions will be taken with arra funds: •    facility construction – funds accelerate completion of a number of ongoing construction projects for major scientific user facilities , major items of equipment for those facilities , and laboratory infrastructure .

general plant projects ( gpp ) update laboratory infrastructure and establish new laboratory research space , renovate existing laboratory space , demolish inadequate facilities , and improve utility systems across sc labs .

•    facility operations / infrastructure – funds increase operations , experimental support , and infrastructure improvements at scientific user facilities across sc .

•    research – funds support selected research programs across sc and are chosen to minimize out - year mortgages .

energy frontier research centers are included .

•    computing – funds support advanced networking ; mid - range distributed computing ; and computation partnerships in areas important to doe energy missions .

•    fellowships – a program to support graduate students and early career scientists was proposed by sc and is under discussion within doe .

within the office of science is the workforce development for teachers and scientists office .

although this office is funded at the level requested by the bush administration , neither the arra nor the explanatory statement specify any funding for specific america competes act activities within this program .

at this point , the degree to which the obama administration will agree with the bush administration regarding how these funds are implemented for specific america competes act authorized stem education programs at doe is unknown .

also at doe , arpa - e faces a unique challenge , as this new organization received its first funding prior to the appointment of a director , or hiring of any staff .

special steps may need to be taken to assure these funds are spent appropriately , and to achieve the desired outcomes .

possible policy options to respond to this concern are discussed further in crs report rl34497 , advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) : background , status , and selected issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

news report indicate that nsf plans to make the bulk of the new awards from its existing pool of applicants .

nist indicated that it is drafting a spending plan .

at ed , states must take actions to improve the collection and use of data in order to receive additional funding from arra funds .

the obama administration has set up a website , http: / / www.recovery.gov .

the agencies whose america competes act activities that received arra funds have launched subsidiary websites .

these websites are: nist: http: / / www.nist.gov / recovery / doe: http: / / www.energy.gov / recovery / science_technology.htm nsf: http: / / www.nsf.gov / recovery / .

