food and agricultural imports have increased significantly in recent years , causing some in congress to question whether the u.s. food safety system can keep pace .

a series of recent incidents have raised safety concerns about many of these foods , medicines , and other products , particularly from china , the third - largest source of u.s. agricultural and seafood imports .

in september 2008 , for example , u.s. authorities said they were more closely monitoring imports of dairy products and dairy - based ingredients from china , following reports that four infants died there and tens of thousands of other young children have been sickened by consumption of milk products , primarily infant formula , contaminated with the chemical melamine .

a reported 13,000 infants were hospitalized .

a number of countries have banned various dairy - related imports from china and / or pulled chinese products from store shelves .

in early 2007 , evidence had emerged that adulterated pet food ingredients from china had caused the deaths of many dogs and cats .

a subsequent survey counted 347 cases ( 235 cats and 112 dogs ) of pets dying from contaminated pet food .

some ingredients also were fed to u.s. food animals , although federal officials claimed that humans were not at risk .

in late june 2007 , the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) announced that it was detaining all imports of farm - raised seafood from china ( specifically , shrimp , catfish , basa , dace , and eel ) until the shippers of these products could confirm that they are free of unapproved drug residues .

chinese importers remained subject to these conditions in 2008 .

while strongly defending its record , the chinese government also has announced a variety of steps to improve the safety of its food and drug exports , including revisions in its regulations , new inspections , and the closure of problem plants .

it also signed , in late 2007 , a memorandum of agreement with the u.s. government pledging expanded cooperation to ensure the safety of many of its food and feed products .

the fda is moving to station some officials in china to provide closer oversight .

at the same time , china has blocked the importation of some types of u.s. food products , ostensibly out of food safety concerns .

these and other developments greatly heightened public and congressional scrutiny not only of china's own food safety regime , but also of the adequacy of u.s. import safeguards .

during the 110 th congress , a number of congressional committees held hearings on , or launched investigations of , food imports from china and elsewhere .

committees reviewed u.s. laws and regulations designed to ensure import safety .

many bills were introduced to clarify and expand federal authorities affecting both imported and domestic foods , and / or to reorganize agency responsibilities .

this crs report first provides information on the most recent chinese - related food safety concern , the use of melamine in dairy ingredients .

following this section , the report provides data on " u.s. - china trade trends " in agricultural trade , examines u.s. programs to monitor the safety of imports , and reports on other recent chinese food safety developments .

it concludes with a brief discussion of the congressional role .

in a food safety crisis that was continuing to unfold in late september 2008 , approximately 54,000 or more young children have been sickened in china , reportedly suffering from the consumption of milk powder contaminated with melamine .

a reported 13,000 of them were hospitalized , and four infants died .

according to various press reports , as early as mid - july 2008 , one provincial government had told chinese health officials about an unusually high number of kidney stones in babies who had all consumed the same milk product .

however , chinese authorities did not hold a news conference to announce a nationwide recall of 700 tons of milk powder until september 11 , 2008 .

melamine is an industrial chemical used in the manufacture of plastic , including kitchen products , countertops , and floor tiles .

when ingested , it can crystallize and cause kidney stones and , ultimately , kidney damage and kidney failure .

pet foods made with melamine - tainted wheat gluten imported from china into the united states were linked to the hundreds of pet deaths in 2006 and 2007 .

in the recent dairy product crisis , the focus initially was on milk powder manufactured by the chinese company sanlu , of which the new zealand dairy giant fonterra owns a 43% share .

sanlu reportedly obtains its milk from middlemen who collect it from local farmers .

investigators believe that these middlemen deliberately were adding melamine to boost product protein content readings of milk that had been watered down to increase its volume .

chinese officials said the practice could have been under way for years .

smaller traces of melamine also reportedly were found in the milk powder of 21 other chinese companies .

u.s. imports of agricultural and seafood products from all countries increased from 35.9 million metric tons ( mmt ) in 1997 to 48.7 mmt in 2007 , or by 36% .

the increase by value was 95% , from $43.8 billion in 1997 to $85.4 billion in 2007 .

among the product categories that more than doubled in volume during the period were live animals , wine / beer , fruit / vegetable juices , wheat , coffee , snack foods , and various seafood products .

not all agricultural imports are used for human food ; some products are ingredients in pet food and animal feed , in manufactured goods ( eg , rubber ) , and in the nursery plant trade .

nonetheless , many consumers are obtaining a growing portion of their diets from overseas .

in 2005 , nearly 15% of the overall volume of u.s. food consumption was imported , compared with 11% - 12% in 1995 .

the proportions ( volume ) for some food product categories were much higher: in 2005 as much as 84% of all u.s. fish and shellfish was imported ( 55% in 1995 ) ; 43% of all noncitrus fresh fruits ( 34% in 1995 ) ; 37% of all processed fruits ( 20% in 1995 ) ; and 54% of all tree nuts ( 40% in 1995 ) .

u.s. imports of chinese agricultural and seafood products have increased far more rapidly , from 433,000 metric tons ( mt ) and $1 billion in 1997 to 2.1 million mt and $4.9 billion in 2007 .

china was the third leading foreign supplier of these products to the united states in 2007 , after canada and mexico .

table 2 , below , shows the major types of food and agricultural imports from china in 2007 .

seafood products , including shrimp , other shellfish ( mollusks ) , and salmon , were the leading food - related ( i.e. , agricultural and seafood ) imports .

fruits , fruit juices , vegetables , tree nuts , teas , and spices also were high on the list .

the broader categories in table 2 mask some specific products that the united states imports in large quantities from china .

for example , a 2007 report by food and water watch , a consumer advocacy organization , noted that china became the leading exporter of seafood to the united states in 2004 .

aquaculture facilitated this export growth , particularly for shrimp and tilapia .

catfish , eel , and crab imports also rose significantly .

the united states exports much more in food and agricultural products to china than china exports to the united states .

in 2007 , u.s. food , agricultural , and seafood exports to china totaled 14.7 mmt and were valued at $8.8 billion .

table 3 , below , shows some of the major types of these u.s. exports .

many of these exports ( eg , much of the seafood ) may be sent to china as lower - value products , processed there , and returned to be consumed in the united states .

as noted , the fda oasis database does not provide answers as to whether chinese imports are any less safe than those from other countries .

nonetheless , the country has come under intense criticism in the wake of several widely publicized incidents involving adulterated food , agricultural , and medical exports .

in early 2007 pet food ingredients from china that contained the chemical melamine — apparently added to boost the ingredients' protein levels — sickened or killed many dogs and cats in north america .

the ingredients subsequently were found in some hog , chicken , and fish feed .

a risk assessment indicated the problem posed virtually no risk to humans , usda and fda officials asserted .

another incident attracted attention in early may 2007 , when the mississippi commissioner of agriculture ordered a number of stores there to stop selling catfish from china after samples tested positive for antibiotics banned in the united states .

such concerns are not new .

an fda import inspector was quoted in 1991: "some countries we almost never have problems with... .

but others , such as india , thailand , china , korea , and many countries in africa , require constant vigilance. .

a number of analysts has examined the food safety challenges china faces as it becomes a major agricultural exporter .

usda economists wrote in 2006: china emerged in the 1990s as a low - cost exporter of food products such as vegetables , apples , seafood , and poultry .

but in recent years , china's exports slowed when shipments of vegetables , poultry and shrimp were rejected for failing to meet stringent standards in japan , europe , and other countries , revealing a gap between chinese and international food safety standards .

some analysts contend that china's problems in complying with other — usually more developed — countries' safety requirements are typical of those faced by most developing countries .

they point to a number of specific obstacles the chinese have encountered in upgrading their safeguards , including: the difficulty of standardizing and monitoring production practices at the farm production level , to which many safety problems can be traced due to widespread noncompliance with existing regulations such as environmental rules , and which is composed of 200 million households typically farming on plots of one to two noncontiguous acres ; heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides to counteract intensively cultivated soils and large pest pressures ; wide use of antibiotics to control diseases in intensive livestock , poultry , and aquaculture systems ; industrialization , lax environmental controls , and untreated human and animal waste in fields and waters , which raise concerns about toxic , metal , and microbial contaminants in food ; a fragmented marketing system dominated by millions of small firms handling small volumes , often on a cash basis with no documentation or ability to trace products ; a fragmented regulatory and oversight structure involving 10 national government ministries and little coordination with lower levels of government , which often have their own , differing standards for food products ; and for many commodities and industries , outdated or nonexistent standards , or standards that are inconsistent with internationally accepted ones .

responsibility for domestic food safety is shared among a number of chinese agencies at the national , provincial , and local levels , including the national ministry of agriculture , which supervises the quality of primary agricultural products ; and the ministry of health and the state food and drug administration ( sfda ) , both with responsibilities in regulating processed foods .

quality assurance for both imports and exports is under the purview of the general administration for quality supervision , inspection and quarantine ( aqsiq ) , which also has oversight over all exports ( including food and toys ) .

however , the ministry of health and the sfda have had "minimal" roles in regulating exports .

at one 2007 hearing , an fda official observed that china has some 400,000 food or feed manufacturers .

from 12,000 to 15,000 are registered with aqsiq and are therefore eligible to export products , yet an estimated one - third of china's food exports come from non - registered establishments .

according to another expert , china officially has 448,000 food enterprises , 78% of them "cottage industries" with 10 employees or fewer .

members of congress have expressed sharp criticism both of china's food safety record and of u.s. efforts to insure the safety of that country's imports .

among panels that have examined the issue in the 110 th congress are the house agriculture committee ; the house energy and commerce committee's subcommittee on oversight and investigations , and its subcommittee on health ; the house ways and means subcommittees on oversight and on trade ; the agriculture subcommittee of the house appropriations committee ; the senate commerce committee ; and the senate health , education , labor , and pensions committee .

a number of bills with food import safety provisions were introduced in 2007 , and several passed .

for example , section 1009 in the food safety title ( x ) of the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( h.r .

3580 ; p.l .

110-85 ) , passed in september 2007 , requires an annual report to congress on the number and amount of fda - regulated food products imported by country and type of food , the number of inspectors and inspections performed , and aggregated data on inspection findings , including violations and enforcement actions .

elsewhere , division a of the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( h.r .

2764 ) , provides funding for the balance of the fiscal year for both fda and fsis .

a provision of this act prohibits fsis from implementing an fsis rule that would allow certain poultry products to be imported from china .

this proposal to permit some types of processed poultry had been published in the november 23 , 2005 , federal register .

approximately a dozen other food safety bills containing one or more provisions that address food import safety were pending in 2008 .

several focus almost exclusively on the issue .

many ( including h.r .

2997 , s. 1776 , h.r .

1148 / s. 654 , h.r .

2108 / s. 1274 , h.r .

3610 , and h.r .

3624 ) propose that importing establishments , and / or the foreign countries in which they are located , first receive formal certification from u.s. authorities that their food safety systems demonstrably provide at least the same level of safety assurances as the u.s. system .

under some of these bills , certification could be denied or revoked if foreign safeguards are found to be insufficient , unsafe imports are discovered , or foodborne illnesses are linked to such products .

a number of the bills also propose the collection of user fees from importers to cover the costs of inspecting foreign products at the borders .

some bills seek to require more physical inspections and testing by fda at the border or within other countries , to authorize more research into inspection and testing technologies , or to restrict imports to specific ports .

h.r .

3100 is another measure with import safety provisions .

s. 2418 would require usda to provide public notification whenever smuggled food products are identified in commerce , and to provide public notification on all recalled food products , using methods prescribed in the bill .

the bill would require private laboratories that conduct tests on fda - regulated imports to be certified by the agency , under a fee - funded process for certification and audits to be developed by fda .

laboratories would have to submit to the agency the results of all tests they conducted .

 ( these bills are described in more detail in crs report rl34198 , u.s. food and agricultural imports: safeguards and selected issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in 2008 , attention focused on two comprehensive safety bills , one by senator durbin ( s. 3385 ) and another a draft proposal being circulated by representative dingell .

title iii of the durbin bill is specific to imported foods , with provisions such as a requirement that each importer establish a food safety supplier verification program ; authorization to permit importers to qualify for expedited review and entry if they exceed minimum safety standards ; and explicit authority for hhs ( fda ) to require export certificates for foods determined to be of higher risk , with certificates to be issued in the foreign countries of origin by qualified "certifying entities. .

title iii also would direct fda to establish a system to accredit qualified third parties that could certify that food facilities are in compliance with u.s. standards .

such parties could include foreign governments , states , and foreign or domestic cooperatives .

other notable provisions in the durbin bill's import title would authorize hhs to enter into agreements with foreign governments that would enable fda to inspect foreign facilities and to deny entry of food imports from those facilities that impede such inspections ; give fda additional authority to review foreign food safety systems ; and require fda to develop a comprehensive plan to improve the regulatory capacities of foreign governments .

import - specific provisions in the dingell draft include a requirement for all importers of food , drugs , devices and cosmetics to register with the fda and to pay an annual fee of $10,000 ; the establishment of a corps of inspectors dedicated solely to import inspections ; more stringent country - of - origin labeling requirements ; and limiting , within five years , all imports ( of fda - regulated foods and other products ) to ports of entry that are located near a federal food testing laboratory .

there are now a total of 13 fda field laboratories but well over 300 ports of entry .

recent developments with food imports also spurred calls for implementation of mandatory country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) for fresh meats , produce and peanuts , taking effect as of september 30 , 2008 .

the omnibus 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) maintained this date , but it added more covered commodities including chicken and modified some labeling and record - keeping requirements .

 ( for further information on cool , see crs report rs22955 , country - of - origin labeling for foods , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

