the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement entered into force on may 15 , 2012 .

it is a comprehensive free trade agreement ( fta ) between the united states and colombia that eventually will eliminate tariffs and other barriers in bilateral trade in goods and services .

during the 112 th congress , president obama submitted the draft legislation on october 3 , 2011 that was then introduced by request in both houses of congress ( h.r .

3078 / s. 1641 ) to implement the u.s. - colombia fta .

on october 12 , 2011 , the house passed h.r .

3078 ( 262-167 ) and sent it to the senate .

the senate passed the legislation ( 66-33 ) on the same day .

the president signed the legislation into law on october 21 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-42 ) .

the fta entered into force after several months of work by both governments to review each other's laws and regulations related to implementation of the agreement , in addition to colombia's efforts to fulfill its set of commitments under the action plan related to labor rights .

the u.s. - colombia fta negotiations grew out of a regional effort in 2004 to produce a u.s. - andean free trade agreement between the united states and the andean countries of colombia , peru , and ecuador .

after negotiators failed to reach an agreement , colombia continued negotiations with the united states for a bilateral fta .

on february 27 , 2006 , the united states and colombia concluded the u.s. - colombia fta , and finalized the text of the agreement on july 8 , 2006 .

on august 24 , 2006 , president bush notified congress of his intention to sign the u.s. - colombia fta .

the two countries signed the agreement on november 22 , 2006 .

the colombian congress approved the agreement in june 2007 and again in october 2007 , after the agreement was modified to include new labor and environmental provisions .

since the 1990s , the countries of latin america and the caribbean have been a focus of u.s. trade policy as demonstrated by the passage of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , the u.s. - chile free trade agreement , the dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , and the u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement .

after 2004 , u.s. trade policy in the western hemisphere focused on completing trade negotiations with colombia , peru , and panama and on gaining passage of these free trade agreements by the u.s. congress .

the u.s. - peru fta was approved by congress and signed into law in december 2007 ( p.l .

110-138 ) .

the u.s. - panama fta was approved by congress shortly after the u.s. - colombia fta on october 12 , 2011 , and signed into law on october 21 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-43 ) .

it went into effect on october 31 , 2012 .

the major expectation among proponents of the free trade agreement with colombia , as with other trade agreements , is that it provides economic benefits for both the united states and colombia as trade expands between the two countries .

another expectation among proponents is that it helps improve investor confidence and increase foreign direct investment in colombia , which may bring more economic stability .

for colombia , a free trade agreement with the united states has been part of the country's overall development strategy and efforts to promote economic growth and stability .

before the u.s. - colombia fta entered into force , the u.s. average tariff on colombian goods was 3% , while colombia's average tariff on u.s. goods was 12.5% .

prior to the agreement , about 90% of u.s. imports from colombia came into the country duty - free under trade preference programs or through normal trade relations .

most of colombia's duties on u.s. exports were consolidated into three tariff levels: 0% to 5% on capital goods , industrial goods , and raw materials not produced in colombia ; 10% on manufactured goods , with some exceptions ; and 15% to 20% on consumer and "sensitive" goods .

exceptions included automobiles , which were subject to a 35% duty ; beef and rice , which were subject to an 80% duty ; and milk and cream , which were subject to a 98% duty through august 11 , 2010 .

table 1 provides a summary of colombian tariffs on goods coming from the united states before the free trade agreement entered into force .

other agricultural products fell under the andean price band system ( apbs ) , a system in which colombia applied a variable levy on imports by increasing tariffs when world prices fall , and lowering tariffs when world prices rise .

the apbs included 14 u.s. product groups and covered more than 150 tariff lines .

the system resulted in high duties , sometimes exceeding 100% , on certain u.s. exports to colombia , including corn , wheat , rice , soybeans , pork , poultry parts , cheeses , and powdered milk .

however , upon entry into force of the u.s. - colombia fta , colombia stopped imposing variable tariffs on u.s. agricultural exports .

the comprehensive free trade agreement was reached after numerous rounds of negotiations over a period of nearly two years .

some issues that took longer to resolve were related to agriculture .

colombia had been seeking lenient agriculture provisions in the agreement , arguing that the effects of liberalization on rural regions could have adverse effects on smaller farmers and drive them to coca production .

the united states agreed to give more sensitive sectors longer phase - out periods to allow colombia more time to adjust to trade liberalization .

sectors receiving the longest phase - out periods include poultry and rice .

with a population of 49 million people , colombia is the third - most populous country in latin america , after brazil and mexico .

colombia's economy , the fourth - largest economy in latin america , after brazil , mexico , and argentina , is small when compared to the u.s. economy .

colombia's gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2017 in purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis was estimated at $714 billion , or about 3.7% of u.s. gdp of $19.4 trillion in 2017 ( see table 2 ) .

colombia's exports of goods and services were equal to 14% of its gdp in 2017 , compared to 12% for the united states .

colombia's imports of goods and services equaled 19% of its gdp in 2017 , compared to 15% for the united states .

the united states is colombia's dominant trading partner in both imports and exports .

changes in colombia's market in the past 13 years , however , have resulted in gradual reductions in overall trade with the united states .

colombia has regional trade agreements with most countries in latin america , including the central america northern triangle ( guatemala , honduras , and el salvador ) ; mexico ; mercosur ( brazil , argentina , paraguay , and uruguay ) ; and chile .

an fta with canada , approved by both countries in 2010 , entered into force on august 15 , 2011 .

colombia signed an fta with the european union , which entered into force in august 2013 , and recently saw its trade agreement with south korea enter into force in july 2016 .

in addition , colombia is one of four countries comprising the pacific alliance , an evolving regional trade integration arrangement that also includes chile , mexico , and peru .

in february 2014 , the presidents of all four countries signed a protocol to eliminate tariffs on 92% of goods traded within the alliance ; the outstanding 8% of items with tariffs remaining are in the agricultural sector and will be phased out over a period of 17 years .

the united states has observer status within the alliance .

upon full implementation , the u.s. - colombia fta will likely have a small , but positive , net economic effect on the united states .

however , there will likely be some adjustment costs , especially in colombia as industries adapt to the lower trade barriers on u.s. exports to colombia .

the net overall effect on the united states is expected to be minimal because colombia's economy is very small when compared to the u.s. economy and the value of the u.s. trade with colombia is a very small percentage of overall u.s. trade .

most of the economy - wide trade effects of trade liberalization from the fta will likely arise from colombia's removal of tariff barriers and other trade restrictions .

approximately 90% of u.s. imports from colombia entered the united states duty - free before the agreement entered into force , either unconditionally or under the atpa or other u.s. provisions ; hence , the marginal effects of the fta on the u.s. economy likely will not be significant .

colombia has a long tradition of civilian , democratic rule , yet has been plagued by violence throughout its history .

the debate on u.s. free trade agreement with colombia brought attention to the issue of labor rights violations in colombia and whether the government was doing enough to curb violence , especially against union members ; address the problem of human rights abuses ; and end impunity .

numerous members of congress opposed the fta with colombia because of concerns about violence in colombia against labor union members and other human rights defenders .

policymakers who voiced opposition to the agreement generally were concerned about the impunity issue in colombia , the lack of investigations and prosecutions , and the role of the paramilitary .

the obama administration also expressed concerns about the level of violence in colombia and negotiated the "action plan related to labor rights" discussed later in this report .

some republican and democratic supporters of the fta took issue with these charges against the colombian government and contended that colombia has made significant progress in recent years to curb the violence .

some policymakers stated that colombia was a crucial ally of the united states in latin america and that if the fta with colombia did not enter into force , it would have led to further problems in the country and other latin american countries .

the colombian government responded to u.s. concerns and acknowledged that , while there continued to be killings in colombia , the situation had improved significantly since 2002 .

according to government data , assassinations of labor union activists and teachers decreased by 86% between 2002 and 2009 , from 106 murders to 28 murders .

in 2010 , however this number increased to 37 .

data on the number of labor leaders murdered may vary by source .

in 2006 , the colombian government estimated that 60 labor union members were killed , while the national labor school ( ens ) , a colombian labor organization , estimated that 78 labor union members were killed .

in 2010 , the colombian government recorded 34 murders , while the ens recorded 51 .

according to the ens , there were 24 murders of labor union members in 2012 , 36 in 2013 , and 20 in 2014 .

in 2017 , colombia's ministry of labor stated that the homicide rate for labor union members had decreased 51% between years 2010-2016 .

the ens , meanwhile pointed to a 31% jump in homicides between years 2015-2016 .

according to the government , about 475 unionists benefit from state - funded security services .

whether labor activists are being targeted because of their union activity or for other reasons is an issue that continues to be debated .

the united states and colombia negotiated to develop an "action plan related to labor rights" ( the action plan ) to help resolve the following u.s. concerns related to labor - related issues in colombia: alleged violence against colombian labor union members ; inadequate efforts to bring perpetrators of violence to justice ; and insufficient protection of workers' rights in colombia .

the governments of the united states and colombia announced the plan on april 7 , 2011 .

it includes numerous specific commitments made by the colombian government to address u.s. concerns .

the obama administration's announcement of the plan stated that the successful implementation of key elements of the plan was a precondition for the agreement to enter into force .

the plan includes a number of obligations with target dates throughout 2011 , and with a final target date of 2014 for the completion of hiring extra labor inspectors .

the most significant target dates were april 22 , 2011 , and june 15 , 2011 .

proponents of the agreement contend that it improves market access for u.s. exporters .

much of the u.s. business contends that the agreement helps increase exports of u.s. products , especially in agriculture .

the national pork producers council , for example , argues that the trade agreement provides significant new export opportunities for u.s. pork producers .

prior to passage of the agreement , u.s. exporters were concerned that they were losing market share in the colombian market as a result of passage of ftas that colombia has negotiated with other countries .

some u.s. exporters were especially concerned about the colombia - canada fta that entered into force in august 2011 .

u.s. wheat producers estimated that the agreement resulted in a decline in the u.s. share of colombia's wheat as canada's share increased .

numerous policymakers voiced concern about the united states losing market share of the colombian market if congress did not approve the u.s. - colombia fta .

over the ten years prior to the u.s. - colombia fta entering into force , colombia entered into five ftas with 12 countries in latin america , in addition to the colombia - canada fta .

colombia also signed ftas with the european union , and the efta ( iceland , liechtenstein , norway , and switzerland ) .

colombia also joined an effort to create the pacific alliance , a regional trade integration agreement with chile , mexico , and peru .

farmers in colombia and their supporters are concerned that the fta with the united states is hurting small farmers .

colombia's relatively high tariff structure of agricultural imports from the united states is to be phased out over a 19-year period under the u.s. - colombia fta , but tariffs on certain products , such as wheat and soybeans , were removed immediately upon the agreement's entry into force .

many in colombia's farming sector argue that the agreement and other liberal trade policies are "undermining local food production and putting small farmers out of business" as lower cost imports enter the colombian market .

in august 2013 , a nationwide strike in colombia lasted over a week as more than 200,000 coffee growers , dairy farmers , and other agricultural workers and their supporters blocked roads and launched protests against the u.s. - colombia fta .

protesters stated that president santos' policies of trade liberalization and privatization are forcing small farmers in colombia to compete with subsidized u.s. products and making them more vulnerable to market fluctuations .

rural farmers are concerned that these policies are decreasing their incomes and were striking to ask for more protection and services from the government .

police reportedly fired tear gas at the protestors while the army patrolled the streets .

human rights organizations contend that colombian military personnel were violating human rights of the protestors through beatings and unwarranted arrests .

some observers argue that the problems that farmers are facing go beyond the free trade agreement with the united states .

for example , farmers in rural areas face extremely expensive credit rates and production supplies .

many also face challenges in transporting their goods to the main producers because of the poor state of supply routes .

while there may be opportunities for some agriculture producers by exporting other goods , such as colombia's array of exotic fruits , the mounting challenges for smaller producers may be too large for them to handle .

in response to the protests , the president reshuffled his cabinet by replacing the agriculture minister , as well as several others .

the government also negotiated a deal with the protestors in which the government said it would do more to protect the livelihoods of farmers and modernize the agricultural sector .

the president announced that his administration would promote a "national pact" for the agriculture industry that would include all stakeholders , including those in non - agricultural sectors .

some of the concessions made to the strikers included regulated fertilizer prices , a freeze on imports of certain produce , a suspension of a resolution that made it illegal for them to produce seeds from their own harvests , and a temporary freeze on proposed price hikes for diesel fuel .

numerous u.s. labor groups oppose the u.s. - colombia fta .

they maintain that colombia's labor movement is under attack through violence , intimidation , and harassment , as well as legal channels .

the american federation of labor and congress of industrial organizations ( afl - cio ) contends that colombian labor union members continue to face daily legal challenges to their rights to organize and bargain collectively and that these challenges threaten the existence of the colombian labor movement .

while the afl - cio acknowledges that colombia has made progress in protecting union members , it continues to have concerns regarding the government's commitment to protect fundamental worker rights .

the afl - cio remained opposed to the fta even after the action plan negotiated by the obama administration and the colombian government was announced on april 6 , 2011 .

the position of colombian labor unions on passage of the u.s. - colombia fta was mixed , with some unions in favor of the agreement and others opposed .

in may 2007 , 17 colombian unionists representing the textiles , flower , mining , and other colombian industries visited the u.s. congress to speak out in favor of the agreement .

they represented the general labor confederation of colombia ( cgt ) , which acknowledged progress in protecting worker rights by the colombian government .

union members in support of the fta argued that it would provide jobs in the coffee , flower , textiles , and other industries in colombia .

they contended that the uribe administration made much progress in protecting worker rights and that the santos administration was making these positive changes "more concrete. .

some cgt representatives stated they did not believe that union workers were being targeted for their labor activities and believed that the violence was due to the ongoing conflict in colombia caused by guerrillas and paramilitaries .

other colombian union representatives , however , many of whom are government employees , spoke out against the agreement .

they argued that the fta would interfere with the colombian government's right to govern the country , and that it would have a negative effect on colombia's agriculture sector and the economy in general .

a major labor confederation in colombia , the central union of workers ( cut ) strongly opposed u.s. - colombia fta and argued that it would not be effective in protecting worker rights in colombia because the labor chapter in the agreement did not go far enough to protect worker rights .

the cut also contended that the action plan related to labor rights would not be effective in ending the impunity of crimes against unionists in colombia .

according to a cut representative , the main problem in colombia was due to the high levels of impunity and the lack of justice in the legal system .

the united states , colombia , and the ilo worked to implement the labor action plan , including supporting the establishment of a separate ministry of labor to elevate the importance of labor issues within the colombian government .

regular meetings and ongoing engagement between the two governments focus on achieving the goals of the plan , including providing technical assistance and cooperative efforts to build the institutional capacity of colombia's ministry of labor .

the two governments have recognized advances made by colombia , and at the same time continue to underscore several areas of concern , including collection of fines imposed for labor violations ; targeted inspections in priority sectors ; investigation and sanction of all forms of abusive contracting ; and violence and threats against trade unionists and continued impunity for the perpetrators .

u.s. and colombian officials continue to participate in technical - level and senior official meetings .

colombia has made progress in lowering its unemployment rate since the u.s. - colombia fta entered into force .

between 2012 and 2017 , the unemployment rate went from 10.4% to 9.4% .

the government is also making efforts to protect vulnerable groups .

the annual budget to protect union leaders increased from $100 million in 2012 to $165 million in 2013 and to $155 million in 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 .

the number of union leaders protected went from 542 in 2012 to 677 in 2014 and currently stands at around 400 .

colombia was excluded from the 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 lists of member states invited to appear for the annual international labor conference's committee on the application of standards , indicating the progress colombia has made in applying international labor standards .

exclusion from the list means that colombia is considered as a case of progress in the observation of labor rights and labor inspection .

colombia was included in the 2014 list , however .

the 2017 announcement took place in the framework of the 106 th international labor conference in geneva , switzerland , in june 2017 , which addressed labor migration governance , fair labor recruitment , and the promotion of decent work for people in conflict zones or disaster areas .

colombia continues to work with the ilo to promote job creation .

on june 6 , 2015 , the colombian government and the international labor organization ( ilo ) signed a memorandum of understanding to establish a framework for cooperation on job creation in rural areas .

the ilo director guy rider emphasized the importance of such cooperation to create jobs in the formal sector of the colombian economy and move away from informality .

some members of congress expressed concerns about implementation of the labor action plan .

an october 2013 congressional staff report to the congressional monitoring group on labor rights in colombia acknowledged that the colombian government had undertaken important measures to protect worker rights and was working at the highest levels of government to implement the plan and improve working conditions in colombia .

the report , however , stated that , despite the "best intentions" by the colombian government , the actions had not resulted in improved conditions for workers and activists in colombia .

the report's findings include the following: ( 1 ) indirect employment is still pervasive and growing ; ( 2 ) the inspection system is ineffective , and worker protections are weak ; and ( 3 ) the right to organize is being denied , and a lack of justice prevails .

prior to approval of the u.s. - colombia fta , labor groups raised concerns regarding the widespread practice of indirect employment relationships in colombia such as labor cooperatives .

colombian cooperatives are work arrangements mostly found in the sugar cane , palm oil , flower , mining , and port industries .

critics of the programs contend that these indirect employment relationships lead to a lack of protection of worker rights , wages below the minimum wage , and lower health and pension benefits .

the colombian government established such work arrangements years ago to help generate employment , but later recognized these pacts could lead to an erosion of worker rights .

subsequently , it undertook a series of reforms since 2004 .

a key law was passed by colombia's congress on december 12 , 2010 .

article 63 of ley 1429 , a law for formalizing the labor force and generating employment , has new and stronger measures to help ensure that worker rights are not being violated and to impose sanctions on businesses that are violating colombian laws .

the major changes in this law are increased sanctions on companies for violations of the law from about $25,000 to $1.5 million ; accountability for inspectors if they do not enforce the law ; and enhanced bargaining rights for workers belonging to a cooperative .

the law was to have a transition period and not enter into effect until july 2013 .

however , in an agreement with the united states under the action plan related to labor rights , the colombian government agreed to accelerate implementation of the law to june 2011 .

critics of the cooperative work arrangements contend that the arrangements lead to worker oppression , prevent workers from joining unions , and result in a denial of basic benefits .

critics also contend that certain marginalized groups , especially the afro - colombian population , are particularly vulnerable to unfair treatment .

colombian labor representatives urged congress to delay passage of the fta until colombia improved its labor laws .

labor groups contend that indirect employment relationships in colombia persist , even after implementation of the action plan , preventing workers from exercising their rights to free association and collective bargaining .

according to the colombian government , cooperatives are required by law to provide health benefits , worker rights protections , and pension benefits , but they have had numerous cases of non - compliance with the law .

the government contends that it has increased inspections and imposed sanctions for non - compliance .

for example , according to government documents , between 2007 and january 2011 , inspectors made 4,787 visits to work areas , conducted 4,052 investigations , and imposed sanctions 816 times .

as a result , the number of workers participating in cooperatives reportedly decreased from 2 million in 2007 to 600,000 in 2010 , and the number of cooperatives reportedly decreased from 12,317 to 4,555 between 2007 and 2010 .

the government also contends that in 2012 and 2013 , thousands of colombian workers have benefitted from "formalization agreements" between employers and workers as a direct result from the labor action plan .

a 2013 colombian government document states that numerous employers in the transportation , sugar cane , palm tourism , health , and other sectors reached agreement with their workers in which 15,700 workers moved from indirect working arrangements to permanent direct employment .

in response to u.s. concerns regarding worker right protection in colombia , the embassy of colombia in the united states reported on the progress that colombia made since 2001 in strengthening the rights , benefits , and security of unions .

according to progress reports issued by the embassy , government reforms in colombia since 2002 helped protect colombian worker rights to form unions , bargain collectively , and strike .

reforms include enhanced efforts to open dialogue with union members , including meetings with colombia's president and vice - president .

a september 2011 report provided indicated that homicides dropped by 45% since 2000 and homicides of union members decreased 81% during the same period .

another report stated that a protection program aimed at vulnerable groups , including union members , and the creation of the special unit at the prosecutor general's office led to an 86% reduction in the level of homicides of union members .

regarding allegations that colombia is the world's most dangerous country for union members , the colombian government contends that because other countries use different methods for tracking this data , it cannot be compared among countries .

the government argues that union membership in certain professions in colombia is almost universal , including teachers and judicial branch employees .

government representatives have stated that many of victims of violence are union members , but that does not necessarily mean that they were targeted because of their union activities .

april 2016 marked the fifth anniversary of the colombian action plan related to labor rights .

a report commemorating the occasion by the obama administration stated that colombia had made "meaningful" progress since the plan's inception .

major achievements , according to the report , include reductions in the number of fake worker cooperatives and a doubling of labor inspectors within the colombian ministry of labor .

the report also listed certain issues that require attention going forward .

according to the text , other forms of illegal subcontracting have started to replace worker cooperatives , threatening the improvements made over the past five years .

similarly , the report found that the government has been slow to address the culture of impunity that surrounds labor law violations and that the government has not been effective in collecting fines levied against employers .

the obama administration continued to work closely with colombia on issues of ongoing concern and devoted resources to address these matters .

the department of labor sent a labor attaché to be stationed at the u.s. embassy in bogota .

colombia is the second country to which dol has sent an attaché , which highlights the importance placed on worker rights in colombia .

some colombian government officials contend that the u.s. - colombia fta and the labor action plan demonstrate an unprecedented level of cooperation between two countries on labor issues and can serve as an example for other free trade agreements on labor issues .

in 2016 , the u.s. office of trade and labor affairs ( otla ) received a complaint from five colombian labor organizations and the american federation of labor and congress of industrial organizations ( afl - cio ) .

the group alleged that the colombian government had failed to comply with the terms described in the labor chapter of the u.s. - colombia fta .

those alleged failures , according to the complaint , were especially damaging , as they helped undermine the fundamental labor rights of colombian workers , particularly their rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining .

the group provided examples from the petroleum and sugar sectors to illustrate specific shortcomings .

the otla investigated the group's claims and published its findings on january 11 , 2017 .

it wrote that the colombian government , despite making progress in certain aspects of the labor question , was marred by inconsistencies that endangered recent advances in labor rights .

the otla specifically highlighted problems with the labor inspectorate , the inspection process , and the process for collecting fines .

the otla also stated that colombia's "high rate of impunity" in cases of violence against unionists , its unlawful collective labor pacts , and pervasive subcontracting practices were major obstacles for worker rights in the country .

the otla included a list of 19 recommendations in its investigation report to help the government of colombia address its labor rights issues .

these included , among other things , strengthening the ministry of labor's labor inspection system ; investigating and prosecuting cases of violence against unionists more thoroughly ; and combating abusive subcontracting practices and collective pact agreements .

the otla also encouraged the secretary of labor of the united states to "initiate consultations" with the government of colombia and indicated it would seek to involve relevant members of civil society in the consultation process .

otla stated it would reevaluate the government's progress "within nine months and thereafter , as appropriate. .

in january 2018 , otla published an assessment of the actions taken by colombia in response to the recommendations included in the january 2017 report .

according to the assessment , colombia has "taken several steps" toward satisfying some of the recommendations found in the 2017 report .

the ministry of labor , for example , mandated the installation and use of an electronic case management system in all regional offices and two special administrative offices .

it also took steps to address high turnover rates within the inspectorate body by converting close to 90 percent of its existing inspector positions into career civil servant positions .

the otla assessment also noted other changes that , if fully implemented , would contribute to addressing the issues and questions raised in the 2017 report .

some of these include remedial training for ministry employees , and a larger budget appropriation from the colombian congress for 2018 .

despite some positive signs , however , the otla warns that not all listed recommendations have received full attention .

the otla stated it would continue to monitor colombia's progress with the help of the u.s. department of state and the u.s. trade representative .

