nearly 300,000 federal employees are presently in pay systems that attempt to link pay increases to job performance — which arguably may be defined as how effectively , efficiently , or thoroughly one performs his or her job .

these pay systems vary considerably in their design , implementation , and outcomes .

all of them , however , represent attempts to create a more productive and motivated federal workforce by linking performance to promotions , pay increases , or one - time bonuses .

a basic challenge with such arrangements , whether used in the private or the public sector , is arriving at credible and objective performance measures .

in addition , while the private sector is ultimately concerned that employee performance be of such effectiveness that it contributes to the profits of a business , the federal government has other objectives to which employee performance is expected to contribute — such as the efficient , economical , and effective provision of services to those who qualify for , and are otherwise entitled to , them .

diverse considerations come to play when attempting to attract and retain the most effective federal employees — pay among them .

departments and agencies that enter into a performance - based pay system attempt to provide managers flexibility in hiring and awarding pay raises to assist them in recruiting new talent and adequately compensating existing talent .

before rewards for good performance can be provided , however , a fair and objective performance evaluation system must be created .

good performance management , as one group of authors has observed , "should be an ongoing , interactive process designed to enhance employee capability and facilitate productivity. .

performance appraisal , on the other hand , measures "an employee's contribution to the organization during a specified period of time," and is defined in 5 c.f.r .

§ 430.203 as "the process under which performance is reviewed and evaluated. .

performance management is ongoing , while performance appraisal is an event — a single moment of assessing completed job performance .

because appraisals are inherently reflections on the past , some public administration experts suggest not using them .

others point out , however , that effective appraisal criteria can help align employee performance with organizational goals , and help create a more satisfied and effective workforce by offering feedback and setting attainable goals .

ineffective criteria can prompt conflict within an organization and lead to resentment and competition among workers .

performance appraisals , therefore , should be precise and assist managers in ongoing performance management efforts .

federal employees who undergo performance appraisals are often given a performance plan , or expectations of their performance , at the beginning of their appraisal cycle .

the performance plan may include both critical and non - critical performance elements , which are defined in the code of federal regulations .

critical element means a work assignment or responsibility of such importance that unacceptable performance on the element would result in a determination that an employee's overall performance is unacceptable .

non - critical element means a dimension or aspect of individual , team , or organizational performance , exclusive of a critical element , that is used in assigning a summary level .

such elements may include , but are not limited to , objectives , goals , program plans , work plans , and other means of expressing expected performance .

at the end of the appraisal cycle , a rating official and an employee may meet for a performance evaluation , or performance rating .

an employee may have an unlimited number of critical and non - critical criteria on which he or she is measured .

the appraisal may be written as a narrative or as a collection of short statements , or an employee may be assessed on a nominal or numeric rating scale .

the national credit union administration ( ncua ) , for example , rates employees on roughly five performance criteria .

each criterion has a five - tier scale that ranges from "exceptional" to "unsatisfactory. .

performance - based pay can be beneficial to both employees and the organization , but it also may present new issues in an organization that has historically used more traditional pay structures .

in some cases , performance - based pay for federal workers may have increased retention of effective employees , increased overall employee productivity , led to cost savings for the organization , and aided in the attainment of organizational objectives in a more effective manner than under the gs pay scale .

adopting merit pay , however , takes substantial time and additional financial resources at the beginning of the implementation .

in other cases , performance - based pay in federal agencies has prompted lawsuits and mistrust of pay system administrators .

experts suggest that organizations need to plan carefully the performance appraisal system that will inform merit pay , and the system must ensure that the financial rewards for effective performance are large enough to be desirable to employees .

"with pay for performance , one needs to re - evaluate the motivation , retention , productivity , and organizational objectives continually , with the idea of fine - tuning the system to make sure rewards are aligned with desired performance. .

experts also observe that rating officials and employees must be trained in how best to use the performance - based pay system .

supervisors , employees , and their representative unions must believe that a pay system is both fair and transparent .

the most effective performance - based pay systems encourage communication throughout the process , use performance appraisals to improve performance management , and ensure that qualified employees' salaries keep pace with those of colleagues both in the public sector and in comparable private - sector positions .

if an agency or department has bargaining unit employees , the agency may observe that unions generally have disliked and litigated performance - based pay systems because they believe the structures destroy solidarity and permit arbitrary or sometimes unintentionally racist , gender - biased , or ageist outcomes .

some unions fear that performance pay will force a return to the spoils system for federal personnel — that employees may be rewarded for partisan or political behavior .

members of congress have expressed concern that giving agency managers more discretion may lead to increased misconduct by those managers .

further , the constitutional design of government leaves most agencies in the position of serving "many masters. .

as public administration professor alasdair roberts has asserted , the power struggle over control of executive branch agencies may be , in fact , a major roadblock to government - wide institution of performance - based pay .

