the purpose of contemporary , structured mentoring programs is to reduce risks by supplementing ( but not supplanting ) a youth's relationship with his or her parents .

these programs are administered by mostly adult volunteers who are recruited by youth - serving organizations , faith - based organizations , schools , and after - school programs .

some of these programs have broad youth development goals , while others focus more narrowly on a particular outcome such as reducing gang activity or substance abuse , or improving grades .

research has shown that mentoring programs have been associated with some positive youth outcomes , but that the long - term ability of mentoring to produce particular outcomes and the ability for mentored youth to sustain gains over time are less certain .

since the mid - 1990s , congress supported mentoring programs for the most vulnerable youth .

the department of justice's ( doj's ) juvenile mentoring program ( jump ) , the first such program , was implemented in 1994 to provide mentoring services for at - risk youth ages 5 to 20 .

although there is no single overarching policy today on mentoring , the federal government has supported multiple mentoring efforts for vulnerable youth since jump was discontinued in fy2003 .

previously , two mentoring programs — the mentoring children of prisoners ( mcp ) program and safe and drug free schools ( sdfs ) mentoring program — provided a significant source of federal funding for mentoring services .

however , the programs were short - lived: the mcp was administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) from fy2003 through fy2011 and the sdfs program was administered by the department of education ( ed ) from fy2002 through fy2010 .

the federal government currently funds mentoring efforts through short - term grants and initiatives , primarily carried out by doj .

doj has allocated funding for multiple initiatives through its mentoring program , including mentoring for certain vulnerable youth and research on mentoring .

in addition , the federal government has provided funding to programs with vulnerable youth that have a strong , but not exclusive , mentoring component .

youth challenge , an educational and leadership program for at - risk youth administered by the department of defense ( dod ) , helps to engage youth in work and school , and leadership opportunities .

adult mentors assist enrolled youth with their transition from the program for at least one year .

finally , federal agencies coordinate on mentoring issues .

the federal mentoring council was created in 2006 to address the ways agencies can combine resources and training and technical assistance to federally administered mentoring programs , and to serve as a clearinghouse on mentoring issues for the federal government .

the council has been inactive since 2008 .

this report begins with an overview of the goals of mentoring , including a brief discussion on research of structured mentoring programs .

the report then describes the evolution of federal policies on mentoring since the early 1990s .

the report provides an overview of the federal mentoring initiatives that are currently funded .

while additional federal programs and policies authorize funding for mentoring activities , among multiple other activities and services , such programs are not discussed in this report .

the report concludes with an overview of issues that may be of interest to congress .

these issues include the limitations of research on outcomes for mentored youth , the quality of mentoring programs , and the potential need for additional mentors .

mentoring refers to a relationship between two or more individuals in which at least one of those individuals provides guidance to the other .

in the context of this report , mentoring refers to the relationship between a youth and an adult who supports , guides , and assists the youth .

youth can receive mentoring through informal and formal relationships with adults .

informal relationships are those that develop from a young person's existing social network of teachers , coaches , and family friends .

this report focuses on formal mentoring relationships for vulnerable youth .

these relationships are cultivated through structured programs sponsored by youth - serving organizations , faith - based organizations , schools , and after - school programs .

approximately 4.5 million youth are in structured mentoring relationships .

volunteers in structured programs are recruited from communities , religious organizations , and the workplace , and undergo an intensive screening process .

youth eligible for services through structured mentoring programs are often identified as at "high risk" of certain negative outcomes .

the goal of modern structured mentoring programs is to reduce risks by supplementing , but not replacing , a youth's relationship with his or her parents .

some programs have broad youth development goals , while others focus more narrowly on a particular outcome such as reducing gang activity or substance abuse , or improving grades .

structured mentoring programs are often community based , meaning that mentored youth and adults engage in community activities ( eg , going to the museum and the park , playing sports , playing a board game , and spending time together outside of work and school ) .

other programs are characterized as school based because they take place on school grounds or some other set location , like a community center .

the co - location of mentoring programs in schools facilitates relationships with teachers , who can meet with mentors and refer youth to the programs .

mentors provide academic assistance and recreational opportunities and expose youth to opportunities that promote their cognitive and emotional development .

issues that may be relevant to any discussions around the federal role in mentoring include the limitations of research on outcomes for mentored youth and the potential need for additional mentors , particularly for vulnerable populations .

a few positive evaluations of mentoring programs may provide justification for federal support of these programs .

the study of community - based mentoring programs at select big brothers and big sisters chapters found that mentored youth were less likely than their non - mentored counterparts to use drugs and alcohol , hit someone , and skip school , among other outcomes .

the evaluation of the big brothers big sisters school - based mentoring program found similar results for mentored youth .

nonetheless , findings from these and other studies show that mentoring did not improve some academic and other tracked outcomes .

the long - term influence of mentoring for youth is unknown .

the 1995 study tracked youth for 18 months , which is among the longest periods of time mentored youth have been studied .

no study appears to address issues around how well youth transition to adulthood , such as whether they attend college or secure employment .

further , studies of mentoring programs have shown that some gains made by mentored youth , compared to their non - mentored counterparts , were short - lived and that mentored youth did not improve in certain areas .

still , these improvements , albeit temporary and limited to certain outcomes , may be a worthwhile public policy goal .

a related issue is the design of mentoring evaluations .

for example , concerns have been raised about the methodology used in the evaluation of the federal safe and drug - free schools mentoring program .

one concern was that grantees were not randomly selected .

as noted , random selection can help researchers determine whether an intervention , such as mentoring , leads to any differences in outcomes between those who receive the intervention and those who do not .

grantees involved in the study "reported being less focused on improving students' academic outcomes and on teaching risk avoidance" than grantees generally , even though these domains were the focus of the evaluation .

the grantees selected for the evaluation were more likely to serve females and more asian , latino , and pacific islander students but fewer white students than grantees overall .

the grantees were also more likely to be school districts , compared to nonprofit or community - based organizations .

they also tended to have more years of experience running school mentoring and serving more students .

these differences may in fact have led to outcomes that were not representative of the entire pool of grantees nationally .

further , some mentored youth in the sdfs mentoring program did not receive certain services that were tied to the outcomes of the study .

for example , 43% of the mentored students reported working frequently with their mentors on academics while 21% never worked on academics .

still , it is unclear whether school - based mentoring programs should be tasked with improving both academic outcomes and certain other outcomes , like reducing involvement in gangs and other risky behaviors .

another possible limitation of the sdfs mentoring evaluation was its design .

although the sdfs mentoring evaluation used random assignment , whereby youth were randomly assigned to the treatment ( i.e. , sdfs mentoring ) or the control group ( no sdfs mentoring ) , over one - third of the control group received mentoring , either from the sdfs grantee or from other organizations in the community .

this finding raises questions about the extent to which the evaluation could have assessed the true effects of the program , since the outcomes for the control group may have been influenced by the participation of some of the youth in mentoring programs .

according to the study , this may have "led to some dilution of the impacts on students compared to expectations. .

the program delivery for the sdfs mentoring program also did not appear to have adhered to certain established best practices in mentoring , such as matches that lasted one year or more and ongoing training for mentoring .

the average length of the mentoring relationship for students surveyed was 5.8 months , and on average , students were not assigned their mentor until about five weeks after they were randomly assigned to the treatment group .

ongoing training did not appear to be widely available .

approximately 41% of mentors reported that ongoing training was available after they begun meeting regularly with their students .

this is in contrast to recommendations by researchers in mentoring that mentors receive support and ongoing training after matches have been established .

still , nearly all mentors received pre - match training or orientation and talked with their program supervisor about how things were going with their mentoring relationship .

most mentors ( 62.3% ) reported having access to social workers or staff when they needed support .

in a similar vein , one of the researchers of the sdfs mentoring evaluation raised questions about the extent of technical assistance available to grantees about implementing the program: "the legislation ... and the program guidance ... said to focus on the academic and social needs of students .

beyond that , there weren't any prescriptive protocols for how people were going to conduct their mentoring activities , or how they were going to supervise their mentors , or how they were going to train their mentors. .

nonetheless , the department of education ( ed ) reported that training and technical assistance was provided by a contractor and ed staff .

a 2010 analysis of three major school - based mentoring programs , including the sdfs mentoring program , suggests that the effects of these programs are small but are in a range that "makes their interpretation subject to underlying perspectives and priorities. .

similarly , a 2011 analysis assessed findings from 73 mentoring programs and found that despite the positive effect of the programs overall , the effect is small .

in other words , some stakeholders may have reason to be skeptical of the findings from the sdfs mentoring program and other mentoring programs , while others may argue that these findings are promising and should lead to further efforts to improve mentoring interventions .

the number of mentoring programs appears to have grown in recent years , likely due to a variety of reasons , including federal attention to mentoring as an intervention for at - risk youth and promising associations between mentoring and multiple outcomes .

these programs have different formats and serve specific populations of youth .

for example , in fy2017 , doj provided funding to mentoring organizations that serve youth who are victims of commercial sexual exploitation , or are at risk of such victimization .

in light of this perceived expansion , researchers and other stakeholders caution that administrators should carefully implement mentoring programs while adhering to core practices of effective mentoring that have been informed by research .

the obama and trump administrations have allocated funding for grants to research on mentoring for at - risk youth .

mentor: a national mentoring partnership , a national mentoring organization , estimated that 9.4 million young people who are at - risk youth need a mentor .

recruiting and retaining volunteers appears to be a major challenge for mentoring organizations , including those funded through federal mentoring programs .

in its 2004 report of the safe and drug free schools mentoring program , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that new grantees had more difficulty than established grantees in recruiting and supporting mentors .

similarly , hhs reports that some mentors in organizations that received mentoring children of prisoners' funding ( which was funded from fy2003 through fy2010 ) had dropped out before being matched with a youth because of the time and energy commitment mentoring entails .

while research on mentor recruitment and retention is nascent , it reveals that mentoring organizations tend to attract individuals who are middle aged , educated , and have children in their household , and that word of mouth is among the top strategies for recruiting new volunteers .

further , individuals are likely to remain in formal mentoring programs if they feel adequately prepared to serve as mentors .

according to the research on mentoring , retention may be high when programs continually monitor mentoring relationships for effectiveness and respond to the needs of mentors .

a related issue is that the mentoring gap may be wider for special populations .

mentoring programs primarily serve youth ages 9 through 11 who come to the attention of a parent or teacher , rather than the most at - risk populations , which include , but are not limited to , older youth , runaway and homeless youth , and youth in foster care or the juvenile justice system .

recent efforts to recruit volunteers to mentor vulnerable populations have been under way , as evidenced by doj mentoring grants in recent years for selected youth populations .

nonetheless , potential mentors may still be discouraged from working with youth facing serious personal difficulties and challenges in their communities .

