the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ; the jobs act ) contained a number of provisions related to the taxation of multi - national corporations .

among these provisions were more generous rules for multinationals to use in allocating interest expense for purposes of the u.s. foreign tax credit .

this rule is referred to as the "worldwide" allocation of interest and it is the subject of this report .

the act's changes were due to take effect for tax years beginning after december 31 , 2008 .

the implementation was , subsequently , delayed until tax years beginning after december 31 , 2010 , by p.l .

110-289 .

other proposals introduced in the 110 th congress , including h.r .

5720 , h.r .

6049 , h.r .

3920 , and h.r .

7060 , would have also delayed or repealed the worldwide interest allocation rule .

in the 111 th congress , the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 , p.l .

111-92 , delayed implementation of the worldwide allocation rules to 2018 , while the hiring incentives to restore employment act , p.l .

111-147 , further delayed implementation to 2021 .

another proposal in the 111 th congress , h.r .

3962 , the affordable healthcare for america act of 2009 , would repeal the worldwide allocation rule .

the jobs act's interest allocation provision was designed to correct what some argue was an imperfection in the design of the foreign tax credit rules .

in general , the tax code places a limit on the foreign tax credit .

to calculate the limit , firms are required to separate interest and other expenses according to source — foreign or domestic .

because of effects detailed below , the more interest that is assigned to domestic sources , the more foreign tax credits a firm can claim and the lower its u.s. tax liability .

some believed that the prior law's approach unduly left taxpayers exposed to double taxation of foreign - source income .

the jobs act addressed this perceived flaw .

the analysis here indicates that worldwide allocation rules , while losing revenue , would likely be better aligned with the objective of the foreign tax credit .

tax planning techniques could undermine this objective — and lead to increased revenue loss and efficiency costs .

the act contained another relevant modification to the interest allocation rules , that would increase a firm's creditable taxes .

specifically , the provision expands the subgroup election for banks to include other financial intermediaries , including insurance companies — which allows for the separate calculation of interest allocation .

this provision could insulate some firms from a portion of the interest allocation rules , and it is at odds with the theory underlying the act's other provisions .

the united states — in principle — taxes its resident corporations and individuals on their worldwide income , regardless of where it is earned , under the residence rule .

the foreign tax credit and deferral are the key structural pieces of the u.s. taxation of foreign - source income .

the foreign tax credit provisions generally permit u.s. taxpayers to credit foreign taxes they pay against u.s. taxes they would otherwise owe — on a dollar - for - dollar basis .

for example , a u.s. corporation chartered in north dakota is potentially subject to u.s. tax on income it earns outside the united states .

concurrently , however , the foreign countries where the income is earned generally tax that income , even if it is earned by a foreign ( u.s. in this case ) investor , under the source principle .

in the absence of the foreign tax credit , this income would potentially face double - taxation and possibly very high tax rates .

the foreign tax credit , however , generally alleviates the possibility of double - taxation of foreign - source income .

with the credit , the u.s. concedes that the country where income is earned has the primary right to tax that income and collect the tax revenue that it generates .

this results in the u.s. collecting only the u.s. tax due after paying foreign taxes — if positive .

as such , the foreign tax credit helps to define the u.s. tax jurisdiction and it is not a tax expenditure favoring selected groups .

while theoretically straight - forward , overlapping jurisdictions introduce numerous complications .

to better understand interest allocation rules , it is useful to first examine two key structural pieces: deferral and the foreign tax credit limitation .

whether an expense is deducted from foreign or u.s. income matters for tax purposes .

the tax code , therefore , contains rules for allocating deductions between foreign and u.s. sources .

in the case of interest expense , the rules generally are based on the approach that money is fungible and that interest expense is properly attributable to all business activities and property of a taxpayer , regardless of any specific purpose for incurring an obligation on which interest is paid .

for example , a u.s. parent company might borrow in the u.s. and use the funds to increase its equity stake in a foreign subsidiary , which uses those borrowed funds to make its own investments .

conversely , a u.s. firm could borrow domestically to finance domestic investment — investment that might otherwise have been financed through repatriated earnings .

in this case , domestic borrowing may support both domestic and foreign investment .

while it is beyond the scope of this report to determine if the fungibility of debt is a reasonable assumption , except to recognize that it underlies both the current interest allocation rules and those enacted by the jobs act , some facts on each side are worth noting .

first , in favor of fungibility , corporations are legal entities , and not economic ones .

as a result , corporate boundaries can be easily manipulated for financial gain .

conversely , the existence of cross - jurisdictional interest rate differentials suggest that fungibility may not hold between all jurisdictions .

current law applies the fungibility principle in a manner sometimes referred to as "waters edge" allocation .

under this system , foreign subsidiaries are not explicitly included in the allocation .

this has two implications for the allocation formula .

first , only a domestic parent's equity stake in its foreign subsidiary is counted as an asset — excluding the foreign subsidiary's assets financed by debt .

the parent's assets , in contrast , are all included in the calculation — whether financed by equity or debt .

secondly , the subsidiary's interest expense is automatically allocated to foreign sources .

this occurs since the subsidiary's interest expense reduces dividend payments to the parent , which are all allocated to foreign sources .

along with allowing firms to allocate interest expense on the basis of worldwide groups , the jobs act contained an additional related change .

current law contains a subgroup election for firms that are banks .

the act expands this election to a wider range of financial intermediaries , including finance companies and insurance firms .

such an election could , potentially , reduce the amount of interest a worldwide group is required to allocate to foreign sources .

for example , a firm that has a financial subsidiary which conducts genuine financial intermediation could arrange to have a portion of the non - financial part of the firms' borrowing undertaken by the subsidiary .

if the financial subsidiary's assets are principally located in the u.s. , borrowing through the subsidiary could be insulated from allocation rules .

more directly stated , firms could distribute their borrowing among related subsidiaries to minimize foreign allocations of interest .

the act does contain anti - abuse provisions whose apparent intent is to limit such arrangements .

nonetheless , it remains to be seen if the anti - abuse provisions will be effective in limiting such arrangements .

as mentioned above , the jobs act contains a number of rules intended to limit the extent to which the expansion of the bank group election can be used to avoid interest allocation .

for example , the act would limit the extent to which a subgroup member can increase the portion of its earnings it pays to the parent as dividends .

this rule is , presumably , designed to limit the means by which a subgroup can borrow and subsequently transmit debt to its parent .

if the subgroup is new , however , the rules for calculating average dividends are confined to the subgroups' years in existence , which may provide a mechanism for avoiding the limitation .

in short , the act's subgroup election provision appears to present potential opportunities for firms to avoid the allocation of interest according to the fungibility principle .

unlike the act's other changes in the allocation rules ( discussed above ) , this feature of the bill appears to move the system away from the "theoretically pure" foreign tax credit limitation under the assumption of fungibility .

the analysis in this report suggests that there are benefits and disadvantages to worldwide allocation of interest enacted by the jobs act .

if debt is fungible , worldwide allocation is the most accurate method of ensuring that the u.s. foreign tax credit is used for its intended purpose: allowing the foreign tax credit to offset the full share of u.s. pre - credit tax that falls on foreign source income .

absent additional rules , however , opportunities for tax planning may limit the achievement of this objective .

also , like the foreign tax credit limit itself , allocation rules tend to contribute to the distortions that discourage equity investment abroad .

adopting worldwide allocation rules could , in several ways , increase these distortions relative to current law .

while the distortions created by current law can be viewed as a cost of collecting taxes — since they increase u.s. revenue — and potential increased distortion associated with worldwide rules cannot since they decrease u.s. revenue .

finally , the subgroup election provision in the jobs act does not appear consistent with the general objective of the foreign tax credit limit or the act's own worldwide allocation regime .

this subgroup election may permit firms to reduce the current domestic interest allocation costs , while achieving foreign interest allocation benefits .

this appendix derives the allocation rules that most accurately support the foreign tax credit limitation — the rules that most accurately limit creditable foreign taxes to u.s. tax on foreign - source income .

while this ideal rule is one under which the location of borrowing does not affect the foreign tax credit limit for u.s. tax purposes , taxpayers could still change their overall ( that is , foreign and u.s. combined ) tax liability by switching the location of borrowing .

the appendix continues by showing how the incentive to borrow abroad is affected by allocation rules .

the discussion concludes with an analysis of how the allocation rules affect investment .

deriving accurate allocation rules the shape that accurate allocation rules take depends , crucially , upon the assumption of debt fungibility .

as noted in the text , it is unclear whether fungibility accurately represents real world experiences .

since both current and enacted law both make this assumption , however , fungibility will be assumed — that debt supports investment in all locations , regardless of the borrowing locale .

with the assumption of fungibility , a shift in the location of borrowing should not shift the location of investment .

further , since investment produces income , a shift in the location of borrowing should not alter the proportion of income earned at home or abroad .

thus , for the foreign tax credit limit to be accurate , a firm should not be able to affect the limit by shifting its location of borrowing .

the basic limitation without allocation of interest assume a multinational's u.s. tax liability can be expressed as: ( 1 ) u.s. tax = t ( y + d / ( 1 - t f ) - ib d ) - td / ( 1 - t f ) ; where t is the u.s. tax rate , y is u.s. - source income before interest deductions , d is dividends from a foreign subsidiary , t f is the foreign tax rate , i is the interest rate , and b d is domestic borrowing .

the equation's first term represents the tax on worldwide income , with dividends grossed up to a pre - foreign tax basis , while the second term is the foreign tax credit , which is limited to the u.s. tax on grossed up dividends .

the foreign tax credit is also limited to actual foreign taxes paid ( or deemed paid , in the case of dividends ) .

as a result , changing the base of the foreign tax credit only has an effect when a company is in an "excess credit" position — where the foreign tax rate is greater than the u.s. rate .

for this analysis , foreign subsidiary dividends are defined in terms of foreign earnings and other elements as: ( 2 ) y f = d + r + ib f + tf ( y f - ib f ) ; where y f is foreign earnings before deducting interest , r is retained earnings , and b f is borrowing by the foreign subsidiary .

in all cases , the amounts would be scaled back for a subsidiary that isn't wholly owned ( eg , if a subsidiary is 90 percent owned , then all three values would be multiplied by 0.9 ) .

foreign earnings are the sum of dividends , retained earnings , interest payments , and foreign taxes .

therefore: ( 3 ) d / ( 1 - t f ) = y f - r / ( 1 - tf ) - ib f .

thus , equation ( 1 ) can be rewritten: ( 4 ) u.s. tax - t ( y + y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f - ib d ) - t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f ) .

for a firm in an excess credit position , the limitation , l , is the last term: ( 5 ) l = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f ) .

in this world , without allocation rules that require the allocation of domestic interest to foreign sources , the taxpayer could increase the limitation — and reduce their taxes — by shifting borrowing to their subsidiary ( by reducing ib f and increasing ib d by equal amounts ) .

clearly , if fungibility is assumed , requiring no allocation rules does not result in an effective limitation .

adjusting for the fungibility of borrowing: the ideal for the limitation to be unaffected by the location of borrowing , geographic - specific borrowing cannot be a parameter in equation ( 5 ) .

that is , neither b f nor b d can appear in the equation .

this condition is satisfied , incompletely , by replacing the term ib f in the equation with ib t .

in this formulation , the limitation could be unaffected by the borrowing location with an allocation rule allocating all borrowing costs to foreign income , or , alternatively , to domestic income .

clearly , this is at odds with the assumption of fungibility .

that is , if a firm has both foreign and domestic investment supported by borrowing , some portion of the interest on total borrowing must be allocated to foreign sources and that proportion must be independent of the borrowing locale .

thus , assuming fungibility , an accurate limitation can be written as: ( 6 ) l = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - iab t ) ; where a is the portion of interest allocated to foreign sources .

fungibility requires that "a" cannot be an arbitrarily chosen fraction ( 50% , for example ) , and that only the location of assets defines "a" .

thus: ( 7 ) a = k f / k t .

the ideal limitation can , therefore , be defined as: ( 8 ) l* = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - i ( ( k f / k t ) b t ) ) .

next , we compare the current law's allocation and the jobs act's rules to this ideal formula .

adjusting for the fungibility of borrowing: current law and the jobs act as noted in the text , current law requires part of domestic borrowing to be allocated to foreign sources .

however , because the subsidiary's own interest payments reduce repatriated earnings and not domestic - source income , all the subsidiary's borrowing costs are automatically allocated to foreign sources .

thus the parameter b t in the ideal limitation , equation ( 8 ) , above , is replaced by b d .

in addition , not all the subsidiaries' assets are included in the allocation rule , a — only the parent's equity stake in the subsidiary is included .

thus , ( 9 ) a = ( k f - b f ) / ( k t - b f ) and ( 10 ) l = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f - i ( ( k f - b f ) / ( k t - b f ) ) b d ) , and since b d = b t - b f , ( 11 ) l = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f - i ( ( k f - b f ) / ( k t - b f ) ) ( b t - b f ) ) .

given that the limitation is , clearly , dependent on the location of borrowing — i.e .

the respective values of b f and b d , current law violates the principle of fungibility .

that is , a taxpayer can increase or decrease the limitation by shifting the borrowing location .

while a full discussion of this topic is in the following section , below , note for now that dl / db f > 0 and that a taxpayer can increase their limitation by shifting borrowing from domestic to foreign locations .

given current law violates the principle of fungibility , let's turn to the jobs act's rules .

as noted in the text , all assets of the subsidiary are included in the allocation formula .

thus , equation ( 7 ) is unchanged .

additionally , the interest expense of the subsidiary is also subject to allocation — both b d , as in equation ( 9 ) , and b f are multiplied by a .

this can be accomplished by allocating part of domestic interest to foreign sources and part of foreign interest to domestic sources — since foreign borrowing has already been netted out of the dividend .

thus , the limitation equation can be expressed as: ( 12 ) l = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f - ib d ( k f / k t ) + ib f ( k d / k t ) ) .

this simplifies to: ( 13 ) l = l* = t ( y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - i ( ( k f / k t ) b t ) ) , which is the ideal limitation formula , equation ( 8 ) .

as it is consistent with fungibility , the value of the limitation is independent of the location of borrowing , and it is proportional to the location of investment .

effects on borrowing location in order to examine the effects of tax regimes on borrowing locale , we depart from the base model by adding foreign taxes .

to simplify the analysis , we assume a single tax rate applies to both dividends and retained earnings .

this analysis assumes that foreign tax authorities do not make allocation adjustments .

thus the total tax paid by a company can be expressed as: ( 14 ) total tax = t ( y + y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib t ) - t ( y f - r / ( ( 1-t f ) - ib f - i ( ( b t - b f ) ( k f - b f ) / ( k t - b f ) ) + t f ( y f - ib f ) where t f is the foreign tax rate .

this rule can be contrasted with the circumstances where there is no allocation rule in place: ( 15 ) total tax = t ( y + y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib t ) - t ( y f - r / ( ( 1-t f ) - ib f ) + t f ( y f - ib f ) and the worldwide allocation rule , contained in the jobs act: ( 16 ) total tax = t ( y + y f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib t ) - t ( y f - r / ( ( 1-t f ) - i ( k f / k t ) b t ) + t f ( y f - ib f ) .

totally differentiating equation ( 14 ) gives us the effect of shifting a small amount of debt from domestic to foreign use , under current law , as: ( 17 ) change in tax = - t f i + ti ( k t - k f ) * ( k t - b t ) * change in foreign debt ( k t - b f ) ( k t - b f ) .

when there is no allocation rule , the result is: ( 18 ) change in tax = ( - t f i + ti ) * change in foreign debt , and finally , with worldwide allocation: ( 19 ) change in tax = - t f i * change in foreign debt .

note that the largest incentive to borrow abroad occurs with the worldwide allocation , and the smallest incentive occurs with no allocation rules .

without allocation rules , the savings from shifting debt abroad is the difference between the tax savings from the foreign deduction and the tax savings from the domestic deduction .

with worldwide allocation , worldwide interest is allocated the same way regardless of where it originates , so that the only effects that multiply the expression ti , each one less than one , that dilute but do not eliminate the effect of the foreign tax credit limit .

the first term is the direct effect from allocating domestic interest and the second is the effect of using net rather than gross foreign assets in the allocation formula .

effects on equity investment next , let us consider the effect of allocation rules on equity investment .

to do so , we change the notation slightly to reflect the idea that gross income is the return on capital multiplied by the capital stock .

under current law , the total tax of a firm can be expressed as: ( 20 ) total tax = t ( rk d + r f k f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib t ) - t ( r f k f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f - i ( b t - b f ) ( k f - b f ) / ( k t - b f ) ) + t f ( r f k f - ib f ) where r is the return on u.s. capital and r f is the return to foreign capital , both on a before - tax basis .

this rule can be contrasted with the circumstances where there is no allocation rule at all: ( 21 ) total tax = t ( rk d + r f k f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib t ) - t ( r f k f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib f ) + t f ( r f k f - ib f ) and the jobs act rule , with worldwide allocation: ( 22 ) total tax = t ( rk d + r f k f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ib t ) - t ( r f k f - r / ( 1 - t f ) - ( ib t k f / k t ) ) + t f ( r f k f - ib f ) .

in order to isolate the tax effect , consider the case where the pretax returns are equal — in practice they will not equal after the consideration of tax rules .

further , consider the case where very small , but slightly , different taxes are added to this , previously , case without taxes .

next , we totally differentiating equations ( 20 ) - ( 22 ) with respect to k f , which holds the firm's total capital stock fixed .

the change in the tax liability under current law with a reallocation of capital is: ( 23 ) change in tax = ( ( t f - t ) r + ti ( b d ) ) * change in foreign capital ( k t - b f * ) .

when there are no allocation rules: ( 24 ) change in tax = ( t f - t ) r * change in foreign capital , and under worldwide allocation rules: ( 25 ) change in tax = ( ( t f - t ) + ti b t ) * change in foreign capital .

k t in all three cases , the tax systems discourage investment abroad , due to the high tax country .

allocation rules magnify this effect because the adjustment to the foreign tax credit limit increases with larger shares of the capital stock located abroad .

in this case , however , the worldwide allocation rule will further discourage investment abroad because of a more powerful effect on the allocation rule .

as a result , worldwide allocation is likely to be less efficient than domestic interest allocation with respect to disincentives for equity investment .

effects on investment financed by debt and equity finally , we consider the effects on investment abroad that are financed by both debt and equity .

assume that the debt to asset ratio of the subsidiary is fixed , and that the total assets and debt of the parent and subsidiary are also fixed .

to consider the effects on equity investment , we again adjust our notation to reflect idea that gross income is the return on capital multiplied by the capital stock .

the equations from the previous section are modified to allow borrowing to change when the capital stock is altered .

in examining the change in taxes for a given change in foreign assets , the tax effects of the change in foreign debt are incorporated .

it is assumed that b f bears a constant relationship of k f .

if the initial ratio of foreign debt to foreign assets is defined as the constant a , then b f - ak f , and a change in b f is equal to a times the change in k f .

that assumption , along with the preceding assumption , allows the following derivations .

under current law the effect of the change in tax can be expressed as: ( 26 ) change in tax = ( ( t f - t ) ® - ib f / k f + ti [ ( b t - b f ) / ( k t - b f ) ][ ( - tib f ) / ( k f ) ] [ ( ( k t - k f ) / ( k t - b f ) ) + ( ( k t - k f ) ( b t - b f ) ) / ( k t - b f ) 2 ] * change in foreign capital , without an allocation rule: ( 27 ) change in tax = ( t f - t ) ® - ib f / k f ) * change in foreign capital , and with worldwide allocation: ( 28 ) change in tax = ( t f - t ) ® - ib f / k f ) + ti[ ( b t / k t ) - ( b f / k f ) ] * change in foreign capital .

again , in all three cases , the tax systems discourage investment abroad , due to the high tax country , although this effect is moderated by the deduction for debt financed investment .

the worldwide allocation rule — when debt to asset ratios are lower abroad than in the united states — would discourage investment to a lesser amount than equity investment .

this moderation of effect results from a small allocation being made as some of the u.s. interest is shifted abroad .

since the worldwide allocation rule would not apply when foreign debt to equity ratios are higher , the worldwide allocation rule would either further discourage investment abroad or have no effect .

in contrast , the current allocation rule may either encourage or discourage investment abroad .

the first term is unchanged from the previous section , and reflects the effect of allocating more existing domestic interest abroad as the capital stock increases .

the second term reflects the fact that some interest has shifted abroad and would not be allocated .

if domestic debt is small relative to foreign debt , then the current allocation rule would , simultaneously , raise u.s. revenue and discourage foreign investment in high tax jurisdictions .

