in august 2007 , congress authorized the establishment of the advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) to support transformational energy technology research projects with the goal of enhancing the nation's economic and energy security .

modeled on the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) in the department of defense ( dod ) , arpa - e would be a new organization within the department of energy ( doe ) ( see box 1 below ) .

as outlined in the america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 , §5012 ) , the goal of arpa - e is to enhance the economic and energy security of the united states through the development of technologies that reduce energy imports , reduce energy - related greenhouse gas emissions , and improve energy efficiency in all economic sectors .

in addition , arpa - e would aim to ensure that the united states is a technical leader in developing and deploying advanced energy technologies .

according to the act , arpa - e would achieve this goal by identifying and promoting revolutionary advances in fundamental sciences and translating scientific discoveries and cutting - edge inventions into technological innovations .

arpa - e would focus its efforts on accelerating transformational technological advances in areas that industry , by itself , is not likely to undertake due to technical and financial uncertainty .

as stated in §5012 , the agency's programs would accelerate novel early - stage energy research with possible technology applications ; the development of techniques , processes , and technologies and related testing and evaluation ; research and development ( r&d ) of manufacturing processes for novel energy technologies ; and coordination with nongovernmental entities to demonstrate technologies and research applications to facilitate technology transfer .

to achieve these goals , arpa - e would make awards to academic institutions , companies , research foundations , and trade and industry research collaborations .

in addition , awards may be made to consortia of these organizations , and these consortia could include federally funded research and development centers ( ffrdcs ) .

according to the act , the criteria for selecting projects would include novelty , scientific and technical merit , the demonstrated capability of the applicant to successfully carry out the proposed project , future commercial applications of the project , and the feasibility of partnering with one or more commercial entities , as well as additional criteria established by the director of arpa - e .

congress authorized $300 million for arpa - e in fy2008 and "such sums as are necessary" for fy2009 and fy2010 .

congress subsequently appropriated no funds for fy2008 .

the bush administration requested no funds for arpa - e in fy2009 , and took no actions to begin its operations .

in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , congress provided arpa - e funding of $400 million which supplemented fy2009 funds of $15 million ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

as a result , arpa - e's received its initial funding of $415 million in fy2009 .

the arra funds are available for obligation until september 30 , 2010 .

the obama administration has proposed arpa - e receive funding of $10 million in fy2010 .

the house committee on appropriations declined to provide this funding .

no senate action has taken place .

president obama announced the establishment of arpa - e in a speech at the national academy of sciences .

shortly afterward , the obama administration released a funding opportunity announcement soliciting concept papers .

the administration has not announced arpa - e's director or organization .

these activities are discussed below .

according to the america competes act , arpa - e has the general goal ( a ) to enhance the economic and energy security of the united states through the development of energy technologies that result in ( i ) reductions of imports of energy from foreign sources ; ( ii ) reductions of energy - related emissions , including greenhouse gases ; and ( iii ) improvement in the energy efficiency of all economic sectors ; and ( b ) to ensure that the united states maintains a technological lead in developing and deploying advanced energy technologies .

arpa - e is to achieve these goals through energy technology projects by — ( a ) identifying and promoting revolutionary advances in fundamental sciences ; ( b ) translating scientific discoveries and cutting - edge inventions into technological innovations ; and ( c ) accelerating transformational technological advances in areas that industry by itself is not likely to undertake because of technical and financial uncertainty .

although there may be interim steps along the way , some experts believe that the end goal for arpa - e research is a "proof of concept," that is , "evidence ( usually deriving from an experiment or pilot project ) demonstrating that a design concept , business idea , etc. , is feasible. .

although smaller in scale than arpa - e , university proof of concept centers , whose goal is to accelerate the commercialization of university innovations without being part of the commercialization effort , might provide a useful example for arpa - e as to how to incorporate the views of customers into the research process .

a study by the kauffman foundation examined two proof of concept centers they deemed successful: the massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) deshpande center for technological innovation and the university of california , san diego ( uscd ) von liebig center .

mit's deshpande center investment of $9.0 million since 2002 has resulted in 1 licensing agreement , 18 startup companies , $140 million in outside financing , and over 200 jobs .

ucsd's von liebig center project investment of $3.8 million since 2001 has resulted in 22 license agreements and 16 start - up companies , which have attracted more than $78 million in subsequent capital from the private sector and created over 130 new jobs .

at mit , business community volunteers called "catalysts" provide guidance to researchers .

the catalyst volunteers are individuals with experience relevant to innovation , technology commercialization , and entrepreneurship , but do not represent any company interests .

the approximately 50 catalysts are chosen based on their "experience in commercializing early stage technologies and / or mentoring researchers and entrepreneurs , and industry expertise ; willingness to proactively provide assistance to mit research teams ; willingness to abide by the time commitment , confidentiality , and conflict of interest guidelines ; and commitment to the interests of mit researchers and the deshpande center. .

catalysts are also members , along with mit staff , of a multidisciplinary committee that evaluates all applications for research funds .

once selected by the committee , a catalyst works with researchers to submit a full proposal .

at ucsd's von liebig center , two kinds of mentors provide guidance to researchers: technology and business advisors , and champion entrepreneurs .

the approximately six technology and business advisors are seasoned entrepreneurs , paid discounted wages by ucsd , to help project teams develop and implement commercialization strategies .

champion entrepreneurs are venture capitalists , experienced entrepreneurs , and angel investors who lead projects through the commercialization pipeline and help start a company around it .

advisors at ucsd are assigned to faculty after they submit a statement of intent to help them prepare a proposal and presentation to a review panel that consists of both technical and business experts .

projects are selected based on the technology's novelty and need , the potential market size , the market definition , the technology's maturity , the utility of the grant , the intellectual property position , and the principal investigator's credibility .

the america competes act mandates that arpa - e be managed by a presidentially appointed director , confirmed by the senate , who would report to the secretary of energy , presumably to facilitate the independence of arpa - e within doe .

the act also states that no other programs within doe will report to the arpa - e director .

as a result , the head of arpa - e could not also be head of another organization such as the office of science or one of the energy technology offices , which focus on specific topics such as energy efficiency and renewable energy , fossil energy , nuclear energy , and electricity delivery and energy reliability .

in addition , one key consideration that the arpa - e director may face is to identify projects that complement those of the office of science and the energy technology offices .

as discussed earlier , the general concept for management of arpa - e is based on that of darpa ( see box 2 above ) .

since 2002 , two federal organizations have been established based on the darpa model: the homeland security advanced research project agency ( hsarpa ) and the intelligence advanced research projects activity ( iarpa ) .

the following are the likely events needed to take place , not necessarily in this order , to establish arpa - e and begin its operation based on the steps taken by iarpa when it began operation .

concerned members of congress may be involved in oversight of these activities to ensure that arpa - e meets the goals outlined in the america competes act .

nomination of arpa - e director by president obama .

conduct senate hearing and vote on confirmation of arpa - e director .

identify location for arpa - e operations , perhaps temporary until permanent space is determined .

employ senior administrative staff .

develop plan for arpa - e operations including organization design , r&d initiatives , and related program offices .

recruit program managers suited to managing the program offices .

post pre - solicitation announcement for each program host proposer's day for each program to familiarize participants with arpa - e and its interest in a given program ; promote an understanding of proposal submission requirements and process ; and foster discussion of synergistic capabilities among potential program participants soliciting proposals .

review proposals and make awards .

as stated by one expert , "standing up new energy technologies is a major and complex challenge , perhaps the most difficult technology stand - up challenge we have faced .

ever. .

if so , congress might wish to ensure the implementation of arpa - e meets the goals and principles provided in the america competes act .

several management design elements to monitor include the timely appointment of a director for arpa - e , recruitment of highly qualified technical program managers familiar with the darpa process , maintenance of autonomy from doe's current activities , and sufficient funding and organizational flexibility .

in terms of the research funded , key aspects to monitor are the focus on high - risk , high - payoff , possibly transformational research that has clearly defined and measurable 3-5 year end - goals rather than incremental research or that focused on "quick wins ; " full and open competition , so that the best projects are selected ; and perhaps most challenging of all , customer involvement so that the outcomes from arpa - e's projects have a transition strategy to an end user .

besides the fy2009 appropriations activity described earlier and the likelihood that funding for the arpa - e in fy2010 will be discussed by congress , members of congress have introduced a number of bills that would impact arpa - e: title iv , entitled energy innovation and workforce development , of a draft senate committee on energy and natural resources bill entitled america clean energy leadership act of 2009 , would amend the america competes act to give contracting authority to arpa - e separate from the department , make technical corrections to reporting requirements , and authorize arpa - e through 2020 .

this bill was approved by the senate energy and natural resources committee on june 17 , 2009 .

the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 ) ,as passed by the house , would provide 1.05% of the cap and trade allowances from 2012 to 2050 to fund arpa - e .

in addition , it would require that the secretary of energy coordinate the innovation activities of clean energy innovation centers , created by that proposed act , with arpa - e , national laboratories , and efrcs , and within industry , and to avoid duplication of research , by annually issuing guidance regarding national energy research and development priorities and strategic objectives ; and convening a conference of doe staff and others to share research results , program plans , and opportunities for collaboration .

the american conservation and clean energy independence act ( h.r .

2227 ) would modify the strategic petroleum reserve and use funds generated as a result of this action to fund arpa - e and a number of other energy - related activities .

besides overseeing the establishment of arpa - e and its funding , an issue for congress is how arpa - e will differ from existing doe office of science activities , including the new energy frontier research centers , the doe energy technology offices , and the energy innovation hubs proposed in the fy2010 budget .

in addition , several bills introduced in congress would either provide arpa - e with additional authority or a source of funds , or require the secretary of energy to monitor its interaction with other proposed doe research and development organizations .

the darpa model has frequently been proposed as a structure for improving the management of federal r&d .

for example , an "advanced civilian technology agency" was proposed in the 100 th and 101 st congresses .

in 1992 , an nas report recommended that the government consider a civilian technology corporation or a civilian technology agency in limited areas including energy research .

in 1993 , the progressive policy institute made a similar proposal .

in 1992 , presidential candidate bill clinton and senator al gore proposed the creation of a civilian advanced research agency to support research on renewable technologies and renewable fuels .

from 1977-2000 , doe had an advanced energy projects ( aep ) division to "explore the feasibility of novel , energy - related concepts that evolve from advances in basic research," and "high - risk , exploratory concepts which do not readily fit into an existing doe program area but which could lead to applications that span scientific or technical disciplines. .

in 1995 , doe placed aep's activities under a new computational and technology research program .

this reorganization was formally stated in doe's 1997 budget request .

funding for the program was reduced in fy1998 and fy1999 , and the aep program was terminated in fy2000 .

legislative origins in the 109 th and 110 th congress against this historical backdrop , in october 2005 , a committee of the nas recommended the establishment of arpa - e in its report rising above the gathering storm .

in november 2005 , during the 109 th congress , house minority leader pelosi released an innovation agenda that proposed to create a new darpa - like initiative within doe .

in 2007 , this same concept was part of an updated "innovation agenda" proposed by then speaker of the house pelosi at the beginning of the 110 th congress .

although some analysts questioned whether arpa - e was the best policy option to respond to the nation's energy challenges , the proposal recommended in the nas report became the basis for congressional hearings and debates in the 109 th and 110 th congresses and eventually served as the outline for arpa - e as authorized in the america competes act .

policy debates in the 109 th congress , the senate committee on energy and natural resources and the house committee on science held hearings on arpa - e. chairman of the house committee on science boehlert stated that he was an "open - minded skeptic" regarding arpa - e , and pointed out that the recommendation for its establishment was based on four assumptions that he considered questionable: the problem with the energy market is that the supply of new technologies is insufficient ; the supply of new technologies is constrained because of a lack of fundamental research ; a sensible way to promote more fundamental research is to apply the darpa model to a civilian energy sector ; and implementing the darpa model is the best way to improve energy research , given tight federal budgets .

in the 110 th congress , chairman of the house committee on science and technology gordon held a similar hearing .

in his opening statement , chairman gordon stated that , among several policy goals and objectives , darpa has succeeded largely because it continued to foster a culture of innovation .

the key for arpa - e success , he said , is that it be a similarly nimble organization with minimal administrative layers and the ability to quickly start and stop research programs .

according to the chair , "investment in arpa - e must be seen as the first step in boosting energy research and development to a level that addresses the scale of our challenge , and the true cost of doing transformational research. .

the following sections discuss several key questions debated during the house science and technology and senate committee on energy and natural resources hearings held regarding arpa - e in the 109 th and 110 th congress .

this analysis incorporates issues discussed in hearing charters , members' statements and questions , and the statements and responses of those providing expert testimony .

is arpa - e needed ? .

is arpa - e needed when the federal government and industry already invest a great deal in energy r&d ? .

similarly , is a darpa model the best research and development policy option for the energy marketplace ? .

a related question is whether in - q - tel , the central intelligence agency ( cia ) venture capital firm that provides funding to identify , develop , and deliver technologies of interest to the intelligence community , is a better model for the energy marketplace than darpa .

 ( see box 4 below . ) .

proponents state that arpa - e will address organizational problems at doe by being small and flexible , unlike existing doe organizations , which they believe are risk - averse and do not sufficiently interact with each other to reach the nation's energy goals .

in addition , proponents argue that arpa - e should focus on breakthrough research , using emerging basic research in areas such as nanotechnology to develop totally new technologies , as opposed to existing programs that have already identified paths forward and tend to focus on incremental advances .

further , unlike current programs , arpa - e is designed to bridge the gap between basic research and industrial development — not to get products to the marketplace , but to transform the marketplace by accelerating research .

in response to the claim that arpa - e will be more flexible and less risk - adverse , critics point out that the new organization will still be within doe , so there is no guarantee that doe management will let it take more risks than existing programs .

while proponents contend that arpa - e would bridge the gap between basic research and industrial development and that existing applied programs tend to focus on incremental advances , some critics argue that reforming doe's existing programs would be better than creating a new organization .

advocates for arpa - e indicated that candidate energy technologies are not yet at a stage where venture capital investment , such as occurs with in - q - tel , would provide the best return .

at some point , however , arpa - e research may lead to technologies appropriate for venture capital investment .

at that stage , it might be appropriate to incorporate a venture capital component into arpa - e's design .

just as darpa has evolved over 50 years , arpa - e may need to evolve as well , some witnesses said .

how much funding should arpa - e receive ? .

how might arpa - e receive funding ? .

the america competes act authorized $300 million for fy2008 , and "such sums as necessary" for fy2009 and fy2010 .

the nas report proposed that funding for arpa - e start at $300 million the first year and increase gradually over five or six years to $1 billion per year .

at that point , the program's effectiveness would be evaluated and appropriate actions taken , according to the report .

one issue discussed in hearings was whether the level of authorized funding for arpa - e is sufficient to support the research necessary for arpa - e to reach its goals .

some noted with concern that the proposed $300 million in fy2008 was less than 0.02% of the transportation and energy industries' annual revenues , a level they believed was insufficient relative to the potential return .

some suggested that if it is to be successful , arpa - e needs to be funded at a level comparable to darpa — about $3 billion per year .

some of those testifying did not believe arpa - e should be funded due to budget constraints .

arpa - e , they argued , would be funded by shifting resources from doe's office of science .

increasing funding for the doe office of science is also a goal of the america competes act .

some hearing witnesses expressed concern that dilution of doe office of science resources might influence doe's acceptance of arpa - e , and hinder its success .

supporters of arpa - e agreed that funding for the doe office of science is the highest priority and testified that funding for arpa - e should not be redirected from that office .

some witnesses expressed concerns that a risk - tolerant agency like arpa - e could not survive if it was subject to the annual appropriations cycle , political and financial pressures , and resource fluctuations that might stifle innovation .

to overcome this potential challenge , some policymakers and experts have proposed funding arpa - e outside of the regular appropriations process .

this might include , for example , providing an advance appropriation supporting arpa - e for several years , rather than the usual one - year appropriation .

another option is to identify a dedicated revenue source for arpa - e .

some of the funding sources that have been proposed are oil industry tax and other incentives ; gasoline tax ; oil company profit tax ; federal oil and gas royalties ; climate change cap - and - trade program ; and strategic petroleum reserve funds .

an analogous situation might be research supported through the ultra - deepwater and unconventional natural gas and other petroleum resources program , authorized by the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) , which receives funding of $50 million per year derived from royalties , rents , and bonuses from federal onshore and offshore oil and gas leases .

based on past experience , however , all of these proposals would face challenges in congress .

will arpa - e work ? .

some critics believe that what is preventing the united states from reaching its energy goals is not federal funding for innovative , high - risk research , but rather a lack of private - sector investment in basic research , failure to effectively transfer new energy technologies to the marketplace , or some combination of these .

they point out the lack of a captive customer as a challenge to arpa - e's ability to be successful: energy has a broad and diverse public and private market , while darpa has dod as its single primary customer , guaranteeing a solid base of demand .

arpa - e proponents indicated that arpa - e is needed for "translational research. .

this type of research identifies the most pressing market needs , selects and funds the most promising scientific approaches to enable breakthrough products , and brings the best candidates of those products to the brink of production .

