sovereign wealth funds ( swfs ) are investment funds owned and managed by national governments .

originally created in the 1950s by oil and resource - producing countries to help stabilize their economies against fluctuating commodity prices , and to provide a source of wealth for future generations , they have proliferated considerably in recent years .

although their lack of transparency makes estimating swf investment levels difficult , it is estimated that they currently manage between $1.9 and $2.9 trillion .

estimates of their growth over the next several years vary , with the consensus hovering around morgan stanley's projection of $10 trillion by 2015 .

early estimates were higher , but it appears that the global financial crisis has led swf growth to slow due to losses by swfs on the value of their existing portfolios , lower commodity prices , and the likelihood that some developing countries will tap into their swf resources for domestic purposes .

swfs can be funded through a variety of means , including profits from the sale of commodities ( such as oil ) or a current account surplus .

swfs can be established to serve several different objectives .

these may include diversifying national assets , stabilizing the domestic economy against volatile commodity prices , saving for future generations , getting a better return on investment than traditional foreign exchange reserves , and promoting political or strategic interests .

the dramatic recent increase in swf activity has raised concerns about this relatively unexamined class of international investors .

this report provides background on swfs , including what countries operate swfs and the size of the swf market , and discusses two broad areas of concern to members of congress and the international financial community: governance and transparency - related issues , and possible non - commercial investment goals , including the potential use of government - controlled investment vehicles to attain global strategic and political goals .

some u.s. policy makers stress that their concerns about swfs are not meant to undermine the u.s. commitment to open investment .

they maintain that the united states is one of the most open economies in the world and note that foreign investment in the united states provides many benefits , including lower interest rates , increased employment , productivity , and access to capital for american enterprise .

indeed , for countries such as the united states , which have both a high national budget deficit and historically low levels of public savings , foreign investment has been crucial .

the rising profile of swfs is a direct consequence of the massive accumulation of global foreign reserve assets over the past decade .

while reserve accumulation has occurred in many emerging market economies , it has been especially sharp among oil producers and asian countries that have large trade - surpluses with the united states and other developed countries .

in these countries , reserves have swelled to levels far in excess of the amount needed for balance of payments support , thus presenting an opportunity for foreign exchange reserve managers to maximize returns .

foreign exchange reserves are traditionally invested in low - risk assets such as u.s. treasury bills , but their recent growth has seen an increasing shift of excess reserves to higher - risk , higher - return investments .

in contrast to traditional foreign exchange reserves , swfs invest in a much broader array of assets , including stocks , bonds , fixed assets , commodities , derivatives , and alternative investments such as real estate and hedge funds .

like private hedge funds and government pension funds , swfs often rely on outside expertise and professional fund managers .

two key forces drove congressional interest in swfs during the 110 th congress: ( 1 ) the introduction of new funds and ( 2 ) major acquisitions by existing swfs following large losses by western financial institutions from the u.s. sub - prime mortgage crisis .

many point to the september 29 , 2007 , launch of the new china investment corporation , ltd. ( cic ) , with $200 billion of capital as a catalyst of the initial western interest in swfs .

while swfs represent a small percentage of all investment classes globally , their rapid and projected growth could increase demand for riskier assets , including equities and bonds .

deutsche bank estimates that future swf asset allocation could lead to a gross capital inflow of over $1 trillion into global equity markets and $1.5 trillion into global debt markets over the coming five years .

merrill lynch , using more aggressive assumptions , estimates that $3.1 to $6 trillion is likely to be invested in riskier assets by swfs in the next five years .

while swf investments peaked during the financial crisis in 2007-8 , with many foreign swfs taking large stakes in western financial institutions , it appears that the pace of investments has tailed off .

the magnitude of financial impact combined with the lack of transparency and possibly political investment motivations of non - commercial entities has sparked concern among some analysts and members of congress about the rapidly growing wealth of emerging market countries and how this wealth is being invested in the united states .

hearings on swfs have been held in several congressional committees including the senate banking committee , senate foreign relations committee , house financial services , house foreign affairs committee , and the joint economic committee .

in addition to hearings , senator richard shelby ( al ) has requested a study from the government accountability office ( gao ) to ensure that swfs are "effectively monitored .

in his opening remarks at the first congressional swf hearing , before the senate banking committee on november 13 , 2007 , senator evan bayh ( in ) neatly summarized the two primary concerns about swf activity in the united states and the challenge they present: a lack of transparency that characterizes many sovereign wealth funds undermines the theory of efficient markets at the heart of our economic system .

in addition , unlike private investors , pension funds and mutual funds , government owned - entities may have interests that will take precedence over profit maximization .

just as the united states has geopolitical interests in addition to financial ones , so do other countries .

just as we value some things more than money , so do they .

why should we assume that other nations are driven purely by financial interests when we are not ? .

the political challenges facing u.s. leaders are aptly summarized by senator charles schumer ( ny ) : right now , the u.s. finds itself in a difficult position .

some of our financial institutions have made mistakes and need capital .

so we're short of capital because of the credit crunch , and in the longer run because of our own habits .

we import more than we export ; we consume more than we save .

the best choice would be that financial institutions could raise capital within the u.s .

but we don't have that choice .

so they raise capital from where it exists , and sovereign wealth funds are the most available form of capital right now .

or [financial institutions] can dramatically shrink , and we can lose thousands and thousands of jobs .

the choice is a simple one , and the issue with sovereign wealth funds can be defined in a single sentence: because they are government - owned , noneconomic factors may influence their decision - making and the pressure they put on companies that they own a piece of .

given these concerns , congressional attention on swfs has focused on two broad areas , namely ( 1 ) the lack of swf transparency and ( 2 ) the potential use of swf capital for strategic or political ( i.e. , non - commercial ) purposes .

these concerns as applied to specific swfs are mapped in figure 3 .

the x axis illustrates fund transparency , or levels of disclosure .

the y axis measures the active , or strategic , nature of their stated ( or perceived ) investment philosophy .

for example , the funds of norway , alaska , and alberta , canada , are conventionally invested in a wide range of investments and are highly transparent .

malaysia's swf and singapore's temasek , while also highly transparent , pursue a more strategic approach to their investments , targeting various industries that are of interest to their respective governments .

the funds in the upper - left quadrant are of most concern to western policy makers .

these are the funds that disclose the least information about their funds and are the most strategic in their investment philosophy .

a third issue that has sparked some congressional interest is how the united states taxes gains on investments in the united states made by swfs .

at the g7 finance ministers meeting in october 2007 , ministers discussed swfs for the first time , noting that they are "increasingly important participants in the international financial system and that our economies can benefit from openness to swf investment flows. .

the final g7 communique for the meeting stated that the imf , world bank , and the oecd should explore best practices for swfs in key areas such as institutional structure , risk management , transparency , and accountability .

secretary of the treasury henry paulson further elaborated on this in his remarks to the international monetary and finance committee of the imf: the united states believes a multilateral approach to swfs that maintains open investment policies is in the best interest of countries that have these funds , and countries in which they invest .

the imf is uniquely positioned to identify best practices for swfs , building on the existing guidelines for foreign exchange reserve management .

best practices would provide multilateral guidance to new funds on how to make sound decisions on how to structure themselves , mitigate any potential systemic risk , and help demonstrate to critics that swfs can be constructive , responsible participants in the international financial system .

recipient countries of swf investment also have a responsibility to maintain openness to investment and should work through the oecd to develop best practices for inward government - controlled investment .

to address concerns related to the lack of swf transparency , some have called for an international body , such as the imf , to establish guidelines and monitor countries' compliance with transparency efforts .

proponents maintain that increased transparency would limit the potential negative impact of greater swf investment by allowing financial markets to better observe swf activity and exercise any necessary market discipline .

edwin truman , of the peterson institute for international economics , argued during november 2007 senate banking committee hearings on swfs that [t]he development of a set of best practices for sovereign wealth funds , and similar understandings covering other cross - border government investments , offers the most promising way to increase the accountability of these activities , which are likely to increase in relative importance over the next decade .

the associated increase in transparency , which is a means to the end of greater accountability , would help to reduce the mysteries and misunderstandings surrounding these governmental activities .

at the same time , the environment for them would become more stable and predictable .

during the october 20 , 2007 g7 finance ministers meeting , u.s. treasury secretary henry paulson hosted an outreach dinner with top swf managers from around the world to begin the process of negotiating increased levels of swf transparency .

there appears to be some positive reception from leading swfs .

according to dr. tony tan , executive director of singapore's gic: we believe there is a case for further disclosure on the part of sovereign wealth funds in the interest of transparency .

such disclosure can include clarity on the relationship between the funds and the respective governments , their investment objectives and general strategies , and their internal governance and risk management practices.... any guidelines on sovereign wealth funds should encourage them to operate according to commercial principles with a long - term orientation , free from political motivations .

singapore will participate in formulating a set of principles and best practices for sovereign wealth funds .

in november 2007 , the imf convened the first of a proposed annual roundtable of sovereign asset and reserve managers .

at the meeting , delegates from 28 countries discussed how best to address the policy and operational issues faced by managers of growing reserves and sovereign assets .

the imf's work agenda on swfs was approved at a meeting of the imf executive board , which includes representatives from both sovereign investors and recipients of sovereign wealth , on march 21 , 2008 .

in september 2008 , following four months of negotiations and several international meetings , members of the newly formed international working group of sovereign wealth funds agreed to a voluntary code of conduct at meetings in santiago , chile .

although voluntary guidelines may likely help policy makers better understand the motives and methods of existing and emerging swfs , it is unclear whether the voluntary guidelines will satisfy western governments , which had sought more restrictive rules requiring greater swf transparency .

reportedly , the debate of how much financial transparency swfs should provide was one of the more contentious issues in the working group .

while some countries agreed that greater transparency would allay concerns that swfs may use their wealth for non - economic reasons and also reassure domestic constituents that the national wealth is being appropriately invested , many countries insisted that swfs be allow to maintain a high degree of secrecy regarding their operations .

the chairman of the australian fund board of guardians , david murray , chaired a subgroup of the iwg responsible for drafting the principles .

the group met three times in oslo , singapore and the final meeting in singapore , where on september 2 , 2008 , the iwg agreed on a set of voluntary principles , the generally accepted principles and practices for sovereign wealth funds ( gapp or santiago principles ) .

the santiago principles are comprised of 24 principles and additional sub - principles in three broad categories: ( 1 ) legal framework , objectives , and macroeconomic linkages ; ( 2 ) institutional framework and governance ; and ( 3 ) investment policies and risk management frameworks ( see box ) .

while country endorsement and adherence to the santiago principles is voluntary and must be ratified by authorities in each national country , by committing to financial objectives and guidelines for increased transparency and disclosure of investments , the creation of the santiago principles appears to be the beginning of the normalization of swfs as global institutional investors .

generally accepted principles and practices ( gapp ) on sovereign wealth funds "santiago principles .

while the imf is working to establish guidelines for the management and operations of sovereign wealth funds , the oecd has an ongoing work program to establish a set of best practices for recipients of investments from swfs .

these guidelines would draw on the oecd's extensive work on the treatment of foreign investment in oecd economies .

oecd work will also draw on the oecd guidelines for corporate governance of state owned enterprises ( the soe guidelines ) .

the guidelines are applicable to both swfs and soes .

