o ver the last decade there has been a growing u.s. trade deficit in fresh and processed fruits and vegetables .

although u.s. fruit and vegetable exports totaled more than $6 billion in 2015 , u.s. imports were nearly $18 billion , resulting in a gap between imports and exports of more than $11 billion for the year ( figure 1 ) .

this trade deficit has widened over time , as growth in imports has outpaced export growth .

as a result , the united states has gone from being a net exporter of fruits and vegetables in the 1970s to having a net trade balance in the mid - 1990s to being a net importer today .

figure 1 .

u.s. fruit and vegetable trade ( excluding nuts ) , 1990-2015source: compiled by crs from data in the u.s. international trade commission's trade dataweb database ( version 2.8.4 ) .

includes fresh and processed products ; excludes nuts .

a number of factors are shaping current competitive market conditions worldwide and global trade in fruits and vegetables .

in the buildup to the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) , the trade situation contributed to demands by the u.s. produce sector that congress consider expanding support for domestic fruit and vegetable growers in farm bill legislation .

historically , specialty crops had not benefitted from the federal farm support programs traditionally included in the farm bill , compared to the long - standing support provided to the main program commodities ( such as grains , oilseeds , cotton , sugar , and milk ) .

the 2008 farm bill , and later the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) , provided additional support for programs supporting fruit and vegetable production , as well as programs addressing existing trade barriers and marketing of u.s. specialty crops .

this report presents recent trends in u.s. fruit and vegetable trade , and highlights some of the factors contributing to these trends .

this summary excludes trade data for tree nuts and processed tree nut products .

although not presented here , u.s. exports and imports of tree nuts and processed tree nut products ( excluding peanuts ) have shown continued increases and , generally , a growing u.s. trade surplus .

a number of factors are shaping current competitive market and trade conditions worldwide , and may be contributing to trends in u.s. fruit and vegetable trade: a relatively open u.s. import regime and lower average import tariffs in the united states , with products from most leading suppliers entering the u.s. duty - free or at preferential duty rates ; increased competition from low - cost or subsidized production of fruit and vegetable products ; continued non - tariff trade barriers to u.s. exports in some countries , including restrictive import and inspection requirements , technical product standards , and sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) requirements ; opportunities for counter - seasonal supplies , driven , in part , by increased domestic and year - round demand for fruits and vegetables ; and other market factors , such as exchange rate fluctuations and structural changes in the u.s. food industry , as well as increased u.s. overseas investment and diversification in market sourcing by u.s. companies .

starting in 2005 , the specialty crop farm bill alliance began promoting recommendations for the 2008 farm bill , initially through the efforts of the united fresh produce association and a number of specialty crop organizations nationwide .

the alliance's goal has continued to work toward enhancing the competitiveness of u.s. fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , and other specialty crops by promoting specific programs and provisions as part of the periodic omnibus farm bill , including the most recent 2014 farm bill .

in the buildup to the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) , concerns over the trade situation for fruits and vegetables , among other production issues , contributed to demands by the u.s. produce growers that congress consider expanding support for domestic fruit and vegetable growers in farm bill legislation .

historically , fruit and vegetable crops have not benefitted from the federal farm support programs traditionally included in the farm bill , compared to the long - standing support provided to the main program commodities ( such as grains , oilseeds , cotton , sugar , and milk ) .

the 2008 farm bill contained a horticultural title that included new and expanded provisions for specialty crops and organic production .

these programs and provisions were reauthorized and in some cases expanded as part of the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) .

among the farm bill's key trade - related provisions are those that specifically address sps / tbt issues in the specialty crops sectors , as well as those that generally address export market promotion and barriers to u.s. trade: market access program ( map ) .

reauthorized map funding to encourage domestic exports , and included an amendment to cover organic products .

map funds cost sharing of foreign market promotion activities .

technical assistance for specialty crops ( tasc ) .

reauthorized tasc program to address sps and technical barriers to u.s. exports , and required an annual congressional report describing factors that affect specialty crops exports .

eligible projects include seminars and workshops , study tours , field surveys , pest and disease research , and pre - clearance programs .

both the 2008 and 2014 farm bills also provided for a range of other programs and support that generally support the specialty crop sectors but may also enhance exports and trade , including expanded plant pest and disease management and detection ; increased collection of market data and information ; and increased specialty crop food safety and related research issues , among other provisions .

often , farm bill legislation might also amend marketing orders governing the grades and standards for some commodities and requiring imports to meet similar standards .

information on these and other farm bill provisions directed to the specialty crop sectors is in crs report r42771 , fruits , vegetables , and other specialty crops: selected farm bill and federal programs .

