in addition to their jobs , workers have obligations — civic , familial , and personal — to fulfill that sometimes require them to be absent from the workplace ( eg , to serve on a jury , retrieve a sick child from day care , or attend a funeral ) .

the u.s. government generally has allowed individual businesses to decide whether to accommodate the nonwork activities of employees by granting them leave ( with or without pay ) rather than firing them .

in other countries , national governments or the international organizations to which they belong more often have developed social policies that entitle individuals to take time off from the workplace for a variety of reasons .

for example , workers in countries that are part of the european union have a minimum vacation benefit with pay of some 20 days per year ; in spain , employees can take paid time off to perform jury service among other civic duties ; and 169 countries guarantee women leave with income in connection with childbirth .

policies specifically intended to reconcile the work and family lives of individuals — which include leave benefits , child - care subsidies , and flexible work arrangements — have garnered increased attention in the 30-member organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) .

in the united states , which is an oecd member , congressional interest has coalesced around family - friendly paid leave proposals .

they would entitle individuals to time off with pay to accomplish parental and caregiving obligations ( eg , bonding with a newborn or newly placed adopted child or assisting a seriously ill spouse ) .

women are regarded as the chief beneficiaries of these proposals because women are the typical informal ( unpaid ) caregivers to family and friends , and a majority of women are in the workforce , with both husbands and wives employed in about one - half of married - couple families .

two approaches have been proposed in congress to guarantee workers the right to take paid leave to attend to family and medical needs .

one is an employer mandate ( eg , h.r .

2460 / s. 1152 ) ; the other , a temporary disability insurance program ( eg , h.r .

1723 ) .

in addition , the obama administration's fy2011 budget for the labor department includes a request for $50 million to help states plan and set up paid family leave programs .

relatedly , h.r .

2339 ( the family income to respond to significant transitions act ) would initiate a grant program to assist states interested in supplementing the income of parents who take leave for such reasons as the birth or adoption of a child , or to care for a newly born or adopted child , or who leave their jobs to care for a seriously ill infant .

while "[d]uring the past two decades , the generosity of paid parental leave has increased in all oecd countries , with the exceptions of ireland , the united kingdom and several countries with no legislation mandating paid leave [such as the united states]," the organization remains focused on leave and other policies thought to ameliorate work - family conflict .

the continuing interest of these governments in encouraging more women to participate in the labor force is partly motivated by concern about the impact of population aging on the future labor supply , and hence , the future rate of economic growth , in member nations .

the economic rationale underlying paid family leave is that it will increase the amount of labor supplied by women with child care ( and increasingly elder care ) obligations and thereby mitigate the slowdown in overall labor force growth .

in the united states , concern about an impending labor shortfall because of an aging population also contributes to interest in greater involvement of the federal government in the provision of paid family - related leave .

so too does the end of years of escalating labor force participation by married mothers , especially mothers of infants .

most recently , a public health rationale has been added to the economic rationale for increased employee access to paid family - related leave .

specifically , the success of one part of the federal government's prescription for containing the spread of "swine flu" — namely , employees staying home from work to care for themselves or for a sick child — likely is dependent upon the availability of paid family and sick leave .

this report begins by reviewing u.s. government regulation of time off from work for any purpose .

it then examines the incidence of paid leave benefits voluntarily provided by u.s. firms .

access to paid leave by various employee and employer characteristics also is analyzed .

estimates from a government survey of the direct cost to u.s. businesses of the different types of leave offered are presented as well .

indirect employer costs that might arise in connection with some types of leave more than others , such as the greater likelihood of hiring and training temporary replacements for employees absent because of maternity versus bereavement reasons , are not included .

neither are estimates of potential gains to companies ( eg , a more stable and experienced workforce , and increased productivity due to greater worker morale ) and society ( eg , improved public health , lower formal caregiving costs , and broader participation in civic affairs ) .

by and large , the u.s. government does not require employers to offer employees nonwage compensation , that is , benefits ( eg , health insurance , retirement plans , and leave ) .

the few employment - based benefits that congress has mandated are social security , unemployment compensation , workers' compensation , and most recently , unpaid family - medical leave .

an overview follows of past and present federal laws and regulations that relate to time off from work .

state statutes may require the provision of leave beyond that in federal law .

employers and unions may negotiate paid time off as a supplement to wages in collective bargaining agreements .

complete coverage of leave benefits that originate from these non - federal sources is beyond the scope of this report .

unlike the abundant data on wages and salaries , less information is available on the benefits paid to workers .

according to the latest data available from the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , benefits account for 30% of the total compensation ( wages and benefits ) of employees in the civilian economy .

leave benefits — which represent 7% of total compensation — receive short shrift compared to the information on some other supplements to wages voluntarily provided by employers .

for example , the government's primary survey of the labor force — the current population survey ( cps ) — does not ask households about time off from work , while it does ask about health and retirement benefits .

 ( these benefits respectively account for about 8% and almost 5% of total compensation ) .

as a result , there is limited publicly available data on gender , age , and other demographic characteristics of workers by employer provision of paid leave .

bls more often looks to employers for information on benefits because they "typically furnish more reliable information than households do on the details of employer - provided benefit plans and the employers' costs for providing those benefits. .

the national compensation survey ( ncs ) collects information from companies on benefit incidence as well as compensation cost levels and trends .

firm size , as measured by the number of employees , is one of the company characteristics for which the ncs obtains data .

again , employer rather than household surveys are a better source of size information .

although the ncs lacks demographic information on employees receiving benefits , it does afford data by job characteristics ( eg , occupation , industry , and earnings ) .

some private firms conduct compensation surveys , but the results may be proprietary , very expensive to access , or not representative of typical business practices ( eg , if the survey covers primarily large corporations ) .

for these reasons , the analysis below is derived from the ncs , and to provide demographic information , from the national survey of america's families and the medical expenditures panel survey .

the latter two are nationally representative surveys of households in the noninstitutionalized civilian population , similar to the cps .

access to the paid time off from work that employers voluntarily provide is not evenly distributed across employees .

this unevenness appears to exacerbate wage inequality , with leave benefits more often available to higher - than lower - paid workers , to more - rather than less - educated workers , to white - collar compared to blue - collar or service workers , to persons working full - rather than part - time , and to employees of larger in contrast to smaller firms .

the u.s. government has a comparatively limited role in mandating or regulating leave benefits .

the sole leave entitlement congress passed — unpaid time off under the fmla — has a long , hotly debated history .

state governments have been more active in this policy area than the federal government .

nonetheless , very few states appear interested in enacting individually a family - medical leave statute that provides both cash benefits and job security .

businesses for their part have been loosening the link between employment and benefit provision in the last several years ( eg , the shift from traditional pensions to 401k retirement plans and ceasing to extend employee health insurance to retirees ) .

