the enacted 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110 - 246 ) includes a new conservation provision that seeks to facilitate the participation of farmers and landowners in environmental services markets , covering a range of farm and forestry services , including improved water and air quality , increased carbon storage , and habitat protection .

the inclusion of this provision could expand the scope of existing farmland conservation programs and facilitate the development of private - sector markets for agriculture - and forestry - based environmental goods and services .

in part , congressional interest in this area has developed in response to increased attention to the agriculture and forestry sectors' contributions to existing environmental pollution and resource degradation .

for example , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) reports that agriculture is the leading source of water pollution in u.s. lakes and rivers , and a major contributor of pollution in u.s. estuaries .

epa also reports that agriculture contributes to an estimated 6% of all greenhouse gas emissions in the united states .

at the same time , some in congress are suggesting that u.s. farm support programs should do a better job promoting environmental benefits and also complying with domestic support constraints called for by the world trade organization .

the agriculture and forestry sectors are also being regarded as a possible source of carbon capture and storage within the broader climate change debate .

the development of market - based approaches to farm conservation and land management might complement existing and / or emerging environmental regulations or natural resource requirements affecting the agriculture and forestry sectors , as well as complement existing federally supported programs that promote conservation in the farm and forestry sectors .

environmental goods and services from the agriculture and forestry sectors might also provide for environmental improvements and mitigation at a relatively lower cost , compared to mitigation in other sectors of the economy .

environmental services markets may also offer additional financial opportunities to farmers and landowners .

ecosystem ( or environmental ) goods and services are the benefits society obtains from the environment and ecosystems , both natural and managed , such as water filtration , flood control , provision of habitat , carbon storage , and many others ( table 1 ) .

in most cases , these constitute "free services" since landowners and managers are not compensated in the marketplace .

however , as many such services have become degraded over time , there is growing recognition that they should be sustained or substituted by market capital , similar to investing in water treatment plants and engineered flood control systems .

one solution would be to create markets , often developed through regulation , so that providers of environmental services can be compensated in private markets for the services they provide .

this could offer a potential business opportunity to the farm and forest sectors , which may be able to provide for such services and participate in the market , for example , by creating , restoring , preserving function and value in a natural resources area , or by capturing and storing carbon before gases that contribute to global climate change are released into the atmosphere .

these services would be in addition to the food and fiber services traditionally supplied by the agriculture and forestry sectors .

the market for environmental goods and services involving the agricultural and forestry sectors began mostly through various pilot programs starting in the 1990s .

the development of voluntary carbon credit markets and watershed approaches incorporating nutrient credit trading , along with wetlands mitigation banking , have involved the farm and forestry sectors .

these programs provide a market for farmers to sell carbon or nutrient farm - based offsets to emitters / dischargers that are looking to buy offsets to mitigate their own emissions / discharges .

these efforts have triggered interest in other types of tradable permits and credits , including habitat credit trading and other types of conservation banking .

usda identifies environmental markets with relevance to the agriculture and forestry sectors to include water quality , air quality , wetlands , endangered species , greenhouse gases , and developmental rights .

often the impetus for these efforts may be linked to a "regulatory driver" specific to an actual or anticipated environmental regulation or natural resource requirement , such as requirements in the clean water act ( cwa ) , endangered species act ( esa ) , or other state or local regulation .

other incentives may include market drivers that make trading environmental services financially attractive , or the desire to cultivate community goodwill .

the participation of agriculture and forestry in emerging environmental services markets is gaining wide support within the farm community and its supporting organizations and agencies , as well as among the regulatory agencies and some environmental groups .

as part of its recommendations for the 2007 farm bill , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) proposed to further facilitate the development of environmental services markets in ways that would more effectively involve the farm and forestry sectors .

both the house - and the senate - passed versions of the 2008 farm bill included similar provisions as part of the conservation title in their respective bills .

a version of this provision is in the enacted 2008 farm bill ( for further discussion , see section titled " enacted 2008 farm bill " ) .

information and examples of ecosystems services markets that have involved the participation of u.s. farmers and landowners include voluntary markets for land - based reductions or storage of carbon , water quality improvements , and preservation or restoration of habitat , as briefly described below .

the development of market - based approaches has been widely touted as a possible source of additional farm income , whether through the sale of tradable credits or from other types of payments , such as recreational use or hunting fees .

this could offset or partially offset the costs of pollution abatement incurred by farmers who make environmental improvements on their farmlands .

in some cases , adopting alternative production practices could also result in on - farm cost savings , such as the use of renewable fuel generated on - farm .

market - based approaches are also often viewed as encompassing broader societal benefits by complementing existing farm conservation programs and evolving regulatory approaches intended to address environmental improvements in the farm and forestry sectors .

usda recognizes that creating markets for ecosystem services could increase farmer investments in environmental stewardship and provide for environmental services including clean air and water , carbon sequestration , and improved wildlife habitat , among other conservation benefits .

however , usda also reports that there are several existing barriers that may prevent the development of fully functioning markets for agricultural environmental services and may be difficult or costly to overcome .

these impediments include but may not be limited to: uncertainty quantifying , measuring , and valuing credits ; low demand for or discounted value of credits from agricultural sources because of uncertainty about the measurement and value of these credits ; low participation in the farm and forestry sectors due to uncertainty over the value of environmental credits compared to the cost of pollution abatement ; reluctance by farmers and landowners to participate in a regulatory - based program ; small quantity of benefits that can be provided by individual farmers or landowners ; high transaction costs ; performance risks and liability ; lack of information about program benefits and how to participate ; lack of monitoring and enforcement ; and uncertainty about whether conservation and environmental improvements that were initially funded through other publicly funded programs , such as cost - share programs administered by usda , will be allowed to be traded .

among the principal questions regarding the inclusion of these types of provisions as part of any major legislative initiative is whether the agriculture and forestry sectors can effectively provide environmental goods and services along with the more traditional food , fiber , and other services these sectors already provide .

the inclusion of these provisions could also raise certain procedural or implementation questions as congress debates future farm policy or as it continues to consider the role of the agriculture and forestry sectors in climate change legislation .

standards - setting process / implementation .

aside from establishing the board discussed earlier , how will usda implement its new farm bill directive for establishing uniform standards , accounting procedures , protocols , and registries for quantifying farm - and forestry - based environmental services ? .

can usda accomplish its task using available agency resources ? .

jurisdictional issues .

what are the advantages of establishing usda as the lead role ? .

what lead role will usda play , given the mostly regulatory authority and statutory obligations of other likely participating federal agencies ? .

might putting usda as the lead create conflict of interest as both the regulator and promoter of standards ? .

are there other jurisdictional issues , such that this provision needs to be referred to other authorizing congressional committees ? .

how might existing state and local programs implemented by other agencies be affected ? .

how will the collaborative effort between usda and the other participating federal agencies be put into practice ? .

how will disagreements be addressed and resolved among all federal partners ? .

consistency with existing and possible future authorities and initiatives .

will the agreed - upon decisions and standards resulting from such an effort be binding among all federal agencies ? .

what assurances are there that these decisions will not override the authorizing legislation regulating water and air quality , and wildlife habitat ? .

will regulatory agencies with authorizing legislation have the flexibility to not adopt the standards authorized by the board or other collaborative process , if they violate the individual agencies' authorizing statutes , or contain regulations , such as measurement protocols ? .

what are the possible implications if these decisions and standards are inconsistent with other existing regulatory guidelines and authorities ? .

will such a standard - setting framework and the agreed - upon standards be consistent with , or readily adapted to , other possible future regulatory initiatives , such as those involving climate change ? .

if possible future climate change initiatives do not provide for carbon offsets and credits from the agriculture and forestry sector , will the agreed - upon standards be enforceable within the existing voluntary carbon market ? .

what are the potential implications if these decisions and standards are inconsistent with other possible forthcoming regulatory guidelines and authorities ? .

standards .

will uniform standards be national , regional , local , or site - specific in scope ? .

how will uniform standards address differences within different production areas , types of resources , and ecosystems ? .

will established protocols and management practices take into account these differences ? .

will these standards consist of an assigned value ? .

given the wide range in the types of environmental services , how will outcomes or benefits be measured and expressed as standards ? .

will there be penalties for non - compliance ? .

federal versus marketplace functions .

what roles should government agencies play in actually establishing environmental services markets involving agriculture and forestry ? .

what roles will be strictly within the purview of the private - sector and independent credit markets ? .

is there a federal role beyond developing the reporting and credit registries that would require the board to act as intermediary between sellers and buyers ? .

who will be responsible for oversight of third party verification and certification , and for assigning market value to tradable credits within an environmental services market ? .

will the federal agencies play a role in market oversight , enforcement , risk management , and capital investment ? .

what other types of federal assistance may be needed to further facilitate the development of environmental services markets ? .

congressional reporting / timeline .

how and when will the agencies involved in setting standards be expected to report their accomplishments to congress ? .

should reporting requirements be included as part of these provisions ? .

market barriers .

how effectively do the current proposals address the types of barriers that have been identified by usda and others that may prevent the development of environmental goods and services markets ? .

possible unintended consequences .

might establishing a market - based approach shift governmental and / or industry priorities away from addressing more serious environmental problems by allowing some industrial facilities to buy relatively lower - cost farm - based carbon credits rather than pay for on - site pollution abatement at the facility ? .

might a market - based program shift usda resources away from established farm conservation programs ? .

