the u.s. military justice system exercises jurisdiction over criminal cases pursuant to article i of the u.s. constitution and the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

military courts' jurisdiction is limited to trying people connected to the armed forces for crimes defined by the ucmj .

within these constraints , military courts' jurisdiction is relatively broad .

for example , it extends to retired servicemembers such as the defendant in united states v. stevenson , a case in which military courts convicted a man on the navy's temporary disability retired list .

in stevenson , the navy prosecuted the defendant for rape , a crime routinely tried in non - military courts with civilian defendants .

in general , the military justice system , including its system of appellate review , is separate and distinct from the civilian judicial system .

some constitutional safeguards and supreme court interpretations are inapplicable in military courts .

also , after following appellate review through the military court system , military defendants may appeal to the u.s. supreme court only in limited circumstances .

companion bills introduced in the 111 th congress , h.r .

569 and s. 357 , would have broadend the supreme court's statutory jurisdiction by authorizing supreme court review of most military cases .

this report surveys military courts' jurisdiction , the structure of appellate review for military cases , interactions between military and civilian courts , the stevenson case , and past legislative proposals .

most criminal cases in the united states are tried either in state courts or in civilian federal courts .

the latter derive authority from article iii of the u.s. constitution .

however , the armed forces may prosecute defendants with military connections in military courts , which derive authority from article i , sec .

8 of the constitution .

the ucmj , passed by congress and implemented by the president through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) , governs military courts' jurisdiction and procedures .

military courts exercise jurisdiction over officers and enlisted servicemembers on active duty .

however , the scope of their jurisdiction may extend beyond individuals serving on active duty .

specifically , such jurisdiction extends to cases involving retired servicemembers who receive military pay or hospital care from an armed force ; specified members of reserve units ; enemy combatants ; and other individuals with connections to military operations or benefits .

as noted below in the discussion of united states v. stevenson , questions remain regarding the scope of military courts' power over retired servicemembers .

however , it is clear that military courts' jurisdiction extends to military veterans only when a veteran maintains at least some current relationship with the military .

if a defendant's connection with the armed forces is sufficient to establish jurisdiction , a military court may try that defendant for a broad range of offenses , including conduct not related to official military duties , as long as the alleged conduct constitutes a crime under the ucmj .

the ucmj includes some crimes that are unique to military service .

for example , under the ucmj , a defendant might be prosecuted for effecting unlawful enlistment , appointment , or separation ; desertion ; or absence without leave .

however , the armed forces may also prosecute defendants under the ucmj for conduct over which civilian courts could also exert jurisdiction .

for example , the ucmj criminalizes murder , rape , robbery , and other common law crimes .

article i military courts handle military cases throughout the chain of appellate review .

appeal to the u.s. supreme court is permitted at the end of the process only in specified circumstances .

the ucmj creates various military courts and provides appellate procedures for them .

after an initial investigation and a court - martial , which is a trial - level proceeding , military cases undergo various stages of review within the military justice system .

first , each court - martial proceeding has a "convening authority," who is a commissioned officer ( other than the defendant's accuser ) who convenes the investigation and court - martial proceeding and then approves or modifies the court - martial's findings and sentences .

convening authorities do not provide legal review ; instead , they provide the equivalent of sentencing determinations by giving "full and fair consideration to matters submitted by the accused and determining appropriate action on the sentence. .

under the ucmj , convening authorities have "substantial discretion" to modify sentences and findings .

after a convening authority approves or modifies a court - martial decision , a court of criminal appeals offers the first opportunity for legal review in military cases .

each branch of the armed services has a court of criminal appeals , comprised of panels of military judges established by the judge advocate general for each branch .

the courts of criminal appeals review cases in panels or , occasionally , en banc .

review is not discretionary ; each judge advocate general "shall refer" to the relevant court of criminal appeals every case involving a conviction that imposes the death penalty or confinement for one year or more ; a bad - conduct or dishonorable discharge ; or , in certain cases , dismissal from the respective service .

unlike convening authorities , courts of criminal appeals provide legal review of military cases .

they "may affirm only such findings of guilty , and the sentence ... as [they] fin[d] correct in law and fact and determin[e] , on the basis of the entire record , should be approved. .

after a court of criminal appeals has reviewed a case , the united states court of appeals for the armed forces ( caaf ) provides the final opportunity for appellate review within the military court system .

the caaf is an article i court , housed within the department of defense .

however , unlike other military courts , the caaf is comprised of civilian judges , whom the president appoints .

in general , the caaf has discretion to grant or deny petitions for appeals , analogous to the u.s. supreme court's discretion to grant or deny writs of certiorari .

however , the caaf must accept appeals in two circumstances: ( 1 ) all cases in which the relevant court of criminal appeals has affirmed a death sentence ; and ( 2 ) all cases in which a judge advocate general has sent a case to the caaf for review after a final court of criminal appeals decision .

the caaf's appellate review is limited .

the caaf must act "only with respect to the findings and sentence as approved by the [court - martial's] convening authority and as affirmed or set aside as incorrect in law by the court of criminal appeals. .

in other words , appeals to the caaf must involve issues originally heard by a court - martial and affirmed or denied by a convening authority and the relevant court of criminal appeals .

the caaf cannot hear appeals based on the all writs act or other jurisdictional authority unless they aid direct review of court - martial decisions .

for example , in clinton v. goldsmith , the air force had dropped from its rolls a servicemember who had served an earlier sentence for engaging in unprotected sex without telling his partners of his hiv - positive status .

the servicemember had petitioned the air force court of criminal appeals for injunctive relief under the all writs act , but that court denied relief , holding that it lacked jurisdiction .

the caaf then granted injunctive relief enjoining the president and other officials from dropping the servicemember from the active duty rolls .

the u.s. supreme court held that the caaf had exceeded its jurisdiction in granting injunctive relief because the relief did not involve review of a court - martial decision .

in so holding , the supreme court rejected the caaf's argument that jurisdiction was proper because the air force's dropping of the servicemember related to conduct at issue in an earlier court - martial proceeding ; instead , the court emphasized that "there is no source of continuing jurisdiction for the caaf over all actions administering sentences that the caaf at one time had the power to review. .

with respect to appeals from the caaf , the u.s. supreme court has jurisdiction to grant certiorari in four specific circumstances: ( 1 ) cases in which a death sentence has been affirmed by the relevant branch's court of criminal appeals ; ( 2 ) cases that a judge advocate general has certified to the caaf ; ( 3 ) cases in which the caaf granted a petition for review ; and ( 4 ) cases that do not fall in the other categories but in which the caaf has granted relief .

the first two categories represent the two circumstances in which the caaf must grant appeals .

the second category represents cases in which the caaf has exercised its discretion to grant an appeal .

and the final category is a catch - all provision for other cases in which the caaf might grant relief .

because the supreme court's jurisdiction is limited to these four circumstances , its power to review military cases generally extends only to cases that the caaf has also reviewed .

for this reason , the caaf's discretion over the acceptance or denial of appeals often functions as a gatekeeper for military appellants' access to supreme court review .

if the caaf denies an appeal , the u.s. supreme court will typically lack the authority to review the decision .

in contrast , criminal appellants in article iii courts have an automatic right of appeal to federal courts of appeals and then a right to petition the supreme court for review .

the u.s. armed forces have a long history of self - regulation .

except for limited interaction with the u.s. supreme court , article i military courts operate separately from the article iii judicial system .

as discussed above , military courts have distinct trial procedures and structures for appellate review .

in addition , because military courts' jurisdictional authority arises under article i rather than article iii , defendants in military cases do not have the benefit of certain article iii safeguards , such as lifetime appointments for judges .

in addition , although military defendants are entitled to due process rights under the fifth amendment to the constitution , the supreme court has upheld a narrowed interpretation of such rights in the context of military courts .

furthermore , legal interpretations by article iii courts do not necessarily create binding precedent for article i courts , and vice versa .

the only article iii court holdings that bind military courts are those of the u.s. supreme court .

however , military courts sometimes reject even supreme court precedents as inapplicable in the military context .

for example , in united states v. marcum , the caaf declined to follow an interpretation of the constitutional right to privacy that the supreme court had handed down a short while earlier .

in marcum , a court - martial had convicted a servicemember of various crimes , including non - forcible sodomy .

on appeal , the servicemember argued that with respect to the non - forcible sodomy charge , he was protected by a constitutional right to privacy in intimate relations under the supreme court case lawrence v. texas .

however , the caaf declined to follow lawrence .

the caaf's rationale for diverging from supreme court precedent in marcum was that constitutional protections "may apply differently to members of the armed forces than they do to civilians. .

thus , although "constitutional rights identified by the supreme court generally apply to members of the military," such rights do not apply when "by text or scope they are plainly inapplicable. .

similarly , article iii courts are not bound by military courts' decisions .

the supreme court may consider caaf decisions or ucmj provisions as potentially persuasive .

for example , the supreme court ordered briefs to examine the impact of a military code provision after it handed down its decision in kennedy v. louisiana , a case involving the question of a death penalty sentence for a child rapist .

in kennedy , the supreme court held that the eighth amendment prohibits punishment by death penalty for a defendant who rapes a child but did not cause or intend to cause a child's death .

in so holding , the court emphasized the "national consensus" against the death penalty in such cases .

in its petition for rehearing , louisiana argued that congress's recent amendment of the ucmj to include a death penalty punishment in military cases for the rape of a child undermined the court's "national consensus" argument .

however , the supreme court decided not to reconsider its kennedy decision , instead reaffirming its prior ruling with only minor modifications .

in its opinion accompanying its denial of rehearing , the supreme court disagreed with louisiana's interpretation of the death penalty language in the ucmj amendment , but it also emphasized that "authorization of the death penalty in the military sphere does not indicate that the penalty is constitutional in the civilian context. .

united states v. stevenson highlights two issues relevant to jurisdiction in military cases .

first , it raises questions regarding the scope of military courts' jurisdiction over retired servicemembers .

second , it raises a question regarding supreme court jurisdiction to review legal questions when the caaf denied review .

the first question was the basis for the stevenson appellant's petition to the supreme court for certiorari .

the united states raised the second question in its brief opposing appellant's certiorari petition .

although the u.s. supreme court clearly has jurisdiction over cases in which the caaf granted review , it is unclear whether the supreme court's jurisdiction extends to specific issues that the caaf declined to address .

in stevenson , naval criminal investigative service officials had investigated the appellant , a man on the navy's temporary disability retired list , while he received treatment at a veterans affairs hospital .

a military court - martial then tried and convicted the appellant for rape .

on appeal , the caaf remanded the case for fact finding regarding blood draws taken while appellee was a patient at the va hospital .

after the united states navy - marine corps court of criminal appeals affirmed the court - martial's decision on remand , the caaf granted a second review of the case .

however , exercising its discretion , the caaf limited the issues on appeal to potential fourth amendment violations , declining to review the question of the military court's jurisdiction over a man on the temporary disability retired list .

in his petition to the supreme court for certiorari , the appellant in stevenson requested review of only the issue that the caaf had declined to address — namely , the issue of military courts' jurisdiction over a case involving a person on the temporary disability retired list .

in response , the united states argued in its opposing brief that the supreme court's appellate review power does not extend to issues that the caaf declined to review .

thus , because the caaf had declined to review that portion of the criminal court of appeals' decision , the united states argued that the supreme court lacked jurisdiction over the appeal .

ultimately , the supreme court declined to hear the case .

on remand to the navy - marine corps court of criminal appeals , for the second time , the court set aside both the findings and the sentence and authorized a rehearing .

the questions raised by the petition to the supreme court for certiorari remain unanswered .

bills introduced during the 111 th congress , the equal justice for our military act of 2010 ( h.r .

569 ) and the equal justice for united states military personnel act of 2009 ( s. 357 ) , would have expanded the u.s. supreme court's appellate jurisdiction over military cases .

specifically , the legislation would have amended the ucmj to authorize appeals to the supreme court in military cases , regardless of the caaf's acceptance or denial of an appeal .

bill sponsors emphasized the need for the law to address the "disparity" between the broad right to appeal to the supreme court in civilian cases , on one hand , and the limited ability to appeal to the supreme court in military cases , on the other hand .

when introducing s. 357 , senator feinstein stated that because "our u.s. service personnel place their lives on the line in defense of american rights[ , it] is unacceptable for us to continue to routinely deprive our men and women in uniform one of those rights. .

h.r .

569 , reported to the house on july 15 , 2010 , as amended , included language not found in the companion bill , s. 357 .

the amended bill authorized the supreme court , through its rules , to prescribe the time limit for application for a writ of certiorari of a decision of the caaf , or the refusal of the caaf to grant a petition of review .

the bill would have been effective at the conclusion of the 180-day period beginning on the date of enactment and then only to decisions of the caaf handed down on or after that date .

additionally , the bill provided that the authority of the supreme court to prescribe necessary rules shall take effect on the date of enactment of the act .

to date , similar legislation has not been introduced in the 112 th congress .

courts have recognized compelling justifications for a military justice system that is distinct from article iii courts .

for example , in marcum , the caaf emphasized the importance of ensuring discipline and obedience in the armed forces .

the marcum court also stressed the military's interest in disciplining servicemembers differently according to their rank .

however , it is unclear whether such arguments justify a disparity in access to supreme court review , especially in the context of servicemembers no longer on active duty or crimes that exist under both military and civilian laws .

military cases follow a unique process of appellate review , moving from courts - martial through the following steps: ( 1 ) automatic appeals to courts of criminal appeals for each armed forces branch ; ( 2 ) potential discretionary review by the highest military court , the caaf ; and ( 3 ) review by the u.s. supreme court in limited circumstances , usually only when the caaf has also granted review .

legislative proposals in the 111 th congress would expand supreme court jurisdiction over military cases by authorizing review even if the caaf denies an appeal .

if the proposals became law , they would make moot the question highlighted by united states v. stevenson regarding the supreme court's jurisdiction over specific issues that the caaf had declined to review .

