in recent years , members of congress , bush and obama administration officials , and analysts have noted the dependence of many european countries on russian energy .

some experts have expressed concern that russia is using this energy dependence as part of a larger effort to limit the sovereignty and pro - western orientation of vulnerable neighboring countries such as ukraine , moldova , and georgia .

in addition to bolstering the sovereignty of these countries , the united states has also had a vital interest in keeping strong ties with nato and eu member states .

some observers believe that these relations could be harmed in the long term if many of these states became too dependent on russian energy .

in 2008 , the european union depended on russia for 23% of its natural gas consumption .

however , this figure conceals the fact that this dependence is unequally distributed .

some eu countries , many of them in central and eastern europe , are dependent on russia for most or all of the oil and natural gas they consume .

for example , the baltic states are entirely dependent on russia for natural gas .

non - eu countries bordering russia are also overwhelmingly or entirely dependent on russian oil and natural gas .

moreover , eu countries may become more dependent on natural gas supplied by russia in the future , as deposits in the north sea decline .

in 2008 , 40% of the eu's natural gas imports came from russia and 33% of its oil imports .

this report begins with a brief discussion of the russian oil and gas industries , including their efforts to purchase energy infrastructure in central and eastern europe and reduce energy subsidies to neighboring countries .

a second section deals with the impact of russian energy policy on neighboring countries , all of them formerly part of the soviet union , de facto or de jure , and all heavily dependent on russian energy imports .

many of these countries are concerned about what they see as russian efforts to manipulate that dependency to achieve political goals .

a final section deals with u.s. efforts to promote the energy security of these countries and on congress's response to the issue .

russian oil and natural gas industries are very important players in the global energy market , particularly in europe and eurasia .

russia has by far the largest natural gas reserves in the world , possessing over 30% of the world's total .

it is eighth in the world in oil reserves , with at least 10% of the global total .

another key trend has been the concentration of these industries in the hands of the russian government in the past decade .

this latter phenomenon has been accompanied by an authoritarian political system under the tight control of president vladimir putin , a former officer of the soviet kgb intelligence service .

both the leadership of state - controlled russian oil and gas firms and the russian government are dominated by former members of the russian intelligence service , now called the federal security service ( fsb ) , or are personally close to putin , or both .

in late 2007 , putin designated first deputy prime minister dmitri medvedev ( whose functions included overseeing gazprom ) as his successor .

medvedev was elected president of russia in march 2008 , in a vote viewed by many observers as not free and fair .

medvedev , although a close putin associate , is not a former fsb officer .

after medvedev took office , putin took the post of prime minister .

the personal and political fortunes of russia's leaders are tied to the energy firms , as russia's economic revival in the past decade has been due in large part to the massive revenues generated by energy exports .

however , many experts believe that the russian leadership's state - oriented approach may be counterproductive for russia in the long run , as output growth in russian oil and gas fields is stagnating .

they say russia's oil and gas industries will likely need foreign investment and expertise , more efficient management , as well as less government regulation and taxation .

the global economic crisis hurt russia's energy firms , russia's economy , and russia's international clout , as energy prices tumbled .

the countries discussed in this report have all faced the impact of russian energy policy .

all are heavily or entirely dependent upon russia for their natural gas and oil imports .

they face common issues of cost , reliability of supplies , and russian efforts to control downstream infrastructure such as pipelines , refineries , and domestic distribution networks .

the countries differ in their geopolitical orientation .

ukraine and moldova seek eventual eu membership , while georgia seeks to join the eu and nato .

the baltic states are eu and nato members , but russia maintains a strong hold on their energy sectors .

on the other hand , belarus is russia's most loyal supporter in europe , while armenia is a strong ally of moscow in the south caucasus region .

the united states has criticized what it has viewed as russian efforts to use its energy supplies as a political weapon .

during the january 2006 natural gas standoff between russia and ukraine , state department spokesman sean mccormack criticized russia for using "energy for political purposes. .

he stressed that while the administration supported a gradual increase in prices to market levels , it disagreed with a "precipitous" increase and cutoff .

secretary of state condoleezza rice likewise on january 5 stated that russia had made "politically motivated efforts to constrain energy supply to ukraine. .

in may 2006 , vice president dick cheney criticized russia's tactics of "supply manipulation or attempts to monopolize transportation" against vulnerable countries in the region as "blackmail" and intimidation. .

in testimony before the commission on security and cooperation in europe in june 2007 , bush administration officials cast doubt on the reliability of russian oil and natural gas supplies to europe and criticized moscow's "nationalistic interventions in its energy sector. .

on october 23 , 2007 , secretary rice noted that "we respect russia's interests , but no interest is served if russia uses its great wealth , its oil and gas wealth , as a political weapon , or that if it treats its independent neighbors as part of some old sphere of influence. .

a state department spokesman reiterated u.s. opposition to the use of energy supplies as a political weapon after a march 3-5 , 2008 , gas supply incident between gazprom and ukraine .

the obama administration has also expressed concerns about european energy security .

on january 22 , 2009 , after the resolution of the second major russia - ukraine gas crisis , a state department spokesman said the conflict "underscores the need for transparent , market - oriented arrangements for the sale and shipment of natural gas and the importance of diversifying energy supplies .

in april 2009 , the obama administration appointed richard morningstar as state department special envoy for eurasian energy .

while the united states has been active on the issue of eurasian energy supplies , skeptics might argue that key u.s. interests are not at stake , given the fact that the problem is one of european dependence , not that of the united states .

moreover , the eu and other european countries will have to be the main players in finding a solution ( if they have the will to do so ) , with the united states playing a secondary role .

the united states has urged european countries to diversify their energy , supplies , reducing their dependence on russia .

the united states has strongly advocated the building of multiple pipelines to supply energy from central asia and azerbaijan to europe .

these projects include the baku - tbilisi - ceyhan ( btc ) pipeline ) , which carries 1 million barrels per day of azerbaijani oil to the turkish port of ceyhan .

another important project supported by the united states has been the south caucasus gas pipeline ( scgp ) , which taps azerbaijan's shah deniz gas field .

in the longer term , through about 2020 , the united states supports expanding the scgp .

the united states also strongly supports the nabucco pipeline , an eu - sponsored project that would supply natural gas from central asia and azerbaijan to europe through georgia , turkey , bulgaria , romania , hungary and austria .

nabucco received a further boost on july 13 , 2009 , when austria , hungary , romania , bulgaria , and turkey signed an intergovernmental agreement on the project .

it is hoped that work on the pipeline could begin in 2011 , with the first gas supplies available by 2015 .

the full capacity of the pipeline , planned at 31 bcm , would be reached a few years later .

another u.s. - backed proposal is the italy - turkey - greece interconnector ( itgi ) gas pipeline .

the connection of the turkish and greek gas pipelines was completed in november 2007 .

the greek and italian gas transport systems are scheduled to be connected by 2012 .

the pipeline will have a capacity of 8 bcm per year , substantially smaller than nabucco or south stream .

itgi may be linked to nabucco , if it is built .

turkey plays a central role in all of these pipeline projects .

turkey limits shipping in the bosporus strait due to environmental concerns .

this reduces the potential for tankers to use the black sea to ship oil and gas to european markets .

therefore , supplies from the caucasus and central asia must cross turkey's territory or transit across the black sea from the caucasus in the east to the balkans in the west .

the united states has supported the american macedonian bulgarian oil pipeline ( ambo ) , another bosporus bypass project .

it could supply caspian oil from the bulgarian black sea port of burgas through macedonia to albania's adriatic port of vlore .

it is expected to be completed in 2011 .

turkey appears to be using its prime geographic location as bargaining leverage with both russia and the eu , in hopes of making turkey a regional energy hub .

after signing the intergovernmental agreement on nabucco in july 2009 , turkey agreed in august to allow russia to use turkey's territorial waters for south stream .

in exchange , russia will provide support for a trans - anatolian oil pipeline crossing turkey from the black sea to the mediterranean .

russia and turkey will also discuss expanding the blue stream natural gas pipeline between russia and turkey .

in addition , russia also agreed to build a nuclear power plant in turkey .

another proposed gas pipeline is white stream .

it would provide gas from the caspian through a pipeline under the black sea from georgia to crimea , in ukraine .

the pipeline would have to pass over russia's blue stream pipeline to turkey on the seabed .

in april 2009 , georgia and the white stream pipeline company signed a memorandum of understanding on the project .

however , it is unclear whether the pipeline can find financing in the current economic climate , or a source of supply .

bush administration officials criticized nord stream , which would traverse the baltic sea floor , supplying germany and other western european countries with natural gas , and bypassing the central and eastern european countries through which the main current pipelines run .

the u.s. supported discussions by poland , the nordic countries , and the baltic states on alternatives , including delivering norway's expanding gas production to northern europe via danish pipelines and by developing liquefied natural gas terminals in poland and the baltic states .

bush administration officials also criticized south stream , saying that it will not reduce dependence on russian supplies .

however , germany strongly supports nord stream , as it is looking for a dependable source of natural gas , particularly after the natural gas crises between russia and ukraine , which briefly interrupted supplies to central and western europe in 2006 and 2009 .

gazprom owns 51% of nord stream , while two german firms and a dutch firm , own the rest .

a french company has also agreed to join the consortium .

former german chancellor gerhard schroeder is chairman of the nord stream consortium .

on the other hand , the baltic countries , poland and ukraine have expressed concerns about nord stream , fearing that it will give moscow more leverage on energy issues with them .

after delays due to environmental concerns by sweden , finland , and denmark , through whose waters the pipeline would pass , nord stream is expected to begin laying the underwater segments of the pipeline later this year , with hopes that the pipeline will begin operation in late 2011 .

the obama administration has been less critical of nord stream and south stream than the bush administration .

part of the change in tone may be due to an effort to "reset" ties with russia that were frayed during the bush years .

u.s. eurasian energy envoy richard morningstar has denied that the united states and russia are involved in a "great game" — that is , a geopolitical struggle — for central asian energy supplies .

he has said that the united states should at least try to work with russia on the issue .

in contrast to statements by bush administration officials , morningstar has said that the united states does not oppose nord stream and south stream ; that the united states does not see nabucco as being in competition with south stream ; and that it is possible that russia could provide gas for nabucco .

the united states has advocated extending an existing oil pipeline that currently runs from the oil terminal at odesa in ukraine to brody , on the polish border .

this pipeline could then be extended to gdansk in northern poland .

at present , however , the odesa - brody pipeline runs in the reverse direction , pumping russian oil to odesa .

these u.s. efforts at "pipeline diplomacy" face challenges .

the success or failure of these projects will likely depend more on whether private energy firms find them profitable than on u.s. diplomatic skill and energy .

a particular concern is whether there is enough oil and natural gas to supply the various pipelines .

russian - supported pipelines appear to have the upper hand because they have supplies available .

their potential profitability makes them tempting even to central and eastern european countries that are trying to reduce dependence on russia .

in addition , moscow can offer them and western european firms participation in exploiting oil and natural gas fields in russia .

for example , the prospects for nabucco are clouded .

some observers believe russia developed south stream , which would take a similar route as nabucco , as an effort to undermine the rival pipeline .

south stream has the support of italy , bulgaria , serbia , and hungary .

the austrian state - controlled energy firm omv has agreed to sell a 50% stake in its baumgarten gas storage and distribution center to gazprom .

the move could allow moscow to block nabucco , as baumgarten is the planned terminus of the project .

in march 2009 , in what some observers viewed as another possible effort to block nabucco , the russian firm surgutneftegas acquired from omv a large stake in the hungarian energy giant mol , a key player in the nabucco project .

the hungarian government has supported both nabucco and south stream .

it is unclear whether sufficient natural gas supplies exist for nabucco .

the united states is strongly opposed to tapping iran's energy resources , due to iran's support of terrorism , its nuclear ambitions , its policy in iraq , and other factors .

political uncertainty in iraq makes it uncertain whether supplies can be drawn from there in the near future .

for the present , therefore , the main u.s. hopes lie with central asia and azerbaijan .

russia and iran have placed an obstacle in the way of u.s. - supported efforts .

they have asserted that no country bordering the caspian sea can legally undertake projects such as building a pipeline on the seabed or drilling for oil and gas there without the consent of all caspian littoral states .

although the other littoral states reject the russo - iranian view , this position could make potential investors leery of investing in such a project .

shipments via tanker across the caspian to baku can be increased , but would be more expensive .

long - standing tensions between azerbaijan and turkmenistan over their caspian sea border could also hinder u.s. plans .

on the other hand , russia's own pipeline routes face supply questions as well .

current russian gas fields in siberia are in decline , and the development of new ones , such shtokman in the barents sea and the yamal peninsula , have been hit by delays .

in the past , russia has been able to make up for any supply shortfalls by delivering supplies from central asian countries .

however , russia's grip on central asian supplies has been called into question .

a dispute erupted between russia and turkmenistan over responsibility for an explosion in a gas pipeline in turkmenistan in april 2009 , while led to a halt in russian gas imports from turkmenistan .

supplies resumed in 2010 , albeit at a reduced level .

turkmenistan is moving to diversify its supply routes by developing pipelines toward china and the rest of asia .

a pipeline from turkmenistan to china opened in 2009 , delivering 30 bcm of gas per year .

turkmenistan has also expanded its gas pipeline capacity to iran , which is expected to reach 20 bcm eventually .

turkmen leaders have also expressed interest in providing gas via nabucco , if it is built , but no commitments have been made .

azerbaijan is the most eager advocate in the region of the u.s. - supported pipeline plans , but has the disadvantage that it has only modest amounts of natural gas to export at present .

the united states hopes that this will change by 2015 or 2016 as azerbaijan develops its shah deniz gas fields .

however , azerbaijan has shown impatience with delays in the nabucco project .

in march 2009 , russia and azerbaijan signed a memorandum of understanding to sell azerbaijani gas to russia .

the decision could deal a serious blow to nabucco , depending on the volumes of gas that are exported to russia in the future .

the signing of the intergovernmental agreement on nabucco was a step forward , but prospects for the pipeline continue to be clouded by the failure of azerbaijan and turkey to come to terms over pricing of gas supplies .

the europeans , supported by the united states , may be able to take other steps to diversify their energy supplies .

oil and natural gas pipelines in europe run in a mainly east - west direction .

more north - south interconnections within europe could help to buffer any shortfalls in a particular region , such as occurred during the gas crises of 2006 and 2009 .

larger storage facilities could also be helpful in this regard .

european leaders have endorsed european commission proposals to enhance interconnections within europe and increase storage .

in 2010 , the european union agreed to allocate 1.39 billion euro ( $1.9 billion ) for projects to improve the interconnectivity of european natural gas pipelines .

included in the amount is 200 million euro for nabucco .

liquefied natural gas ( lng ) delivered to terminals throughout europe may be an economical substitute for natural gas from gazprom pipelines .

interconnections and lng could help create an integrated gas market in europe .

this would make it easier for countries to diversify their supplies and find the best price , rather than have to rely on long - term "take or pay" contracts signed with gazprom .

these contracts require consumers to buy at least a minimum amount of gas , even if they do not need it .

moreover , although the price for the gas is determined by a formula that includes the market price for oil and other fuels , these contracts can result in prices that are higher than in the growing "spot" market for gas .

already , lng ( largely from north africa ) makes up 15% of europe's gas imports , and is particularly important for some western european countries .

for example , 65% of spain's gas imports are lng.. poland intends to build an lng terminal on the baltic sea in order to diversity its supplies .

it hopes to have the terminal in operation by 2014 .

the new terminal will be able to serve countries in central europe and the balkans as they pursue efforts to interconnect their pipelines .

another option for these countries is a planned lng terminal on the adriatic sea in croatia .

advances in tapping "unconventional gas" ( that is , gas from sources such as shale deposits or coalbeds that once had been viewed as too difficult technically or too expensive ) could result in increased lng production from a wider variety of suppliers , perhaps resulting in a further erosion of russia's leverage .

the united states is a leading producer of unconventional gas .

u.s. and european officials have stressed the need for countries of the region to improve energy conservation and develop alternative fuels , although they acknowledge that these efforts will take time .

in the long run , russia's statist , manipulative approach to energy policy may eventually be moderated by its own needs .

some observers believe that russia will need western investment and expertise to fully exploit new oil and natural gas fields in remote areas as current ones decline .

this may provide an opening for the united states and other countries to persuade russia to liberalize its energy sector .

on the other hand , the current statist system has provided russia's leaders with immense personal wealth and power , and afforded them the satisfaction of overseeing russia's renewed international strength .

they may not want to change this system , even if it might be in russia's long - term interest to do so .

in addition to diplomacy , the united states has other tools to deal with the energy dependency question .

the united states has funded feasibility studies for some pipeline routes through the trade and development administration ( tda ) .

for example , in august 2007 , the tda provided $1.7 million for feasibility studies on building both an oil and a gas pipeline across the caspian sea to link to the btc pipeline and the south caucasus gas pipeline .

the export - import bank has also provided funds for pipeline projects .

the united states and eu are working with ukraine to develop an energy efficiency action plan for that country .

the united states and eu have also urged ukraine to improve its investment climate to encourage foreign investment in tapping ukraine's own considerable natural gas and oil resources .

the united states provides small amounts of aid to the countries of the region to help build their energy security .

members of congress have expressed concern about the impact of russian energy dependency on the countries of central and eastern europe .

members have sharply criticized russian policy and called on the european union to work with the united states in helping these countries diversify their energy supplies .

senator richard lugar has called for a greater nato role in energy security issues , including providing emergency energy assistance to member states facing a sudden energy cutoff .

bush administration officials said nato could play a greater role in the security of pipelines and other energy infrastructure , but that broader energy issues are best dealt with in other venues .

in the 111 th congress , the senate foreign relations committee has held hearings on policy toward russia in march 2009 and energy security in may 2009 .

in both hearings , senator john kerry , chairman of the committee , senator lugar , and witnesses before the committee expressed concern about russia's use of energy supplies for political purposes .

in july 2009 , the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on energy security during which senator kerry and senator lugar hailed the signing of the intergovernmental agreement on nabucco , at which senator lugar was present .

nabucco was also discussed at an august 2009 senate foreign relations hearing on georgia .

in february 2009 , in a hearing of the house foreign affairs committee on u.s. - russian relations , chairman howard berman and several witnesses criticized russia's political use of energy in europe .

in hearings of the europe subcommittee of the house foreign affairs committee in june and july 2009 , members expressed concerns about russia's energy policy in europe with philip gordon , assistant secretary of state for europe and eurasia , who repeated administration calls for european energy diversification .

in a march 2010 hearing on trans - atlantic security , chairman berman and several witnesses referred to energy security as an issue in the relations between europe , the united states , and russia .

congress has also passed resolutions that refer to concerns about russian energy policy .

s.res .

530 , in a list of criticisms of russian policies on the eve of the st. petersburg g - 8 summit in july 2006 , expressed disapproval of russian energy policy toward ukraine , georgia , moldova , and other countries .

h.res .

500 , passed in july 2007 , charged that russia and other countries in creating a gas opec , and criticized russia's use of its gas supplies as a political tool against georgia , ukraine , belarus , and other countries .

in july 2008 , the senate passed s.res .

612 , which called on the united states and other countries to build a constructive relationship with moscow at the 2008 g - 8 summit , but criticized some russian policies .

it said that "the conduct of russian trade and energy policy has created a widespread perception that the government of the russian federation is using oil and gas exports and economic policy as a means of political pressure on countries that seek closer ties with the united states and euro - atlantic partners. .

in the 111 th congress , representative ros - lehtinen introduced h.con.res .

61 , which calls on russia's g8 membership to be conditioned on its compliance with its international obligations and commitment to democratic standards .

the resolution says that the russian government has apparently used its energy resources as a political tool against neighboring states , harassed domestic and foreign energy companies to gain control over these industries ; and tried to gain control over energy infrastructure in europe in order to dominate european energy markets .

