" infectious diseases are not a thing of the past .... we need to continually adapt our prevention and response capabilities in an era of increasing threat and globalization. .

the international saga of andrew speaker , a traveler thought to have xdr - tb , an extensively drug - resistant form of tuberculosis , placed a spotlight on existing mechanisms to contain contagious disease threats and raised numerous legal and public health issues .

this report presents the factual situation presented by andrew speaker , an analysis of various public health emergency measures available to contain emergent public health threats when individuals with serious communicable diseases attempt to use public transportation such as commercial aviation , and legal issues related to the use of such public health measures .

tuberculosis ( tb ) is a bacterial infection which usually attacks the lungs but can also damage other parts of the body .

it is spread when an infected person coughs , sneezes , sings , or talks and another person breathes in the bacteria .

the risk of becoming infected depends on various factors including the extent of the disease in the person with tb , the duration of the exposure , and ventilation .

for example , when an infected individual travels on an airplane , the risk to other passengers is increased by proximity to the infected person , and the time spent on board .

while the overall risk of tb or any communicable disease being transmitted on board aircraft is low , the increasing availability and duration of air travel increase the possibility of exposure to people with tb .

the world health organization ( who ) has stated that one in three people in the world is infected with dormant tb bacteria .

generally , these individuals become ill only when the bacteria become active , often as a result of lowered immunity , such as when an individual has hiv / aids .

tb is usually treatable with antibiotics , but antibiotic resistance has been increasing , partly as a result of the misuse or mismanagement of the medication .

multi - drug resistant tb ( mdr - tb ) is resistant to two of the most effective antibiotics .

extensively drug resistant tb ( xdr - tb ) is a type of mdr - tb which is resistant not only to the first - line antibiotics , but also to other second - line drugs .

xdr - tb is a serious condition because the treatment options are limited and successful treatment is not always possible .

in 2006 who issued a global alert about xdr - tb which has been described as underscoring "the harsh reality that xdr - tb has the potential to transform a once treatable infection into an infectious disease as deadly , if not more so , than tb at the beginning of the 20 th century. .

on may 12 , 2007 , andrew speaker , a man with tuberculosis , flew from atlanta , ga , to europe , where he was married in greece , and then traveled to italy .

while mr. speaker was in europe , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) completed testing showing that he was infected with xdr - tb .

at that point , cdc attempted to reach the patient in europe , and to prevent his use of public transportation , such as passenger aviation , for his return to the united states .

fearing he would not be able to return to the united states for treatment , mr. speaker , without cdc's knowledge , flew to canada and entered the united states by car on may 24 .

although cdc had alerted u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) in the department of homeland security to the possibility that mr. speaker was en route to the united states , mr. speaker was not stopped at the border .

once in the united states , mr. speaker contacted cdc , and voluntarily went to a hospital in new york city .

on may 25 , cdc issued a federal order of provisional quarantine and medical examination pursuant to section 361 of the public health service act .

 ( this was the first such order since 1963. ) .

mr. speaker was then flown in a cdc aircraft to an atlanta hospital , and later to the national jewish medical and research center in denver , for treatment .

on june 2 , the federal order was rescinded when denver health officials assumed public health responsibility for mr. speaker's case .

on july 3 , 2007 , physicians determined that mr. speaker had multi - drug resistant tuberculosis ( mdr - tb ) rather than xdr - tb .

on july 17 , he had surgery to remove diseased and damaged tissue in his lung .

mr. speaker was released from the national jewish medical and research center in denver on july 26 after doctors determined that he was no longer contagious and had no further detectable evidence of infection .

he was to continue antibiotic treatment for two years and was required to check in with local health authorities five days a week and have his treatment directly observed by health care workers .

on april 28 , 2009 , mr. speaker filed suit claiming that the cdc violated the privacy act by disclosing protected information concerning his identity and medical history and seeking damages .

the district court granted the cdc's motion to dismiss the case for failure to state a claim .

however , on appeal , the eleventh circuit reversed the district court decision finding that mr. speaker had provided enough factual specificity and raised a reasonable inference .

the case was remanded for consideration on the merits .

incidents involving persons with serious communicable diseases who disregard medical advice and either board commercial aircraft or express the intention to fly , cross borders , or take other forms of public transportation , have prompted the expansion of public health measures which may be used in emergency situations involving a public health threat .

some available measures , such as quarantine and isolation authorities , date back many hundreds of years , while others , such as the public health "do not board" list , are recent measures , largely implemented in response to the andrew speaker incident in 2007 .

the situation presented by andrew speaker raises a classic civil rights issue: to what extent can an individual's liberty be curtailed to advance the common good ? .

the u.s. constitution and federal civil rights laws provide for individual due process and equal protection rights as well as a right to privacy , but these rights are balanced against the needs of the community .

with the advance of medical treatments in recent years , especially the use of antibiotics , the civil rights of the individual with a contagious disease have been emphasized .

however , classic public health measures such as quarantine , isolation , and contact tracing are , nevertheless , available in appropriate situations and , as new or resurgent diseases have become less treatable , some of these classic public health measures have been increasingly used .

therefore , the issue of how to balance these various interests in a modern culture which is sensitive to issues of individual rights has become critical .

constitutional rights to due process and equal protection may be implicated by the imposition of a quarantine or isolation order .

the fifth and fourteenth amendments prohibit governments at all levels from depriving individuals of any constitutionally protected liberty interest without due process of law .

what process may be due under certain circumstances is generally determined by balancing the individual's interest at stake against the governmental interest served by the restraints , determining whether the measures are reasonably calculated to achieve the government's aims , and deciding whether the least restrictive means have been employed to further that interest .

in o ' connor v. donaldson the supreme court examined the civil commitment of an individual to a mental hospital and held that "a state cannot constitutionally confine without more a nondangerous individual who is capable of surviving safely in freedom by himself or with the help of willing and responsible family members or friends. .

clearly , an individual who is highly contagious with a serious illness may be considered dangerous , and thus subject to involuntary confinement if there is no less restrictive alternative .

the lesson of donaldson is that such confinements must be carefully examined in order to comport with the constitutional right to due process .

donaldson also raises the issue of whether less restrictive programs are required prior to the imposition of the more restrictive application of isolation or quarantine .

it could be argued that the least restrictive alternative must first be applied or more restrictive alternatives will run afoul of constitutional requirements .

the unequal treatment of certain socially disfavored groups with regard to quarantine also raises equal protection issues .

for example , in wong wai v. williamson a board of health resolution mandated chinese residents to be quarantined for bubonic plague unless they submitted to inoculation with a serum with "the only justification offered for this discrimination ... a suggestion ... that this particular race is more liable to the plague than any other. .

the court struck the resolution as a violation of the equal protection clause .

although the constitution does not specifically grant a right to travel , the supreme court has held that there is a fundamental right to travel .

this right , and the applicable due process procedures , have been examined in the context of transportation security , particularly regarding alleged terrorists .

generally , restrictions on travel , such as identification policies for boarding airplanes , have not been found to violate the constitution .

if the public safety arguments have prevailed regarding restrictions due to transportation security , they would be likely to prevail against a serious public health threat .

however , the seriousness of the threat and the due process procedures used would be key to any constitutional determination .

in addition to constitutional issues , discrimination against an individual with an infectious disease may be covered by certain federal laws , notably section 504 of the rehabilitation act , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , and the air carrier access act ( acaa ) .

however , under these statutes , an individual with a contagious disease does not have to be given access to a place of public accommodation or employment if such access would place other individuals at a significant risk .

although the language of section 504 does not specifically discuss contagious diseases , the supreme court dealt with discrimination issues in the context of tuberculosis and section 504 in school board of nassau county v. arline .

the court found that in most cases an individualized inquiry is necessary in order to protect individuals with disabilities from "deprivation based on prejudice , stereotypes , or unfounded fear , while giving appropriate weight to such legitimate concerns of grantees as avoiding exposing others to significant health and safety risks. .

the court adopted the test enunciated by the american medical association ( ama ) amicus brief and held that the factors which must be considered include "findings of facts , based on reasonable medical judgments given the state of medical knowledge , about ( a ) the nature of the risk ( how the disease is transmitted ) , ( b ) the duration of the risk ( how long is the carrier infectious ) , ( c ) the severity of the risk ( what is the potential harm to third parties ) and ( d ) the probabilities the disease will be transmitted and will cause varying degrees of harm. .

the court also emphasized that courts "normally should defer to the reasonable medical judgments of public health officials. .

the ada provides nondiscrimination protections to individuals with contagious diseases but balances this protection with requirements designed to protect the health of other individuals .

title i of the ada , which prohibits employment discrimination against otherwise qualified individuals with disabilities , specifically states that "the term 'qualifications standards' may include a requirement that an individual shall not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the workplace. .

in addition , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) is required to publish , and update , a list of infectious and communicable diseases that may be transmitted through handling the food supply .

similarly , title iii , which prohibits discrimination in public accommodations and services operated by private entities , states the following: nothing in this title shall require an entity to permit an individual to participate in or benefit from the goods , services , facilities , privileges , advantages and accommodations of such entity where such individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others .

the term 'direct threat' means a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies , practices , or procedures or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services .

although title ii , which prohibits discrimination by state and local government services , does not contain such specific language , it does require an individual to be "qualified" and this is defined in part as meeting "the essential eligibility requirements of the receipt of services or the participation in programs or activities. .

this language has been found by the department of justice to require the same interpretation of direct threat as in title iii .

contagious diseases were discussed in the ada's legislative history .

the senate report noted that the qualification standards permitted with regard to employment under title i may include a requirement that an individual with a currently contagious disease or infection shall not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the workplace and cited to school board of nassau county v. arline , the section 504 case discussed previously .

similarly , the house report of the committee on education and labor reiterated the reference to arline and added "[t]hus the term 'direct threat' is meant to connote the full standard set forth in the arline decision. .

the air carrier access act ( acaa ) prohibits discrimination by air carriers against "otherwise qualified individual[s]" on the basis of disability .

enacted in 1986 , prior to the ada , the acaa contains no statutory reference to communicable diseases .

however , the regulations , like the ada and its regulations , generally treat individuals with communicable diseases as falling within the definition of "individual with a disability. .

the regulations prohibit various actions by carriers against individuals with communicable diseases .

a carrier may not " ( 1 ) refuse to provide transportation to the person , ( 2 ) require the person to provide a medical certificate , or ( 3 ) impose on the person any condition , restriction , or requirement not imposed on other passengers. .

however , an exception applies when an individual "poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others. .

"direct threat" is defined as "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies , practices , or procedures , or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services. .

