this report provides a brief analysis of haiti's development needs .

it examines the current situation in haiti , haiti's development needs , and what is being done by the haitian government , the united states , and foreign donors to meet those needs .

it also addresses priority areas for haitian development .

haiti and its multilateral and bilateral donors developed an international assistance strategy , known as the interim cooperation framework ( icf ) , to address haiti's short - term needs following the collapse of the government of president jean - bertrand aristide in february 2004 .

the cooperation framework has been extended through 2007 , and is the basis from which a long term poverty reduction strategy is being developed .

the second part of the report uses the interim cooperation framework's outline to organize statistics related to the priority needs that have been established .

these statistics illustrate the challenges posed by current conditions of poverty in haiti for achieving haiti's development goals .

haiti's poverty is massive and deep .

over half the population ( 54% ) of 8.2 million people live in extreme poverty , living on less than $1 a day ; 76% live on $2 or less a day .

poverty among the rural population is even more widespread: 69% of rural dwellers live on less than $1 a day , and 86% live on less than $2 a day .

hunger is also widespread: 81% of the national population and 87% of the rural population do not get the minimum daily ration of food defined by the world health organization .

in order to reach its millennium development goal of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015 , haiti's gross domestic product ( gdp ) would have to grow 3.5% per year , a goal the international monetary fund ( imf ) says haiti is not considered likely to achieve .

economic growth for fy2006 is estimated to have been 2.5% .

over the past 40 years , haiti's per capita real gdp has declined by 30% .

therefore , economic growth , even if it is greater than population growth , is not expected to be enough to reduce poverty .

the likelihood that economic growth will contribute to reduction of poverty in haiti is further reduced by its enormous income distribution gap .

haiti has the second largest income disparity in the world .

over 68% of the total national income accrues to the wealthiest 20% of the population , while less than 1.5% of haiti's national income is accumulated by the poorest 20% of the population .

when the level of inequality is as high as haiti's , according to the world bank , the capacity of economic growth to reduce poverty "approaches zero. .

president rené préval , who was inaugurated to a five - year term on may 14 , 2006 , recently completed his first year in office .

he outlined his government's two main missions to be building institutions as provided for in the constitution — including the new municipal posts filled by elections on december 3 , 2006 — and creating conditions for private investment in order to create jobs .

préval has criticized the donor community for not dispersing funds quickly enough .

some international donors have complained that préval's government keeps changing priorities - first children's needs , then road - building , then security issues .

crime and kidnapping levels have been high , leading préval's government and the u.n. mission in haiti ( minustah ) to focus on improving security .

plagued by chronic political instability and frequent natural disasters , the republic of haiti remains the poorest country in the western hemisphere .

the united nations designates haiti as one of the fifty "least developed countries" in the world .

"least developed countries" ( ldcs ) [are] a category of states that are deemed highly disadvantaged in their development process... , and facing more than other countries the risk of failing to come out of poverty .

as such , the ldcs are considered to be in need of the highest degree of attention on the part of the international community....the un gives a strong signal to the development partners of these countries , and points to the need for special international support measures and concessions in their favour .

haiti has many priorities for development that are deeply interconnected .

to address the persistent poverty crisis in the country , the haitian government and the international donor community , including the united states , are implementing and developing assistance strategies that address many development needs simultaneously .

in the short - term , they are trying to implement projects that will boost public and investor confidence .

at the same time , the government and donors are pursuing medium - term development plans that will improve living conditions for haiti's vast poor population and construct government institutions capable of providing services and stability .

the haitian government is working with international donors to develop a long - term poverty reduction plan .

since 2000 , in response to unresolved elections disputes and questions of transparency , u.s. and other foreign donors have directed assistance through non - governmental organizations .

the interim government ( 2004-2006 ) focused on macroeconomic performance .

the préval administration has continued efforts begun by that government , maintaining fiscal discipline and implementing structural economic reforms .

now that an elected government is in place , donors are looking at how to ensure transparency as they provide funds directly to the government again .

in addition , since president préval took office in may 2006 , both the new government and international donors are shifting from a short - term program to carry haiti through a transition period to a long - term program to help reduce poverty in haiti .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) 's primary objective in haiti for 2007-2009 is , "helping to meet the basic needs of haitian citizens. .

according to usaid's fy2007 budget justification , these basic needs include "better education and healthcare ; more jobs and economic opportunities ; greater access to equitably applied justice ; humanitarian assistance ; and institutions capable of providing these basic needs. .

usaid's programs are based on the objectives , strategy , and monitoring indicators established under the interim cooperation framework .

usaid began implementing new strategies in three areas in fy2007 .

because haiti's poor have become even more vulnerable by the complex disasters arising out of instability and insecurity , one program is aimed at protecting vulnerable populations .

this program includes efforts to: ( 1 ) improve emergency preparedness and disaster mitigation ; ( 2 ) protect and increase the food security of groups such as children under five years of age , and pregnant and lactating women ; ( 3 ) work with vulnerable populations to increase family income and decrease food insecurity ; and ( 4 ) promote stability by providing short - term employment opportunities in violence - prone areas , especially for out - of - school youth .

the proposed budget for this program for fy2007 was $10.6 million in development assistance ( da ) , and $19 million in economic support funds ( esf ) .

 ( congress has passed continuing resolutions for fy2007 , and funding for fy2007 is still unclear. ) .

the second new strategy involves democracy and governance .

this program aims to strengthen civil society organizations so that they can reach out to groups traditionally excluded from the political process , and apply pressure on the haitian government to create and implement good governance reforms .

judicial reform programs focus on improving the justice ministry's capacity to function ; providing protection and treatment for victims of organized violence ; preventing human trafficking ; and providing specialized education and other opportunities for marginalized youth in haiti's most violent areas .

other programs aim to strengthen the parliament , and help local government institutions be able to incorporate citizen input and deliver services .

the proposed fy2007 budget for this program is $8 million in development assistance ( da ) , and $13 million in economic support funds ( esf ) .

the third new strategy involves education .

the four elements of this program include ( 1 ) investment in primary schools to achieve equitable access to quality basic education ; ( 2 ) supporting the social integration of adolescents through vocational / technical education ; ( 3 ) strengthening the capacity of the ministry of education ; and ( 4 ) increasing government oversight of education at the local level .

the proposed fy2007 funding for this program is $4.6 million in development assistance ( da ) , and $6 million in economic support funds ( esf ) .

overall , the bush administration requested $198 million for haiti for fy2007 .

levels for child survival and health , development assistance , and counternarcotics assistance funds decreased .

hiv / aids funding increased as part of the president's emergency plan for aids relief .

the administration's fy2008 request of $223 million represents increases in economic support funds and hiv / aids funding , but decreases in all other categories of aid to haiti from fy2006 and proposed fy2007 levels .

comparing fy2006 levels to fy2008 requested levels of aid to haiti , esf would increase from $49.5 million to $63.5 million ; global hiv / aids initiative funding would increase from $47.3 million $83 million .

child survival and health would decrease from $19.8 million to $18.0 million ; development assistance would decrease from $29.7 million to $14.8 million ; foreign military financing from $98,000 to $0 ; international military education and training from $213,000 to $200,000 ; international narcotics control and law enforcement would decrease from $17.5 million to $9 million , and p.l .

480 food assistance would decrease from $39.5 million to $34.5 million .

according to the imf mission chief for haiti , the préval administration has made concerted efforts to continue the strong macroeconomic performance initiated by the interim government , maintaining fiscal discipline and continuing structural economic reforms , such as passing a new organic budget law .

most analysts agree , however , that even strong macroeconomic performance will not be enough to reduce poverty in haiti .

the imf points out that enormous political , technical , and institutional challenges must also be overcome before poverty reduction objectives can be achieved .

the world bank and others say that it is highly unlikely that economic growth will reduce poverty as long as haiti's income inequality remains as high as it is — and by 2030 the income gap is expected to grow .

three factors contributing to income inequality are: a large disparity in the capacity to generate income , with the rural areas having the least capacity ; access to education , which only half the population has ; and whether or not a household receives remittances from abroad .

analysts say that policy aimed at reducing income inequality in haiti should address decentralization , to provide more and better infrastructure and services throughout the country .

according to the world bank , public spending on education that is targeted toward the poor can reduce poverty in both the short - and long - term .

access to education , it says , can reduce poverty relatively quickly by increasing individual productivity and helping to shift poor people from low - paying agricultural employment to better paying jobs in the industrial and service sectors .

in the long - term , the bank says , education can increase poor children's chances of breaking out of the cycle of poverty by gaining access to formal employment .

this means , however , that investment and the economy must be strong enough to create job opportunities for newly educated people .

usaid defines three groups of challenges facing development efforts in haiti: public sector institutions with little capacity to govern ; a weak private sector whose growth is extremely limited by an atmosphere of insecurity ; and the degradation of haiti's natural resources , which are needed for productive economic activities .

because haiti's current capacity is so limited , and its needs are so great , the imf maintains that technical assistance will be crucial in making progress .

according to the haitian government , there has never been a systematic policy for poverty reduction nor a coherent program with precisely defined objectives .

haiti's limited capacity to develop plans and absorb funds , and donors' concerns over transparency of government spending continue to pose obstacles to the execution of development programs .

both donors and the haitian government share responsibility for addressing problems with the disbursement of funds and the coordination of foreign assistance .

the préval administration notes in its interim poverty reduction strategy paper that the capacities of those who have a stake in the poverty reduction process are also "generally inadequate for the implementation of such a process," and calls for assistance to strengthen those stakeholders' capacities as well .

usaid's office of transition initiatives , which provides "fast flexible short - term assistance targeted at key political transition and stabilization needs," worked in haiti from 2004 to 2006 .

its mission identified three ingredients necessary to increase security in haiti's most violence - prone areas: community ownership , development assistance , and rule of law , and said that all three elements must be present .

it also said that programs targeted at reducing violence must address "spoilers," whether political or criminal , who want to incite disorder to promote their own interests .

the millennium development goal that the haitian government agreed to in 2000 for environmental sustainability was to reverse losses by 2015 .

according to the imf , this will be difficult to achieve , as losses have continued over the last decade , and environmental policies are weak .

currently , only 3.8% of total land area is forested .

a weak political structure combined with ongoing political tensions , violence , massive poverty , and income inequality have made it difficult to pursue the goals of interim development and poverty reduction plans , and will do so for the successor poverty reduction plan as well , if not adequately addressed .

several indices show haiti lagging far behind countries in the region and the world in terms of development .

as mentioned earlier , the united nations designates haiti as one of the fifty "least developed countries" in the world .

the economist intelligence unit ranked haiti second - to - last in its 111-country quality - of - life index .

the quality - of - life index uses the weighted measure of nine quality - of - life indicators to determine a country's quality - of - life score on a progressive scale from 1 to 10 .

with a score of 4.090 , haiti trailed behind the other 21 latin american and caribbean countries included in the study .

the united nations development program's human development index ( hdi ) measures a country's indicators for life - span , education , and income against established goalposts , yielding a score along a progressive scale from 0 to 1 .

haiti's hdi score is 0.482 , behind the latin american and caribbean regional score of 0.795 .

haiti ranked 154 th out of 177 countries ( 177 being the least developed ) , the only country in the americas or the caribbean to fall in the category of countries of "low human development. .

this section uses the interim cooperation framework's outline to organize statistics related to some of the priority needs that have been established .

these figures and tables put international efforts into the context of haitian poverty , drawing a statistical overview to convey the extent of the poverty in haiti and the obstacles that must be overcome in order for development to occur there .

