the age discrimination in employment act ( adea ) of 1967 , as amended , seeks to address the longstanding problem of age discrimination in the workplace .

the adea , which prohibits employment discrimination against persons over the age of 40 , was enacted "to promote employment of older persons based on their ability rather than age ; to prohibit arbitrary age discrimination in employment ; [and] to help employers and workers find ways of meeting problems arising from the impact of age on employment. .

the adea makes it unlawful for an employer "to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation , terms , conditions , or privileges of employment , because of such individual's age. .

the statute not only applies to hiring , discharge , and promotion , but also prohibits discrimination in employee benefit plans such as health coverage and pensions .

in addition to employers , the adea also applies to labor organizations and employment agencies .

after it was enacted , the adea went through a series of amendments to strengthen and expand its coverage of older employees .

originally , the adea only covered employees between the ages of 40 and 65 .

eventually the upper age limit was extended to age 70 , and then eliminated altogether .

in 1978 , enforcement authority of the adea was transferred from the department of labor to the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) .

the adea is not the only legal remedy available to employees who have been subject to age discrimination .

other laws that may offer some degree of protection include the u.s. constitution , federal statutes such as the age discrimination act and the congressional accountability act , and various state laws .

one alternative remedy to the adea is the u.s. constitution .

although an employee seeking a remedy for age discrimination in employment may decide to file a constitutional challenge based on the equal protection clause , such a claim is unlikely to be successful .

because the equal protection clause applies only to governmental entities , a plaintiff must show state action in order to establish such a claim .

moreover , the courts generally review legislation involving age classifications under a deferential standard of review , meaning that such legislation is highly likely to survive judicial scrutiny .

for example , in gregory v. ashcroft , the supreme court considered an equal protection clause challenge to a missouri law that required state judges to retire at age 70 .

noting that "age is not a suspect classification under the equal protection claus" "and that the plaintiffs did not "have a fundamental interest in serving as judges," the court reviewed the claim under the deferential rational basis standard .

ultimately , the court held that the state had a legitimate and rational basis for requiring retirement of their state judges to ensure the competency and efficacy of their judiciary .

other remedial alternatives to the adea may be found in other federal statutes .

for example , the age discrimination act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in federally funded programs or activities .

although each federal agency is responsible for enforcing compliance with respect to its funding recipients , the statute states that agencies are not authorized to take action against recipients with respect to their employment practices .

however , it is possible , though not certain , that individuals may bring employment - related suits on their own .

meanwhile , as noted above , the congressional accountability act applies several existing civil rights , labor , and workplace laws — including the adea — to employees of the legislative branch of the federal government .

finally , in addition to federal laws , most states have laws that prohibit age discrimination in private employment .

the adea does not preempt such state laws , even when those laws are more stringent than the adea .

