pursuant to the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has established regulations regarding the transport , treatment , storage , and disposal of hazardous wastes .

rcra establishes certain minimum standards that states must meet .

however , states have the option to implement requirements that are more stringent than those specified under rcra .

many states have opted to do so — particularly with regard to the management of certain hazardous wastes generated by households .

households and certain small businesses are essentially exempt from rcra .

this means that under federal law , hazardous wastes generated by those entities may be disposed of in municipal solid waste landfills or incinerators .

one category of household hazardous waste that many states are choosing to regulate more strictly is electronic waste , commonly referred to as "e - waste. .

there is no universally accepted definition of e - waste , but it generally refers to obsolete , broken , or irreparable electronic equipment such as televisions , computers and computer monitors , laptops , printers , cell phones , vcrs , dvd players , copiers , fax machines , stereos , and video gaming systems .

state and local agencies , particularly municipal waste management agencies , have become increasingly concerned about the landfill disposal or incineration of e - waste because of the large volumes in which it is being generated and because of the hazardous constituents the waste may contain .

to avoid landfill disposal or incineration , e - waste may be recycled .

recycling may include any of a number of services or processes , such as: sorting to find reusable devices ( which may in turn be sold or donated to an entity such as a school or charitable organization ) ; demanufacturing into component parts that can be resold ; or further processing components to extract materials such as metals , glass , or plastic .

for example , leaded glass in a cathode ray tube ( crt ) may be recovered and reprocessed to produce new crts .

recycling can be a costly process ( see "the cost of recycling electronics," below ) .

a challenge to many states is how to finance an e - waste collection and recycling program .

to date , 14 states have enacted some form of legislation or regulations that will affect e - waste recycling and disposal practices .

as more states propose such legislation , potentially regulated stakeholders ( particularly electronics manufacturers and retailers ) have expressed concern that they will be required to comply with a patchwork of state requirements throughout the united states .

in 2005 , two congressional hearings were held to explore issues associated with e - waste , and the congressional e - waste working group was formed .

one goal common to both the hearings and the establishment of the working group was to explore potential national solutions to the e - waste management issue .

with increased legislative activity in the states , it is anticipated that stakeholders will increase their call for federal legislation regarding e - waste management .

to illustrate the issues associated with individual state action , this report discusses the key issues that have led to state action , describes common elements in state waste laws and proposals , and provides an overview of each enacted state law .

fourteen states have enacted some form of e - waste management law .

although the goals of each law are similar — to avoid landfill disposal of certain e - waste — the approaches taken to achieve those goals differ significantly .

however , most state laws and proposals have certain broad elements in common , such as specifying the electronic devices covered under the law , how a collection and recycling program will be financed , collection and recycling criteria that must be implemented to minimize impacts on human health and the environment , and restrictions or requirements that products must meet to be lawfully sold in the state .

state e - waste laws are similar in that they intend to facilitate the recycling of certain electronic devices .

although the designated ceds vary slightly from state to state , all include crts from computer monitors .

aside from that similarity , each state's means of achieving its goals is significantly different .

following this overview of enacted state e - waste laws , table 1 compares key elements of each program .

on april 9 , 2001 , the state enacted the arkansas computer and electronic solid waste management act .

the law applies to computer and electronic equipment — defined as a personal computer , computer component , audio player , stereo player , videocassette player , facsimile machine , copy machine , cellular telephone , wireless paging device , video game console , or any electronic item containing an intact or broken crt .

the law authorizes the state's department of environmental quality to establish and implement rules and regulations banning the disposal of all computer and electronic equipment in arkansas landfills by january 1 , 2008 ( that deadline was extended from the original date of january 1 , 2005 ) .

the law also establishes a program that requires state agencies to develop plans to sell , reuse , recycle , or dispose of surplus computer equipment and electronics ; and encourages those agencies to donate unsold equipment to arkansas public schools .

a portion of the funds generated from selling surplus electronics must be allocated to a computer and electronics recycling fund , also established by the law .

among other activities , funds may be used for product market research and development grants to determine the most efficient means of collecting , transporting , and processing scrap electronic equipment , and to establish statewide contracts for computer and electronics recycling and demanufacturing businesses .

california's electronic waste recycling act of 2003 was enacted on september 24 , 2003 , and subsequently amended september 29 , 2004 .

the law applies to new or refurbished televisions or computer monitors that use a crt or liquid crystal display ( lcd ) , laptop computers , or any other video display device larger than four inches .

beginning january 1 , 2005 , the law requires that at the time of retail sale , california consumers must pay an "electronic waste recycling fee" ranging from $6 to $10 , depending on screen size .

no recycling fee is assessed on the resale or reuse of a covered device .

retailers are required to transfer the collected fees to the board of equalization , which in turn deposits the money into an account managed by the california integrated waste management board ( ciwmb ) .

the ciwmb distributes the funds from this account to approved recyclers or to registered manufacturers that are collecting and recycling ceds .

following are additional requirements of california's e - waste program: a new or refurbished ced cannot be sold without a clearly visible label showing the name of the manufacturer or the manufacturer's brand .

ced wastes cannot be exported to a foreign country without proper notification to the state department of toxic substances control .

the sale of electronic devices that would be prohibited for sale under the rohs directive would be prohibited for sale in the state .

state agencies purchasing or leasing covered electronic devices must require prospective bidders to certify that they comply with the law .

a ban on the landfill disposal of crts went into effect under regulations issued by the state in 2001 .

on july 6 , 2007 , connecticut enacted its e - waste recycling law , which applies to desktop or personal computers , computer monitors , portable computers , crt - based televisions and non - crt - based televisions or any other similar or peripheral electronic device .

under this law , by january 2009 , manufacturers will be required to participate in a program to implement and finance the collection , transportation , and recycling of certain electronic devices .

the law requires manufacturers to register with the state department of environmental protection and pay an annual fee that the state will use to administer the recycling program .

also by january 2009 , municipalities must provide for the collection of ceds ; waste ceds must then be transported to and recycled by an approved recycler .

in addition to the registration fee , manufacturers must pay reasonable costs of transportation and recycling ceds attributed to them , and will be billed a pro rata market share for orphan devices .

following are additional elements of connecticut's e - waste program: by january 1 , 2008 , a manufacturer or retailer cannot sell a ced in the state unless it has permanently affixed , readily visible label with the manufacturer's brand .

to be eligible to receive funds from the state , ced collectors , transporters , and recyclers must meet performance standards established by the state .

retailers must provide consumers with information on recycling .

by january 1 , 2009 , ceds collected through any state program can not be exported for disposal in a manner that poses a significant risk to the public health or to the environment .

a landfill disposal ban will take effect in january 2011 .

on april 22 , 2004 , maine enacted the act to protect public health and the environment by providing for a system of shared responsibility for the safe collection and recycling of electronic waste .

the law applies to waste televisions and computer monitors ( crts and flat panel displays or similar video display devices with a screen greater than four inches measured diagonally ) .

the law implements a version of the producer - pays model that requires manufacturers to pay for the handling , transportation , and recycling of televisions and computer monitors .

by july 20 , 2006 , municipalities were required to ensure that waste televisions and computer monitors generated by households are recycled .

they are required to ensure that a system is in place for delivering residential waste televisions and computer monitors to a consolidation facility in maine .

each municipality may determine how this requirement will be met ( eg , operate an ongoing collection center , have one - day collections , or have residents deliver directly to a nearby consolidator ) .

beginning january 1 , 2006 , consolidation facilities were responsible for counting each household - generated waste television and computer monitor and determining the total from each manufacturer .

by march 1 of each year , beginning in 2007 , the consolidator must provide this accounting to the state department of environmental protection and submit a bill to manufacturers for allowable costs associated with recycling ( i.e. , the costs of handling , transportation , and recycling of their own television and computer monitor products , plus a pro rata share of orphan products ) .

the consolidator must also transport waste televisions and computer monitors to a certified recycling and dismantling facility .

following are additional elements of maine's e - waste program: all ceds offered for sale in the state must have a visible , permanently affixed label clearly identifying the manufacturer of the device .

retailers are prohibited from selling any ced offered for sale by a manufacturer not in compliance with the law .

recyclers must provide consolidators with a sworn statement that their operations meet environmentally sound management guidelines established by the state .

a ban on the landfill disposal of mercury - added products and crts went into effect under separate law on july 20 , 2006 .

the law implementing maryland's electronic recycling program took effect on july 1 , 2005 , and was subsequently amended with changes that take effect october 1 , 2007 .

the law , implemented as a pilot program scheduled to end december 31 , 2010 , applies to manufacturers of computer or video display devices ( crt , lcd , plasma , digital , or other image - projection technology ) with a screen greater than four inches .

to sell ceds in maryland , manufacturers of more than 1,000 devices a year must register with the maryland department of the environment and pay a $10,000 registration fee ( before the amendment , the fee was $5,000 ) .

in subsequent years , manufacturers must pay a $5,000 annual fee .

manufacturers with an approved takeback program pay an annual fee of $500 .

the fees are deposited in a fund to make grants to counties and municipalities to implement local recycling plans and address methods for the separate collection and recycling of ceds .

following are additional elements of maryland's e - waste program: all ceds offered for sale in the state must be labeled with the name of the manufacturer name or the manufacturer's brand label .

retailers are prohibited from selling any ced offered for sale by a manufacturer not registered with the state .

the law specifies criteria a manufacturer must meet to demonstrate that it has implemented its own takeback program .

a ban on the landfill disposal of crts from television and computer monitors has been in effect since april 1 , 2000 .

the law makes it illegal for a person to dispose of , or for a landfill , incinerator , or transfer station to accept , crts for disposal .

as part of its electronics recycling strategy , the state has established a grant program providing free electronics recycling for municipalities .

on may 8 , 2007 , minnesota enacted its e - waste recycling law , which applies to computers , peripherals ( keyboards , printers , or other devices sold for external use with a computer ) , facsimile machines , dvd players , video cassette recorders , and "video display devices" — defined as a television or computer monitor , including laptops , with a crt or a flat panel screen that is larger than nine inches .

beginning july 1 , 2007 , the law requires manufacturers to register with the state and pay an initial registration fee of either $5,000 ( those that sell more than 100 units per year in the state ) or $1,250 ( those that sell under 100 units ) .

thereafter , manufacturers must pay $2,500 , plus a variable recycling fee based on the total weight of ceds sold in the previous year .

in addition to the registration fee , manufacturers must pay for collection and recycling of their e - waste .

the law also requires manufacturers to meet specific recycling goals ( minnesota is the only state to set such mandatory goals ) .

during the first program year ( july 1 , 2007 through june 30 , 2008 ) , manufacturers must collect and recycle an amount equal to 60% of the total weight of ceds sold in the state in the previous year ; this amount increases to 80% in subsequent program years .

starting august 1 , 2008 , to assist manufacturers in determining the total weight of ceds sold in the state , retailers are required to report to manufacturers the number and type of video display devices sold to households in minnesota during the program year .

following are additional elements of minnesota's e - waste program: all ceds offered for sale in the state must be labeled with the manufacturer's name or brand label .

retailers are prohibited from selling any ced offered for sale by a manufacturer not registered with the state .

in addition to manufacturers , ced recyclers and collectors must also register with the state ( but pay no fee ) .

by september 2008 , manufacturers' annual registration must include a report on any ceds they sell that do not meet rohs requirements .

recyclers are prohibited from using prison labor .

a ban on the landfill disposal of crts went into effect under separate law on july 1 , 2006 .

on may 24 , 2006 , new hampshire enacted a ban on the landfill disposal and incineration of "video display devices. .

video display devices are defined as a "visual display component of a television or a computer , whether separate or integrated with a computer central processing unit , and includes a cathode ray tube , liquid crystal display , gas plasma , digital light processing , or other image projection technology , greater than four inches when measured diagonally , and its case , interior wires , and circuitry. .

the ban took effect july 1 , 2007 .

on january 13 , 2008 , new jersey enacted the electronic waste recycling act .

the law applies to desktop or personal computers , computer monitors ( crt , lcd , gas plasma , digital light processing , or other image projection technology greater than four inches measured diagonally ) , portable computers , and televisions sold to consumers .

beginning february 1 , 2009 ( january 1 , 2009 , for television manufacturers ) , and each january 1 thereafter , ced manufacturers must register with the state department of environmental protection ( dep ) and pay a $5,000 registration fee .

each manufacturer's registration and renewal shall include a list of all of the brands under which its products are sold .

beginning january 1 , 2010 , registered manufacturers must participate in and pay for a statewide ced collection , transportation , and recycling program ( based on their return share in weight — as established by dep ) .

manufacturers have the option of developing their own program .

following are additional elements of new jersey's e - waste program: a manufacturer may not sell any ced in the state unless it is labeled with its brand .

a retailer may not sell any ced unless it is properly labeled and produced by a manufacturer , listed by dep , that is in compliance with the law .

retailers are required to post information , provided by dep , describing to consumers how and where to recycle ceds .

dep is required to establish recycling criteria for local and municipal agencies to follow ; and to establish performance requirements for collectors , transporters , and recyclers .

dep is required to establish per - capita collection and recycling goals .

by january 1 , 2010 , ced manufacturers and retailers cannot sell a device unless it meets rohs requirements .

ced recycling programs are prohibited from using prison labor or exporting ceds for disposal "in a manner that poses a significant risk to the public health or the environment. .

by january 1 , 2010 , the law requires that no person shall knowingly dispose of a used ced as solid waste .

on august 31 , 2007 , north carolina enacted the solid waste management act of 2007 .

section 16 of the law includes provisions regarding the management of ceds ( referred to in this law as "discarded computer equipment" ) .

ceds are defined as any desktop cpu or laptop computer , the monitor or video display unit for a computer system , and the keyboard , mice , and other peripheral equipment ( not including printers , scanners , or fax machines ) .

the definition does not include televisions .

by january 1 , 2009 , manufacturers that sell more than 1,000 items of computer equipment per year must register with the state and pay a $10,000 registration fee and an annual renewal fee of $1,000 .

manufacturers are prohibited from selling computer equipment in the state unless an item has a visible , permanent label identifying the manufacturer affixed to the equipment .

within 120 days of registration , manufacturers will be required to submit to the state a plan for the reuse or recycling of equipment .

among other provisions , recycling plans must describe any take - back programs that will be implemented ; how the manufacturer will implement and finance the plan ; and how it will transport discarded equipment from collectors .

manufacturers may implement recycling plans jointly with other manufacturers .

standards for recyclers are not specified in the law .

however , manufacturer recycling plans are required to "provide for environmentally sound management practices to transport and recycle discarded computer equipment. .

manufacturers must also submit an annual report to the state that includes an evaluation of the recycling rate for equipment .

however , the law does not specify recycling goals that manufacturers must meet .

also by january 1 , 2009 , the state department of environment and natural resources will be required to maintain a list of registered manufacturers ; implement a public education program regarding computer equipment reuse and recycling ; and provide technical assistance to local governments on the establishment and operation of equipment collection centers .

on june 7 , 2007 , oregon passed its e - waste recycling law , which applies to televisions and computer monitors of any type with screens larger than four inches , and to desktop or portable computers .

by january 1 , 2009 , manufacturers that sell these products in the state will be required to finance "free , convenient , and environmentally sound" recycling services .

manufacturers can create their own take - back program or participate in a common program , but they must pay for collection , transportation , and recycling costs .

manufacturers must also register with the state and pay an annual registration fee of $20 , $200 , $5,000 , or $15,000 , depending upon their market share in the state .

the registration must include a list of products sold in the state and a statement regarding whether the manufacturer will implement its own recycling program in accordance with criteria established by the law , or use the state contractor program .

among other requirements , the state department of environmental quality will be responsible for maintaining a list of registered manufacturers and orphan brands ; determining each manufacturer's return share of ceds ; establishing a state contractor program to collect , transport , and recycle ceds ; and determining the recycling fee to be paid by each registered manufacturer .

state and local governments will fund consumer education and promotion of the law .

at the time of sale , retailers will be required to provide consumers with information about where and how they can recycle ceds in the state .

following are additional elements of oregon's e - waste program: a manufacturer may not sell any ced in the state unless it is labeled with its brand .

a retailer may not sell any ced unless it is properly labeled and is on the list of registered manufacturers posted by the state .

a ban on the landfill disposal of ceds becomes effective january 1 , 2010 ; the state department of environmental quality may postpone the prohibition in any area of the state where there is an inadequate system for ced collection , transportation , and recycling .

on july 7 , 2006 , rhode island enacted the electronic waste prevention , reuse and recycling act .

the law bans the landfill disposal of desktop computers ( including cpus ) , computer monitors , including crt monitors and flat panel monitors , laptops , combination units ( cpus with monitors ) , crt - and non - crt - based televisions ( including plasma and lcd ) , or any similar video display device with a screen greater than four inches diagonally and that contains a circuit board .

the law specifies that after july 1 , 2008 , no person shall dispose of a ced in any manner other than by recycling or disposal as hazardous waste .

the law also requires the state department of environmental management , in consultation with stakeholders , to develop a plan for implementing and financing a program that addresses the collection , recycling , and reuse of covered electronic products from all covered electronic product generators in the state .

progress reports on the study were due to the general assembly on january 1 and may 1 , 2007 .

by december 31 , 2007 , the law also requires the department to submit to the general assembly a plan and recommendations for any legislation necessary to implement the plan for collection , recycling , and reuse of ceds .

on june 15 , 2007 , texas enacted its e - waste recycling law , which applies to computer equipment — defined as desktop or notebook computers , including computer monitors or other display devices that do not contain a tuner ( i.e. , it does not include televisions ) .

the law requires manufacturers to implement a recovery plan that provides consumers with a free and convenient program to recycle the manufacturer's computer equipment .

following are additional elements of texas's e - waste program: a manufacturer may not sell any ced in the state unless it is labeled with its brand .

retailers may not sell any ced unless it is properly labeled and is on the list of registered manufacturers maintained by the state .

the texas commission on environmental quality ( the commission ) is required to adopt standards for recycling such as those provided by the institute of scrap recycling industries , inc. ( which bans the use of prison labor ) .

the commission is required to educate the public regarding the computer recycling programs , maintain program information on a website , enforce requirements for recycling computer equipment , and compile and issue an annual electronic report to the state legislature .

on november 11 , 2006 , washington passed its e - waste recycling law , which applies to crts or flat panel computer monitors or televisions with a screen size of more than four inches , and to desktop or laptop computers .

the law requires ced manufacturers to finance and implement a program to collect , transport , and recycle waste ceds .

the program must be implemented in accordance with requirements specified in a "standard plan," implemented by the state , that will apply to all manufacturers .

individual manufacturers may opt to implement their own "independent plan," if it is approved by the washington department of ecology .

by january 1 , 2007 , and annually thereafter , manufacturers must register with the state and pay an annual administrative fee .

by january 1 , 2008 , and annually thereafter , manufacturers must pay their apportioned costs associated with the implementation of the standard plan .

initially , there is no provision to address financing orphan waste .

however , by april 1 , 2010 , the state's department of ecology must report to the state legislature regarding the amount of orphan products collected .

if more than 10% of the total products collected are orphan products , the department must provide recommendations for reducing the amount of orphan products or alternative methods for financing the collection , transportation , and recycling of orphan products .

following are additional elements of washington's e - waste program: a manufacturer may not sell any ced in the state unless it is labeled with its brand .

the state is required to establish performance standards for environmentally sound management of ced processors , including financial assurances to ensure proper closure of a facility that is consistent with specified environmental standards .

retailers must provide information to consumers describing where and how to recycle ceds and locations for collection or return of products .

each collector , transporter , and recycler of ceds must annually register with the state .

no plan or program may include the use of federal or state prison labor for ced processing .

