each member serves as the leader of his or her personal office .

in contrast , a member who is a committee chair serves in addition as the leader of a committee , with responsibility for setting the course and direction of the panel for other committee members and the house .

a chair also has responsibility for overseeing a large professional and paraprofessional staff .

although day - to - day staff management is typically entrusted to a committee staff director , all senior committee staff are operational managers who should ensure that all of the duties and activities supporting a chair's goals are carried out effectively .

once a committee chair is selected during the postelection transition period , the chair , often in consultation with others , makes a series of decisions and takes a series of actions .

decisions may be related to the committee's policy calendar ; the committee's administrative functions ; the chair's responsibilities during committee sessions ; the role of committee members ; the relationship with the committee's ranking minority member , other chairs , and party leaders ; subcommittee leaders ; and other subjects .

this report addresses some of the critical matters a house committee chair — new or continuing to the next congress from the concluding one — confronts from the time of the early organization meetings in november to approximately march or april .

the report is divided into the following sections: transition , administrative matters , committee organization , committee procedure and the role of a chair , procedural tools for committee chairs , floor consideration and the role of a chair , and legislative issues and agenda .

each section is divided into more specific topics .

actions with an identifiable deadline appear in italic .

this report contains numerous citations to house rules , which may be found , along with the parliamentarian's notes , in constitution , jefferson's manual , and rules of the house of representati ve s o f the united states , one hundred fifteenth congress .

an explanatory document of house rules and precedents , arranged by parliamentary subject - matter , is house practice: a guide to the rules , precedents , and procedures of the house .

the congressional research service ( crs ) maintains a set of reports on the legislative process and congressional procedures , including the budget process and budget procedures , and congressional organization that is wide ranging in format , coverage , and subject matter .

crs has an even wider range of reports on hundreds of legislative issues .

all crs reports are available on the crs website at http: / / www.crs.gov .

the office of the parliamentarian is the official source of parliamentary advice for committees , although parliamentarians do not attend committee meetings to assist the chair , unlike their service to the presiding officer during a meeting of the house .

crs's specialists and analysts on congress also provide confidential parliamentary assistance and training for committee and subcommittee chairs , majority and minority committee members , and majority and minority staff .

crs policy specialists and analysts may assist committees , members , and staff confidentially in framing policy issues , developing legislative options , planning hearings , providing written and oral policy and legislative analyses at all stages of the legislative process , and appearing as nonpartisan witnesses at hearings .

the house routinely meets for so - called early organization in november , just a week or so after the election , with organizational activities continuing into december and even into january or later .

the november meetings typically occur simultaneously with the orientation activities planned for members - elect and might overlap with a so - called lame - duck session .

a committee chair controls the selection of committee staff , authorizes expenditures from the committee budget , establishes operational and ethics policies , determines committee travel allocations , decides the content of the committee website , and assumes responsibility for administration of the committee's rooms , paperwork , and other operations .

the chair negotiates and decides on the allocation of budget , resources , and duties with the minority .

a committee chair establishes the committee agenda , divides work between the subcommittees and the full committee , determines procedural strategy , calls hearings , selects witnesses and determines the order of their testimony , presides over hearings and markups , chooses the markup vehicle and pursues an amendment strategy , prepares the committee report accompanying legislation , and discusses , or might negotiate , any of these matters with the ranking minority member .

rules and practices of the house vest discretion with a committee chair , but he or she must be vigilant and well served by committee staff in using this discretion .

when a measure is reported by a committee , it is the responsibility of the committee chair to consult the party leadership to determine floor scheduling for the measure .

there are two principal routes to the floor: suspension of the rules , and a special rule from the house rules committee .

if a measure is reported or ordered reported and is fairly noncontroversial , it might qualify to be considered under the suspension of the rules procedure .

a committee chair might mention at markup his or her intention to seek floor consideration by that means .

if the measure is deemed appropriate for suspension consideration , the chair notifies the speaker of the house and majority leader of his or her desire for the measure to be considered in that manner .

it is within the speaker's discretion , subject to guidelines in party rules , to choose legislation to be considered under the suspension procedure .

if the measure is more contentious or does not appear appropriate for suspension consideration , a special rule can be sought .

the committee chair writes a letter to the rules committee , possibly cosigned by the ranking minority member , asking the panel for a hearing on the measure .

if , after consultation with the majority leadership , the rules committee holds such a hearing , the committee chair is traditionally the first witness to testify on behalf of the legislation , perhaps with the ranking minority member .

the chair recommends the type of special rule sought for the measure's consideration and how the special rule should address matters , such as points of order , that the chair would like the special rule to cover .

in making the motion to suspend the rules and pass a measure or following the adoption of a special rule in the house , the chair may take , delegate , or delegate in part the role of majority floor manager .

in this role , the chair determines which majority - party members speak on a measure , in what order , and for what amount of time , and which members will speak in support of or in opposition to amendments that are allowed and offered on the floor .

if the chair as floor manager is opposed to an amendment , he or she is entitled to close debate on it .

the committee chair is usually responsible for choosing , for his or her party , which amendments will receive voice votes and which will require recorded votes .

the chair also takes a lead in raising or debating parliamentary questions and points of order .

finally , if a house - and senate - passed measure is to be reconciled by conference with the senate , a committee chair works with the party leadership in selecting conferees from his or her committee and in determining the overall number of conferees to , perhaps , accommodate other committees and individual members .

the committee chair serves as the chair of the house delegation or may chair the conference .

the time before a new congress convenes and the time immediately afterward are critical periods for the development of a committee's agenda — for the next months , the first session , and even the two - year congress .

some legislation can move quickly through committee , and perhaps through the two houses of congress , but other legislation can take many months and perhaps still not have cleared congress before it adjourns sine die after two years .

a committee might look back to the previous congress , or previous congresses , to see what groundwork has been laid through hearings and other activities , such as government accountability office ( gao ) evaluations requested , on subject matter within the committee's jurisdiction .

a committee might also look ahead to the current or following congress when a major , multiyear program authorization is expiring or when the committee wishes to report legislation to reform a major federal program .

action in the current congress can save time and build momentum in the next congress .

some committees hold retreats , sometimes with outside speakers , to help them develop their legislative agenda .

the major initiatives of the president and his administration are sometimes first announced in the annual state of the union address , which often occurs during the third or fourth week of january .

these initiatives can be new for the president , a reiteration of actions the president sought in the past from congress , an endorsement of legislative proposals originated by members of congress , a refocus to an existing set of programs , or an expansion or contraction of a set of programs that the president's annual budget might subsequently reflect .

many other forms of presidential initiatives are also possible , such as the issuance of executive orders .

a house committee's jurisdiction might encompass one or more presidential initiatives , and the chair and members of the committee must listen to the president's initiatives both as committee members and as individual members representing their district and party .

the chair and the committee's majority - party members are under no specific obligation to take any action on a suggestion or request of the president or on legislation subsequently transmitted by the president or his administration to congress unless they are directed by the house or their party to take an action .

considerations of whether or not to take an action , and what that action might be , could include whether or not the president and congress are controlled by the same party , or whether just one chamber is of the same party as the president ; the president's and his administration's commitment to an initiative ; the chair's and the committee's majority - party members' interests , priorities , and desires ; house leadership and majority - party sentiments ; minority - party views ; a decision on which chamber of congress should act first ; the role of congress and necessity for congressional action , such as the expiration of the authorization of a major federal program ; the necessity for or benefits of action and the consequences of inaction ; alternatives to congressional action and potential consequences of inaction ; other matters competing for a place on the committee's agenda ; national , regional , local , ideological , and other political perspectives ; public opinion ; the impact of regional , national , and international events ; actions anticipated in another committee with related jurisdiction ; and actions anticipated in the other chamber .

by law , the president transmits a budget for the u.s. government after the first monday in january but no later than the first monday in february .

in its content , the budget will contain budget requests , proposed legislative language related to specific requests , and legislative initiatives that have budget consequences .

although the president's budget is referred to the appropriations committee , less than 40% of new budget authority is within the jurisdiction of the committee , and it has no jurisdiction over revenues or debt .

particular budget requests and legislative initiatives , including changes to entitlement and revenue laws , are within the jurisdiction of specific legislative committees .

legislative proposals in support of the president's budget recommendations might not be submitted until much later , yet implementation of some , many , or the major initiatives in the president's budget might depend on congressional passage of legislation separate from annual appropriations bills .

many of the same considerations that a committee might review related to presidential initiatives in the state of the union address apply to the committee's activities related to matters within the committee's jurisdiction in the president's budget .

in addition , a committee might want to hold hearings or undertake other actions to influence the appropriations process if it strongly supports or disagrees with specific budget requests .

some committees hold budget - themed hearings immediately or shortly after the president transmits the budget to hear from relevant cabinet secretaries and agency heads and perhaps others .

transmittal of the president's budget has a noticeable , immediate impact on house committees .

transmittal begins a season of work taking place simultaneously in the budget , appropriations , and legislative , or authorizing , committees , with parallel activities occurring in senate committees .

 ( see , below , " expiring authorizations ." ) .

under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 ) , congress is expected to complete bicameral agreement on a concurrent resolution on the budget by april 15 , although it does not usually do so .

also under the budget act , the house appropriations committee is expected to report all the annual appropriations bills by june 10 , although it does not usually do so .

to prepare a concurrent resolution on the budget , the house budget committee holds hearings , which may include appearances by the president's economic team of cabinet and cabinet - rank officials , and receives analyses from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , among other inputs .

a critical part of the committee's information gathering is its receipt of "views and estimates reports" from each of the other house committees .

under the congressional budget act and house rules , house committees report their views and estimates to the budget committee no later than six weeks after the president transmits his budget , which would be no later than march 15 if the president transmits the budget on february 1 .

a house committee might hold a meeting at which it considers its proposed views and estimates report , or the committee might consider the proposed report in the course of a meeting having several agenda items .

committee chairs usually take the lead in deciding the approach to drafting the report and in the drafting itself .

not all committees necessarily hold a meeting on their proposed views and estimates reports .

a committee's views and estimates report might take the form of a letter to the budget committee's chair and ranking minority member , the form of a detailed report , or another form .

sometimes majority and minority members of a committee submit separate views and estimates , and sometimes individual members of a committee submit additional or other views to supplement their committee's report .

a report typically includes comments on the president's budget proposals and estimates of the budgetary impact of any legislation likely to be considered by a committee during the current session of congress .

a report might contain specific comments on direct spending within a committee's jurisdiction and could also discuss the committee's authorizations that require funding in annual appropriations measures .

a views and estimates report might also comment on structural and procedural aspects of the budget that affect a committee's jurisdiction .

the ways and means committee's views and estimates report discusses revenues and revenue and debt legislation .

because of the amount of work it takes for the house appropriations committee to consider and draft the house's annual appropriations bills , the appropriations subcommittees usually begin their hearings quickly once the president transmits the budget .

over the course of several months , each subcommittee will likely hear from relevant cabinet officials and other agency heads ; numerous executive officials who can speak to specific programs and activities ; members of congress ; and public witnesses , that is , not federal government officials or employees .

the concurrent resolution on the budget establishes total spending levels , among other provisions .

the joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report on the budget resolution contains the allocation of spending among each chamber's committees , including the house appropriations committee .

the appropriations committee subdivides its allocation among its subcommittees .

if a budget resolution has not been finally agreed to by the house and senate , the house might adopt a "deeming resolution," minimally making a spending allocation to the appropriations committee .

in the absence of a budget resolution , the house may begin consideration of annual appropriations bills after may 15 .

a budget resolution agreed to by both chambers might also contain reconciliation instructions , which are provisions directing specified committees to report legislation within their jurisdiction that changes revenues or spending , or both , by certain amounts , usually by a specified deadline .

if the budget resolution agreed to by the house and senate contains reconciliation instructions , the instructions are an order of the parent chamber to named committees to comply .

in such a case , the named committees must put reconciliation on their agendas .

in establishing federal programs and agencies , congress often provides an authorization for a period of time .

a program , for example , might have a one - year authorization , requiring passage of legislation each year to continue the program , or it might have a multiyear authorization of two , three , or more years , requiring the passage of legislation only before the end of the specific number of years to continue the program .

congress also sometimes passes legislation temporarily continuing a program for six months , a year , or some other period to give itself additional time to complete passage of new multiyear authorization legislation .

these fixed - year and short - term authorizations can apply to spending programs , tax provisions , grants of legal authority , or other matters .

 ( see also , below , new requirements placed on committees to plan for authorizations in " oversight and investigations ." ) .

legislation to "reauthorize" existing programs and agencies and legislation authorizing new programs and agencies might also have failed to clear the previous two - year congress and therefore remain potential agenda items in the current congress .

ushering through congress legislation to reauthorize programs and agencies is some of the most consequential work that legislative committees undertake each congress .

committees may consider authorization legislation because existing authority is about to expire , new authority is needed to deal with new or newly identified issues , or for other reasons .

new authorizations and major reauthorizations can consume a large amount of committees' time and effort during one or more sessions of congress .

reauthorizations that are arguably noncontroversial , such as for some small business programs , are nonetheless important legislative products that committees must support with their time and effort to see them enacted into law .

many provisions of the revenue code and the major entitlement programs continue in effect indefinitely .

to make changes in these kinds of laws , congress must enact new law .

however , some provisions of these kinds of laws are temporary , and congress needs to enact new law to continue temporary provisions in effect .

each committee tries to anticipate and plan its work related to expiring authorizations .

among the possible consequences that a committee might consider for inaction , in addition to the potential lapse of the program or agency , are the decline of congressional control over policy ; ceding of policy influence , where appropriations are necessary , to the appropriations committee from a legislative committee ; loss of jurisdiction by a committee ; and loss of influence by and support for a committee within the house .

although the president and the executive departments and agencies are often sources of important or high - profile legislation , committee chairs and committee members , especially majority - party members , establish a committee's legislative priorities .

it is their interests , sense of national needs , political judgments , and hard work that focus a committee's limited time on a legislative agenda .

in the time before a new congress convenes and in the time immediately afterward , a committee chair , his or her closest allies , and the chair's party have the most flexibility in determining the key legislative issues the committee will address in the two - year time frame of a congress .

to wait to identify key legislative issues until later in the first session allows greater opportunity for other individuals and events to determine a committee's agenda .

to go forward without knowledge of key legislative issues risks having exigencies and events determine the agenda and having committee resources misallocated by looming deadlines or to lower - priority matters .

one of the ways in which congressional committees gather information for possible future lawmaking , inform committee members communally on a topic , and influence the implementation of laws already enacted by congress is through the conduct of oversight — "continuous watchfulness" in the words of the legislative reorganization act of 1946 — and especially the convening of oversight hearings .

the rules of the house assign to committees responsibility for determining , based on oversight , whether laws within their respective jurisdictions should be changed or if additional laws are necessary .

among the requirements for committees' reports' contents under house rules , reports on measures are to include oversight findings and recommendations .

house rules require each committee ( except appropriations , ethics , and rules ) to hold an open meeting to adopt an authorization and oversight plan for a two - year congress by february 15 of the first session of a congress and to submit the plan to the oversight and government reform , house administration , and appropriations committees .

house rules also direct committees to establish oversight subcommittees or assign to subcommittees responsibility for oversight .

preparation of an authorization and oversight plan requires immediate attention to accurately reflect a committee's oversight priorities .

the plan , however , is not a straitjacket in limiting oversight to subjects listed in the plan or requiring oversight action on every subject listed .

committees have tended to include a broader set of oversight subjects in their plans than it is likely they can cover in a two - year congress .

however , preparation of the plan is a key opportunity for the chair , subcommittee chairs , and other committee members to determine what oversight they consider critically important , particularly as it relates to the committee's legislative priorities .

with an identification of critical oversight subjects , a committee can make assignments to and establish schedules for committee staff , agency and program staff , gao , and other entities that support the committee in its oversight function .

in addition , congress has created entities , such as gao , the inspectors general , and crs , that are specifically directed to inform congress through written reports and oral communications .

congress has also placed reporting requirements in numerous statutes , providing congress with an enormous flow of information from the executive branch .

these and other resources' intellectual capital — analysts , attorneys , economists , other specialists , written reports , and consultative services — provide a committee with a "running start" in establishing oversight priorities for agencies and programs within its jurisdiction .

congressional oversight can be viewed as a continuum of activities that in its most potent expression is the investigative power of congress .

congressional investigations might include the use of subpoenas ; depositions ; discussions with witnesses' attorneys ; witnesses invoking constitutional privileges in order not to testify ; the invoking of executive privilege ; and the threat of citation , or citation , by the house of a witness for contempt .

early and careful planning , consistent application of committee resources , highly capable committee staff , and perseverance are some attributes associated with successful congressional committee investigations .

congress has passed a number of laws that provide mechanisms for approving or disapproving executive proposals .

these laws sometimes address specific legislation and sometimes address a class of proposal .

for example , the president has trade negotiating authority under the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 until at least july 1 , 2018 ( p.l .

114-26 ) .

using this authority , the president negotiated certain trade agreements to be considered in congress under expedited congressional procedures established in trade laws .

other laws , such as the congressional review act ( p.l .

104-121 , subtitle e ) , contain a procedural mechanism for congress to review and disapprove proposed federal agency rules .

as a committee contemplates its agenda , it seeks to be aware of pending and potential executive proposals that might be within its jurisdiction and subject to congressional approval or disapproval .

transition ( early organization to swearing - in ) early organization , including possible party selections of chairs — possibly occurring the week of november 13 , 2018 activities report — to be submitted by january 2 , 2019 preparation of committee calendar ; transfer of noncurrent records to the clerk of the house adoption of the rules of the house for the 116 th congress — january 3 , 2019 , or later house adopts resolutions electing chairs and members to committees — after the rules of the house have been adopted administrative matters committees' approval of their expense resolutions in the form of a simple resolution — late january or february , pursuant to information from the committee on house administration house administration committee introduces primary committee expense resolution , which is agreed to by the house — march monthly expenses report submitted by committees to committee on house administration — by the 18 th of each month monthly payroll certification submitted by committees to cao's human resources office — by the 15 th of each month quarterly consolidated foreign travel submitted by committees to clerk of the house committee organization committees' adoption of their rules and publication in electronic form and in the congressional record — not later than 30 days after the committee chair is elected plan for subcommittee structure and authority — no later than a committee meeting to adopt committee rules , but more likely during the transition beginning with early organization election of subcommittee chairs and designation of committee and subcommittee vice chairs — following adoption of a committee's rules committee procedure and the role of a chair announcement of date , place , and subject matter of a hearing and publication in electronic form and in the congressional record — at least one week prior to the hearing notice of a committee's markup meeting is published in electronic form and in the congressional record — at least three days prior to the meeting publication of the text to be marked up — not later than 24 hours prior to the meeting's commencement electronic posting of a committee's recorded votes and of the text of amendments adopted — not later than 48 hours after a vote is taken and not later than 24 hours after an amendment has been adopted preparation of a committee report on legislation and filing in the house — promptly , but , in general , not later than seven days after a measure has been approved by a committee legislative issues and agenda president's state of the union address to congress — typically , the third or fourth week of january president's budget submitted to congress — by law , no later than the first monday in february , although the budget has been submitted later than that date committees report their views and estimates to the budget committee — no later than six weeks after the president transmits his budget committees submit oversight plans to committees on oversight and government reform , appropriations , and house administration — february 15 congress completes its bicameral agreement to a concurrent resolution on the budget — april 15 , although congress in some years has not completed action or has completed action at a later date house may begin consideration of appropriations bills , even in the absence of final action on a concurrent resolution on the budget — may 15 under the congressional budget act , house appropriations committee is to report its last appropriations bill — june 10 , although this date has not been predictiv .

