this report provides a discussion of how well the conservation security program ( csp ) and the conservation reserve program ( crp ) comply with wto green box rules .

specifically , some market watchers have questioned whether the current usda implementation rules for csp are consistent with paragraph 12 of annex ii of the agriculture agreement ( aa ) .

also , questions have been raised about whether the allowance of harvesting hay and grazing on crp land , as well as the proposed use of crp land for biomass production , would be consistent with a reading of paragraph 10 of annex ii of the aa .

both csp and the crp are likely to remain important policy tools in the next farm bill .

yet certain aspects of both programs potentially are ambiguous or fall into "gray" zones concerning their compliance with wto rules .

this report is not a legal opinion , but describes both the csp and crp programs , the wto annex ii ( so - called green box ) provisions that govern compliance , and the potential issues involved in evaluating the compliance status of the two programs .

the conservation security program , authorized in the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) , is a voluntary program that provides financial and technical assistance to promote conservation and improvement of natural resources on tribal and private working lands within selected watersheds .

csp is administered by usda's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) .

unlike the conservation reserve program and some other nrcs programs , csp provides payments for conservation on land that remains in production .

nrcs implements csp on a watershed basis in order to focus funding on high - priority areas that offer the greatest environmental impact per dollar spent .

in fy2006 , usda spent $259 million supporting 19,375 new and existing csp contracts ( 4,400 new csp contracts were added in fy2006 ) covering 15.8 million acres ( an average outlay of about $16.40 per acre ) .

based on a review ( done with technical support from nrcs ) of a producer's environmental resources and current conservation practices , each participating producer prepares a csp contract including a stewardship plan that details the conservation activities that exist and / or are to be implemented .

contracts extend from 5 to 10 years .

by statute ( section 2001 of the 2002 farm bill , p.l .

107-171 ) , csp participants qualify for one of three levels ( or tiers ) of participation , with each successive tier obligating the producer to meet a higher degree of resource management standards .

depending on the stewardship plan described in a csp contract , participating producers may be eligible for four types of payments — stewardship or base payments ; cost - share payments on existing practices ; one - time new practice cost - share payments ; and enhanced payments .

these are defined as follows .

the conservation reserve program , enacted in 1985 , provides payments to farmers to take highly erodible or environmentally sensitive cropland out of production for ten years or more to conserve soil and water resources .

it is the federal government's largest private land retirement program .

in fy2006 , crp outlays totaled $1.8 billion and covered almost 37 million enrolled acres ( this amounts to about $48.65 per acre on somewhat less than 10% of the nation's cropland ) .

the program is administered by usda's farm service agency , with technical assistance provided by usda's natural resources conservation service .

usda has notified the wto of crp outlays for the years 1996 through 2001 as green box - compliant under paragraph 10 of annex ii , which refers to long - term resource retirement programs .

inclusion of crp payments under paragraph 10 hinges on payments being used to retire land from marketable agricultural production for at least three years .

use of the land for agricultural production would potentially disqualify the land from green box eligibility for that particular year ; and potentially for all years of a crp contract if the productive activity is engaged in more frequently than once every four years .

congress will be revisiting u.s. farm legislation this year and could potentially address the ambiguities concerning notification of csp payments and agricultural uses on crp land to the wto .

such a tactic could potentially avoid or minimize the likelihood of future wto challenges against u.s. conservation programs .

