on february 6 , 2007 , president george w. bush formally announced the creation of a new unified combatant command for the african continent , reflecting africa's increasing strategic importance to the united states .

the department of defense ( dod ) organizes its command structure by dividing its activities among joint military commands based either on a geographic or functional area of responsibility ( aor ) .

with the creation of the new command , dod now has six geographic commands and four functional commands .

previously , u.s. military involvement in africa was divided among three geographic commands: european command ( eucom ) , central command ( centcom ) , and pacific command ( pacom ) .

the command's area of responsibility ( aor ) includes all african countries except egypt , which remains in the aor of centcom .

africa command ( africom ) was launched with initial operating capability ( ioc ) as a sub - unified command under eucom on october 1 , 2007 , and reached full operating capability ( foc ) as a stand - alone unified command on october 1 , 2008 .

africom's first commander , army general william e. "kip" ward , former deputy commander of eucom , retired in 2011 , transferring command authority to general carter f. ham , formerly commanding general of u.s. army europe , on march 9 .

although the precise wording of africom's mission statement has evolved since the command was first announced , dod officials have broadly suggested that the command's mission is to promote u.s. strategic objectives and protect u.s. interests in the region by working with african partners to strengthen their defense capabilities so that they are better able to contribute to regional stability and security .

a key aspect of this mission is its supporting role to other agencies' and departments' efforts on the continent .

but like other combatant commands , africom is expected to oversee military operations , when directed , to deter aggression and respond to crises .

africom's first major military operation was operation odyssey dawn , the u.s. contribution to a multilateral military effort to enforce a no - fly zone and protect civilians in libya , in support of u.n. security council resolution 1973 .

initial u.s. military operations , launched on march 19 , 2011 , included tomahawk cruise missile attacks targeting libyan command and control and air defense facilities .

general ham served as theater commander for the operation , with tactical operations coordinated by a joint task force under admiral sam locklear .

locklear serves jointly as commander of u.s .

naval forces europe and africa , and as commander of allied joint force command , naples , which has operational responsibility for nato missions in the mediterranean .

the commander of u.s. air forces africa served as joint force air component commander for operation odyssey dawn .

africom also supported the u.s. humanitarian response that commenced on march 4 , through the delivery of relief supplies and the evacuation of foreign nationals fleeing the violence .

nato assumed the lead for military operations in libya on april 1 under operation unified protector .

congress continues to closely monitor developments related to the ongoing conflict in libya .

the bush administration's motivation for the creation of a new unified command for africa evolved in part out of concerns about dod's division of responsibility for africa among three geographic commands , which reportedly posed coordination challenges .

although some military officials had advocated the creation of an africa command for over a decade , more recent crises highlighted the challenges created by "seams" between the commands' boundaries .

one such seam was located between sudan ( then within centcom's aor ) , chad and the central african republic ( then within eucom's aor ) , an area of periodic instability .

the united states , acting both alone and a member of the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) , has provided airlift and training for african peacekeeping troops in the darfur region of sudan , and although centcom had responsibility for sudan , much of the airlift and training was done by eucom .

additionally , close observers say that eucom and centcom had become overstretched by the mid 2000s , particularly given the wars in iraq and afghanistan .

the commander of eucom , whose aor included 92 countries prior to africom's creation , testified before congress that the increasing strategic significance of africa will continue to pose the greatest security stability challenge in the eucom aor .

the large ungoverned area in africa , hiv / aids epidemic , corruption , weak governance , and poverty that exist throughout the continent are challenges that are key factors in the security stability issues that affect every country in africa .

his predecessor , general james l. jones , who later served as president barack obama's national security advisor , pointed out in 2006 that eucom's staff were spending more than half their time on africa issues , up from almost none three years prior .

africom has faced myriad challenges in its establishment , and outstanding issues remain as the command moves forward .

some of these issues have been or may be addressed by congress .

key oversight questions relating to the command may include the following: what are the united states' strategic interests in africa ? .

how are u.s. strategic interests influencing the size and scope of the u.s. military footprint on the continent , and what effect might africom's creation have on future u.s. military operations in africa ? .

is africom's mission well defined ? .

the 2010 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) addresses steps the u.s. military will take in order to improve potential "contingency response. .

how has africom prepared to meet potential contingencies on the continent ? .

how are africom and u.s. military efforts in africa perceived by africans and by other foreign countries , including china ? .

have those perceptions evolved since the command was first announced ? .

what are the costs associated with africom ? .

how are these costs affected by africom's chosen headquarters location ? .

how closely do the state department and dod coordinate on plans for the command and on u.s. military efforts in africa in general ? .

what are the obama administration's views on the development of africom's interagency process ? .

has africom's enhanced integration of non - dod usg agency personnel proven effective in supporting the command's mission ? .

how is africom addressing the intelligence community's need to realign its resources directed toward the continent ? .

what are africom's current intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) needs ? .

how is the obama administration ensuring that u.s. military efforts in africa do not overshadow or contradict u.s. diplomatic and development objectives ? .

should conflict prevention activities be an essential part of dod's mandate , and are they sustainable ? .

what are the authorities granted to u.s. chiefs of mission regarding combatant command activities in the countries to which they are posted , and are these authorities sufficient ? .

how prominent are counterterrorism operations and programs , particularly relative to the peacekeeping training and support components , in africom's mandate ? .

would some dod - implemented counterterrorism programs be more appropriately implemented by other u.s. agencies ? .

how do africom's civil affairs teams contribute to the command's mission ? .

are the legal authorities guiding dod's implementation of security cooperation programs sufficient for africom to fulfill its mandate ? .

do any of these authorities hinder the u.s. military's ability to conduct these programs ? .

are there procedural challenges that hinder africom's ability to conduct its capacity building mandate in a timely manner ? .

does the lack of assigned forces affect africom's ability to implement its mandate ? .

how can africom ensure that improvements in partner capacity are sustained ? .

how does dod ensure that the training and equipment provided to african forces are not used to suppress internal dissent or threaten other nations ? .

this report provides information on africom's mission , structure , interagency coordination , and its basing and manpower requirements .

it also gives a broad overview of u.s. strategic interests in africa and the role of u.s. military efforts on the continent .

issues on the african continent have not historically been identified as strategic priorities for the u.s. military , and u.s. military engagement in africa has been sporadic .

according to one defense analyst , "during the cold war , united states foreign policy toward sub - saharan africa had little to do with africa. .

after the fall of the soviet union , many u.s. policymakers considered the u.s. military's role and responsibilities on the continent to be minimal .

in 1995 , the department of defense outlined its view of africa in its u.s. security strategy for sub - saharan africa , asserting that "ultimately we see very little traditional strategic interest in africa. .

in 1998 , following terrorist attacks on two u.s. embassies in east africa , the united states conducted a retaliatory attack against a pharmaceutical factory in khartoum , sudan , that clinton administration officials initially contended was producing precursors for chemical weapons for al qaeda .

the embassy bombings , and the retaliatory strike against sudan , are considered by many analysts to be a turning point in u.s. strategic policy toward the region .

the department of defense conducts a wide variety of activities in africa in support of u.s. national interests .

operational activities may include , but are not limited to , humanitarian relief , peacekeeping , counterterrorism efforts , sanctions enforcement , non - combatant evacuations ( neos ) , and maritime interdiction operations ( mios ) .

in addition to traditional contingency operations , the u.s. military implements a number of efforts aimed at increasing african militaries' capacities to provide security and stability for their own countries and the region as a whole .

several of these dod - implemented initiatives are part of foreign military assistance programs funded by the state department that "help to promote the principles of democracy , respect for human rights , and the rule of law. .

in addition to providing funding , the state department gives overall guidance and direction for the programs .

the united states military also occasionally provides advisors to peacekeeping missions on the continent ; u.s. military advisors from cjtf - hoa have assisted peacekeepers deployed to sudan and somalia .

u.s. forces routinely conduct a variety of bilateral and multilateral joint exercises with african militaries through such programs as joint combined exchange training ( jcet ) .

u.s. forces also conduct joint exercises as part of disaster assistance and maritime security training .

the africa center for strategic studies ( acss ) was created in 1999 as one of dod's five regional centers for strategic studies .

it conducts a variety of academic activities for african , american , and european military and civilian officials aimed promoting good governance and democratic values , countering ideological support of terrorism , and fostering regional collaboration and cooperation in the african defense and security sectors .

acss , which is based in washington , dc , has offices on the continent in dakar , senegal and addis ababa , ethiopia .

the united states sells military equipment to african governments through the foreign military sales ( fms ) program , implemented by the u.s. defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) .

the u.s. government also provides loans ( the united states waives repayment of these loans for african countries ) to foreign governments to finance the purchase of such equipment through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program .

equipment is also provided to select african countries through the african coastal and border security program ( acbsp ) and the excess defense articles ( eda ) program , and through special dod authorities .

u.s. counterterrorism strategy on the continent is addressed through a number of these initiatives , but u.s. counterterrorism efforts may also include , at one end of the spectrum , programs to address the root causes of terrorism , and , at the other end , military operations to destroy terrorist targets through military strikes .

the united states is placing increasing emphasis on information operations ( io ) in africa , which use information to improve the security environment and counter extremist ideology through military information support teams deployed to u.s. embassies .

io activities in africa have included website initiatives such as maghrebia.com and africom's operation objective voice ( oov ) , an interagency effort to counter extremist messaging .

some question whether activities such as these should be a part of dod's mandate , or whether they might be more appropriately managed by other u.s. agencies .

dod officials argue that africom not only allows the u.s. military to better coordinate these operations and programs , but that it also allows dod to better coordinate with other u.s. agencies , like the state department , usaid , the department of justice , the central intelligence agency , the federal bureau of investigation and others , as well as with other governments , like those of britain and france , which are also providing training and assistance for african security forces .

dod suggests that africa command builds on the experiences of the u.s. military's only forward presence in the region , the combined joint task force — horn of africa .

u.s. reaction to the creation of a new command for africa has been largely positive , although concerns have been raised .

in africa , on the other hand , perceptions of the command are more mixed .

there has been considerable apprehension over u.s. motivations for creating africom , and some africans worry that the move represents a neocolonial effort to dominate the region militarily .

u.s. military efforts on the continent have been seen as episodic , leading some to question the motivation for a more sustained focus from dod now .

reports of u.s. air strikes in somalia in recent years and u.s. support for ethiopia's military intervention there have added to those concerns .

many view u.s. counterterrorism efforts in africa with skepticism , and there appears to be a widespread belief that the command's primary goals are to hunt terrorists and to secure u.s. access to african oil .

u.s. foreign policy analysts have focused increased attention on china's role in africa in recent years , and such attention has led some to question whether africom might be part of a new contest for influence on the continent .

africom has been received with cautious optimism among several african governments and militaries .

they view increased american attention to the continent's problems as a positive development , potentially bringing increased resources , training , and assistance .

u.s. foreign military assistance has increased in recent years , and military training programs in africa have steadily been on the rise .

in the first years of the command , dod and state department officials consulted regularly with african nations on africom , seeking to solicit african views and explain the rationale behind the command's creation and its programs .

in april 2007 , senior officials visited nigeria , south africa , kenya , ethiopia , ghana , and senegal .

following their visit , one dod official noted that despite some initial "misconceptions," they had not encountered "any specific resistance to the idea. .

in june 2007 , they visited algeria , morocco , libya , egypt , and djibouti , and held discussions with african union officials .

the delegation also held meetings with 40 foreign defense attachés serving in paris .

african officials reportedly gave "positive feedback about the design and mission of africom" and advised the delegation that dod should consider how africom could complement the au's regional security structure .

in september 2007 , dod hosted representatives from the african union , african regional security organizations , and over 35 african governments to further explain its plans for the command and to solicit input from attendees ; a similar event was held in april 2008 .

analysts suggest u.s. officials should continue to closely consult with these governments to ensure that africom reflects a mutual exchange of interests and is seen to foster a closer alliance rather than serving as an avenue for the u.s. to dictate policy to african governments .

in october 2007 , members of the pan - african parliament , the legislative body of the african union , voted in favor of a motion to "prevail upon all african governments through the african union ( au ) not to accede to the united states of america's government's request to host africom anywhere in the african continent. .

west african military chiefs , following a conference the following month in liberia , issued a cautious response to u.s. government plans , saying that africom "had not been fully understood" by african countries and requesting "further sensitization by the united states authorities at the highest political level. .

ecowas's commissioner for political affairs , peace , and security did suggest that "everybody welcomes and supports the idea , but we want that direction to come from the heads of state. .

several african heads of state publicly expressed preliminary views on the command .

some advised dod to consider how africom could complement the au's regional security structure .

former nigerian president umaru yar'adua , during his december 2007 visit to washington , dc , commented , "we shall partner with africom to assist not only nigeria , but also the african continent to actualize its peace and security initiative , which is an initiative to help standby forces of brigade - size in each of the regional economic groupings within the african continent. .

yar'adua's statements were criticized by several nigerian opposition parties and civil society organizations .

in response , nigeria's minister of foreign affairs remarked , "nigeria's position on africom remains that african governments have the sovereign responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security on the continent.... president yar'adua's statement on the proposed africom is consistent with nigeria's well - known position on the necessity for africa to avail itself of opportunities for enhanced capacity for the promotion of peace and security in africa. .

during president bush's second official visit to africa in february 2008 , ghana's president john kufour announced , "i am happy , one , for the president dispelling any notion that the united states of america is intending to build military bases on the continent of africa .

i believe the explanation the president has given should put fade to the speculation , so that the relationship between us and the united states will grow stronger and with mutual respect. .

liberia's president ellen johnson - sirleaf has been vocal in her support from africom , and has offered to host its headquarters .

as africom has assumed ongoing security engagement operations from eucom and centcom and initiated new programs , its officials have stressed the need to continue strategic communications efforts to increase understanding of the command among african governments and their people .

congress has followed the evolution of u.s. military engagement on the african continent with interest and continues to engage the executive branch on issues related to africom's development .

several members of congress expressed interest in the creation of a combatant command for africa prior to the bush administration decision to establish africom .

in 2006 , senator russ feingold introduced s.amdt .

4527 to s. 2766 , the senate version of the fy2007 national defense authorization act ( hereafter these authorization bills are referred to as ndaas ) requiring a feasibility study on establishing a new command for africa .

in december 2007 , representative ileana ros - lehtinen introduced h.res .

897 , recognizing the strategic importance of the african continent and welcoming africom's establishment .

senator james inhofe introduced similar legislation , s.res .

480 , in march 2008 .

these resolutions also urged the departments of defense and state , as well as usaid , to consult with african partners to address concerns regarding the command's mandate .

multiple committees held hearings on the command during its first year .

general carter ham delivered africom's most recent posture statement to the house and senate armed services committees in april 2011 .

congress has addressed issues associated with the command's development in report language accompanying several authorization and appropriations bills .

in the command's first year , the senate armed services committee expressed its support for africom in s.rept .

110-77 ( accompanying s. 1547 , the senate version of the fy2008 ndaa ) , but raised questions regarding authorities needed to stand up and staff the command ; authorities and funding mechanisms for interagency staff ; location ; planned staffing levels ; and anticipated costs .

the committee repeated its support in s.rept .

110-335 ( accompanying the fy2009 ndaa ; p.l .

110-417 ) , but expressed concern that other u.s. government agencies may not have the resources to support the command's "whole of government" approach .

congress has focused some of its attention on africom on the command's headquarters location .

in 2008 , the house appropriations committee raised concern with unanswered questions related to the headquarters location in h.rept .

110-775 ( accompanying h.r .

6599 , the house version of the fy2009 military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act ) .

the house armed services committee , in h.rept .

112-78 ( accompanying h.r .

1540 , the fy2012 ndaa ) , has directed the secretary of defense to report to congress on the conclusions of an alternative basing review for africom by april 2012 , noting the committee's view that africom's location should "provide the maximum military value to the realigned command and at the minimum cost required to implement the relocation. .

in july 2011 , senator kay bailey hutchison introduced s.amdt .

562 to h.r .

2055 , the fy2012 military construction and veterans affairs appropriations bill , which would restrict the use of funds for a permanent africom headquarters outside the united states until the secretary of defense provides the congressional defense committees with an analysis of the military construction costs associated with establishing a permanent location overseas versus in the united states .

dod has used military construction funds in previous years to update the headquarters facilities currently used by africom in stuttgart and is not currently requesting funds for further headquarters construction .

several committee reports have raised questions associated with military construction in djibouti associated with africom's combined joint task force – horn of africa .

in s.rept .

111-35 ( accompanying s. 1390 , the senate version of the fy2010 ndaa ) , the senate armed services committee expressed support for the persistent regional engagement activities conducted by cjtf - hoa , but requested clarification from dod on the future role of the task force on the continent .

in the final version of the fy2011 ndaa ( h.r .

6523 , p.l .

111-383 ) , the house armed services committee required dod to submit a report evaluating cjtf - hoa's activities to counter violent extremism on the continent and the extent to which the task force's activities are aligned with africom's mission .

most recently , in s.rept .

112-29 ( accompanying the senate version of the fy2012 military construction and veterans affairs appropriations bill ) , the senate appropriations committee reiterated support for maintaining a military presence in the horn of africa at camp lemonnier , given the region's strategic importance in the war against terrorism , but repeated concerns about "the long range mission of africom at camp lemonnier and the planned development and security of the installation," as well as about the long - term funding options for cjtf - hoa .

africom's mandate has also been considered by congress within the broader context of dod's role in u.s. foreign affairs .

in 2008 , africom was the focus of a series of hearings by the house committee on oversight and government reform's subcommittee on national security and foreign affairs .

the command has also been discussed in hearings on foreign assistance and national security reform , on interagency cooperation , and on the concept of "smart power. .

the house armed services committee , which commissioned a panel on roles and missions ( of not only the various military branches , but also of the various civilian agencies involved in protecting u.s. security ) , found that shortcomings in the interagency process have led the military to take on missions that are not part of its core responsibilities .

the fy2008 ndaa required the military to examine its core competencies , a review which may ultimately have implications for africom , as may a requirement in h.rept .

111-288 accompanying the fy2010 ndaa for dod to evaluate the relationship between dod's authorities to conduct security cooperation and the department of state's authorities for security assistance .

some observers have cautioned that africom could develop independent institutional imperatives that demand resources regardless of need , rather than reflecting genuine strategic interests .

given that a large part of africom's mandate is to build the indigenous capacity of african defense forces , the ease with which the command can conduct security cooperation programs will be key to its success .

dod officials suggest that inefficiencies exist in the authorities through which funding is provided for the u.s. military's security cooperation activities .

some military officials have argued that the applicable laws need simplification to allow the combatant commands greater flexibility to respond to emerging threats and opportunities .

others have raised concerns , though , that modifying the administrative authorities could interfere with the department of state's diplomatic decisions or bilateral relationships .

the national security council is currently conducting a security sector assistance review that may address some of these issues .

the u.s. military has faced other policy restrictions in its operations with some african governments and militaries .

the establishment of a new unified command requires both financial and human resources , and although some have been redirected from other commands , military resources have been stretched by major theater operations in iraq and afghanistan , making troop readiness and costs associated with africom's development a key issue for congress .

a june 2011 dod report on the organizational structure of combatant commands noted that africom's headquarters staffing is not currently sufficient for full - time operational capacity during an extended crisis .

the report states that during operation odyssey dawn in libya , africom headquarters was augmented by 90 personnel , and additional personnel would have been required to maintain continuous operations if odyssey dawn had continued longer than it did .

the june 2011 report also notes that the command is open to increasing state department and usaid staffing at africom above current levels "if , and when , these departments are able to provide additional manpower resources. .

additional staffing of interagency personnel at africom may require additional resources from congress .

the secretary of defense has advocated on behalf of the civilian agencies , emphasizing that the state department is critically understaffed .

the development of africom's interagency staffing has been of interest to congress .

in the house report to accompany h.r .

2082 , the intelligence authorization act of fy2008 , the permanent select committee on intelligence expressed concern with interagency coordination on africa , calling it "flawed" and suggesting that the intelligence community needed to realign its resources to "better understand the threats emanating from this region. .

dod officials point out that there are no legally binding requirements for agencies to coordinate their activities , which could make africom's "pioneering" interagency process more challenging , should other agencies not have the resources to participate adequately .

because africom's role is to support u.s. foreign policy objectives in africa , close coordination with the state department will be critical to its success .

as u.s. military activity on the continent has expanded in recent years , some observers have expressed concern with the idea that u.s. military efforts on the continent could overshadow u.s. diplomatic objectives .

a 2006 senate foreign affairs committee report found that: as a result of inadequate funding for civilian programs ... u.s. defense agencies are increasingly being granted authority and funding to fill perceived gaps .

such bleeding of civilian responsibilities overseas from civilian to military agencies risks weakening the secretary of state's primacy in setting the agenda for u.s. relations with foreign countries and the secretary of defense's focus on war fighting .

former senate africa subcommittee chairman russ feingold , who was supportive of africom's creation , once cautioned that the command must "contribute to , not define , the u.s. government's overall strategy and objectives for the continent. .

likewise , senator richard lugar has suggested that africom could help the u.s. military develop a "more sophisticated understanding of a region that is ever - changing and highly complex," but has also noted that , "with greater expertise created within a new regional command , the hope is that there would be few disagreements between the two departments on the appropriateness of security assistance to specific african nations .

but undoubtedly , some differences of opinion will occur. .

as africom continues to develop , congress may exert its oversight authority to monitor the command's operations to ensure that they support , rather than guide , u.s. political , economic , and social objectives for the continent .

appendix .

appendix a .

history of u.s. military involvement in africa the united states maintained wheelus air base in libya from the 1940s until 1971 with some 4,000 american personnel .

wheelus served primarily as a bomber base for missions to europe and as an air force training location , although u.s. forces from the base did provide emergency humanitarian assistance to earthquake and flood victims in libya and tunisia in the 1960s .

africa was not included in the u.s. military command structure until 1952 , when several north african countries , including libya , were added to the responsibilities of u.s. european command because of their historic relationship with europe .

the rest of the continent remained outside the responsibility of any command until 1960 , when cold war concerns over soviet influence in newly independent african countries led dod to include sub - saharan africa in the atlantic command ( lantcom ) , leaving north africa in eucom .

the unified command plan was revised again in 1962 by president john f. kennedy , and responsibility for sub - saharan africa was transferred to a newly - created strike command ( stricom ) , which was responsible for operations in the middle east , sub - saharan africa , and south asia and located at mcdill air force base in tampa , fl .

stricom was redesignated as readiness command ( redcom ) in 1971 , and its responsibility for africa was dissolved , leaving sub - saharan africa out of the combatant command structure until 1983 .

under the reagan administration , u.s. military involvement in africa was largely dominated by cold war priorities , and the administration's "containment" policy led dod to divide responsibility for africa into its current configuration .

in the 1980s , the u.s. military was involved in repeated skirmishes with libyan jets in territorial disputes over the gulf of sidra , and those engagements later escalated as libya was implicated for supporting international terrorism .

on april 15 , 1986 , the united states initiated air strikes against multiple military targets in libya under the code name operation el dorado canyon to "inflict damage to qadhafi's capability to direct and control the export of international terrorism ; " several civilian targets including the french embassy in tripoli were also inadvertently hit .

after the end of the cold war , u.s. policy toward africa was driven by president george h. w. bush's vision of a "new world order" and later by president bill clinton's policy of "assertive multilateralism. .

u.s. military involvement in africa was dominated by the deployment of u.s. forces to somalia to secure humanitarian operations , first in 1992 under the u.s. - led unified task force ( unitaf ) , also known as operation restore hope , and later under the united nations operation in somalia ( unosom ) ii .

u.s. military efforts in somalia were unprecedented on the continent — over 25,000 u.s. soldiers were deployed by president george h.w .

bush under unitaf , which was led by centcom and included forces from 24 other countries .

the number of u.s. troops was significantly reduced under president clinton as operational responsibility was shifted from unitaf to unosom ii .

in october 1993 , u.s. special operations soldiers in the u.s. - led task force ranger engaged somali militia forces in the battle of mogadishu , which ultimately resulted in the deaths of 18 american soldiers and hundreds of somalis .

president clinton ultimately ordered the withdrawal of u.s. forces from somalia in march 1994 , the same month that a limited u.s. deployment of 3,600 soldiers was dispatched to central africa to assist in humanitarian efforts for rwandan refugees and to provide protection for humanitarian supplies in rwanda .

in 1995 , dod outlined its view of africa in its u.s. security strategy for sub - saharan africa , asserting that "ultimately we see very little traditional strategic interest in africa. .

while the u.s. military was deployed almost annually during the 1990s to conduct non - combatant evacuation and repatriation operations ( neo ) in african countries that had become politically unstable , other contingency operations involving u.s. forces in africa in latter half of the 1990s were limited .

in 1998 , following the attacks on two u.s. embassies in east africa , the united states conducted retaliatory cruise missile attacks against a pharmaceutical factory in khartoum , sudan , that clinton administration officials initially contended was producing precursors for chemical weapons for al qaeda .

in 2003 , the united states responded to calls to intervene in liberia's civil war by deploying a u.s. amphibious ready group ( arg ) off the coast of liberia to provide assistance to the ecowas mission in liberia ( ecomil ) through joint task force liberia , under the command of eucom .

out of an estimated 5,000 u.s. forces deployed to the area under operation sheltering sky , only approximately 200 u.s. soldiers came ashore .

more recently , u.s. military personnel have provided training and logistical support for african peacekeepers in both sudan and somalia and counterterrorism training to select african military units in the sahel and east africa .

as discussed above , the u.s. navy continues to conduct anti - piracy patrols off the coast of east africa .

according to media reports , the u.s. military also has , in recent years , engaged in air strikes against suspected terrorist targets in somalia .

africom officials have acknowledged that the command provided logistical and advisory support for a joint military operation between the armies of uganda , the drc , and southern sudan in december 2008 against the ugandan insurgent group known as the lord's resistance army ( lra ) .

the u.s. government is currently reviewing its strategy to address the lra threat .

in march 2011 , the united states commenced military operations in libya under operation odyssey dawn , the u.s. contribution to a multilateral military effort to enforce a no - fly zone and protect civilians in libya , in support of u.n. security council resolution 1973 .

nato assumed the lead for military operations in libya on april 1 under operation unified protector .

appendix b .

instances of the use of u.s. armed forces in africa , 1950-2009 appendix c. acronym .

