the fy2008 national defense authorization bill , h.r .

1585 , was adopted by the house on december 12 , and by the senate on december 14 , 2007 .

on december 28 , the white house announced that the president would "pocket veto" the bill , a procedure that would preclude efforts by congress to override the veto .

the president objected to a provision of the bill that would allow lawsuits in u.s. courts against the current iraqi government for damages resulting from acts of the saddam hussein regime .

on january 16 , 2008 , the house passed h.r .

4986 , a version of h.r .

1585 that was modified to allow the president to waive application to iraq of the provision that he had cited as grounds for his veto .

h.r .

4986 was subsequently passed by the senate and signed by the president on january 28 , 2008 , becoming p.l .

110-181 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 .

division a of the act provides department of defense authorizations .

within division a , titles xvi ( "wounded warrior matters" ) and xvii ( "veterans matters" ) address matters related to the care and treatment of injured or ill servicemembers .

these individuals are widely referred to as "wounded warriors. .

provisions in the act reflect congressional concern about the quality and availability of medical , mental health , and dental care services for servicemembers returning from active duty in iraq and afghanistan , and the difficulties that some of these individuals have experienced in their transition from military service to veteran status .

the provisions vary in scope .

some of them alter specific aspects of existing services or benefits programs in either the department of defense ( dod ) or the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

others call for comprehensive and long - term assessment and / or redesign of programs or systems in one or both of the departments .

this report does not attempt to analyze each of the provisions in the act , but provides brief outlines of the matters addressed .

unless otherwise noted , references in this report to activities of "dod" ( including mentions in title xvi ) or "va" ( including mentions in title xvii ) are activities to be carried out by the secretary of the stated department .

the following acronyms and abbreviations are used: mtf: military treatment facility oef: operation enduring freedom oif: operation iraqi freedom pdes: the dod's physical disability evaluation system ptsd: post - traumatic stress disorder tbi: traumatic brain injury tdrl: temporary disability retired list tsgli: traumatic servicemembers' group life insurance vasrd: veterans administration schedule for rating disabilities wramc: walter reed army medical cente .

section 1601 is the short title .

title xvii includes several provisions that have an impact on programs administered by the va. a majority of these provisions are focused on improving health care services for those with tbi .

following is a summary of each of these provisions .

expresses the sense of congress , recognizing that va is a leader in the field of tbi care , and also acknowledges that dod and va have made efforts to provide a smooth transition of medical care and rehabilitative services to servicemembers as they transition from the dod health care system to that of the va .

however , it is the sense of congress that more can be done to assist veterans and their families in the continuum of the rehabilitation , recovery , and reintegration of wounded or injured servicemembers and veterans into their communities .

amends 38 u.s.c. , chapter 17 , and adds a new section .

it requires the va secretary to develop an individualized plan for rehabilitation and reintegration into the community for each veteran or servicemember who receives inpatient or outpatient care at the va for tbi .

this plan must be provided in writing to each veteran or servicemember before such individual is discharged from inpatient care at a va medical facility , or as soon as practicable following a diagnosis of tbi by the va .

it requires that each individualized plan for rehabilitation include ( 1 ) rehabilitation objectives for improving the physical , cognitive , and vocational functioning of a veteran or servicemember with a tbi in order that such individual regain independence and reintegrate into the community ; ( 2 ) access , as needed , to all appropriate rehabilitative components of the tbi continuum of care ; ( 3 ) a description of specific rehabilitative treatments and other services , to include the type , frequency , duration , and location of such treatments and services ; ( 4 ) the name of the designated case manager responsible for the implementation of the individualized plan ; and ( 5 ) the dates on which the effectiveness of the plan will be reviewed .

requires the va secretary to develop the individualized plan based on a comprehensive assessment of the physical , cognitive , vocational , neuropsychological and social impairments of the veteran or servicemember .

the assessment must also take into consideration the family education and family support needs of such individual after discharge from inpatient care .

the assessment will be performed by a team of individuals , with relevant expertise as stipulated in this section .

requires the va secretary to assign a case manager for each veteran or servicemember with a tbi .

the case manager will be responsible for the implementation of the individualized plan , and the coordination of care .

the secretary must ensure that such case manager has specific expertise , either through experience , education , or training , in the care required by the individual to whom such case manager is assigned .

requires the va secretary , to the maximum extent practicable , to involve the family members or legal guardian of the veteran or servicemember with a tbi in developing the individualized plan .

it also requires the secretary to collaborate with a state protection and advocacy system if the veteran or servicemember covered by such plan requests such collaboration , or , in the event that the individual is incapacitated , the family or guardian of the servicemember or veteran requests collaboration .

in the event that the servicemember is still on active duty , the va must collaborate with dod in developing the individualized plan for rehabilitation and reintegration .

requires the va secretary to periodically review the effectiveness of each individualized plan and refine it as appropriate after such review .

moreover , the secretary is required to review the individualized plan at the request of the veteran with a tbi or in the case of a veteran or servicemember who is incapacitated , at the request of the guardian or designee of the veteran .

amends 38 u.s.c. , chapter 17 , and adds a new section .

it authorizes the va , at its discretion , to provide hospital care and medical services through appropriate public or private entities to veterans and servicemembers who receive tbi care from the va .

such care in non - va facilities may be authorized if the va is unable to provide care at the frequency or duration prescribed in the individualized plan , for rehabilitation and reintegration .

amends 38 u.s.c. , chapter 17 , subchapter ii .

requires the va to conduct research on mild to severe forms of tbi ; visually related neurological conditions ; means of improving the diagnosis , rehabilitative treatment , and prevention of tbi ; and dual diagnosis of ptsd and tbi , among other conditions .

requires the va to collaborate on this research with the defense and veterans brain injury center ( dvbic ) and other relevant programs of the federal government .

requires the secretary to conduct educational programs on recognizing and diagnosing mild and moderate cases of tbi .

moreover , this section requires the va to establish a tbi registry to be known as the "traumatic brain injury veterans health registry. .

when possible , the va secretary must notify each individual listed in the registry of significant developments in research on the health consequences of military service in oif and oef theaters of operations .

this section requires the va secretary to implement , within 90 days of enactment , a five - year pilot program to assess the effectiveness of providing assisted - living services to eligible veterans to enhance the rehabilitation , quality of life , and community integration of such veterans .

the pilot program must be carried out in locations selected by the secretary .

however , at least one program must be located in a veterans integrated service network ( visn ) that has a va polytrauma center .

other locations must be in areas that contain high concentrations of veterans with tbi .

the secretary must also give special consideration to rural areas when selecting program locations .

authorizes the secretary to enter into agreements for the provision of assisted living services with a provider participating in medicaid ( 42 u.s.c .

1396 et seq. ) .

such assisted living facilities must meet standards prescribed by the secretary for the purposes of the pilot program .

requires the secretary to continue to provide case management services for veterans participating in the pilot program .

requires the secretary to submit a report on the pilot program to the house and senate veterans' affairs committees not less than 60 days after the completion of the pilot program .

the report must include information about the program , utility of the program , and recommendations regarding the extension or expansion of the program .

amends 38 u.s.c .

1710a and adds a new provision that requires the secretary to provide age - appropriate nursing home care .

this section extends from two to five years the period of automatic eligibility for va health care , for veterans who served in a combat theater of operations and are discharged or released five years before the date of enactment of this act .

for those veterans who served in a combat theater of operations after november 11 , 1998 , but more than five years before the date of enactment of this act , and have not enrolled in the va health care system , the period of automatic eligibility will be three years .

amends 38 u.s.c .

1702 that pertains to presumption of service - connection , and inserts the term "mental illness" instead of "psychosis. .

requires the secretary to provide a veteran who served in a period of war after the persian gulf war , or in combat against a hostile force during a period of hostilities after november 11 , 1998 , a preliminary mental health evaluation as soon as practicable , but not later than 30 days after a request for such evaluation .

amends 38 u.s.c .

1712 and extends from 90 days to 180 days after discharge or release , the eligibility for outpatient dental treatment for a veteran with service - connected dental conditions or disabilities who served on active duty .

amends 38 u.s.c .

6301 to include national guard and reserve components among those who are eligible for va outreach services .

defines the term "outreach" as the act or process of reaching out in a systematic manner proactively to provide information , services , and benefits counseling to veterans , and to the spouses , children , and parents of veterans who may be eligible to receive benefits under the laws administered by the secretary , to ensure that such individuals are fully informed about , and assisted in applying for , any benefits .

amends 38 u.s.c .

1980a , and provides for the designation of a fiduciary or trustee for benefits under the traumatic servicemembers' group life insurance ( tsgli ) for servicemembers who are medically incapacitated .

