the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) protects the interests of participants and beneficiaries in private - sector employee benefit plans .

governmental plans and church plans generally are not subject to the law .

erisa supersedes state laws relating to employee benefit plans except for certain matters such as state insurance , banking and securities laws , and divorce property settlement orders by state courts .

an employee benefit plan may be either a pension plan ( which provides retirement benefits ) or a welfare benefit plan ( which provides other kinds of employee benefits such as health and disability benefits ) .

most erisa provisions deal with pension plans .

erisa does not require employers to provide pensions or welfare benefit plans , but those that do must comply with its requirements .

erisa sets standards that pension plans must meet in regard to: who must be covered ( participation ) , how long a person has to work to be entitled to a pension ( vesting ) , and how much must be set aside each year to pay future pensions ( funding ) .

erisa sets fiduciary standards that require employee benefit plan funds be handled prudently and in the best interests of the participants .

it requires plans to inform participants of their rights under the plan and of the plan's financial status , and it gives plan participants the right to sue in federal court to recover benefits that they have earned under the plan .

erisa also established the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) to insure that plan participants receive promised benefits , up to a statutory limit , should a plan terminate with a lack of sufficient assets to pay promised benefits .

in order to encourage employers to establish pension plans , congress has granted certain tax deductions and deferrals to qualified plans .

to be qualified for tax preferences under the internal revenue code ( irc ) , plans must meet requirements with respect to pension plan contributions , benefits , and distributions , and there are special rules for plans that primarily benefit highly compensated employees or business owners .

responsibility for enforcing erisa is shared by the department of the treasury , the department of labor , and the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) .

in the department of the treasury , the internal revenue service oversees standards for plan participation , vesting , and funding .

the department of labor regulates fiduciary standards and requirements for reporting and disclosure of financial information .

the pbgc — a government - owned corporation — administers the pension benefit insurance program .

erisa consists of four titles .

title i sets out specific protections of employee rights in pensions and welfare benefit plans .

title ii specifies the requirements for plan qualification under the internal revenue code .

title iii assigns responsibilities for administration and enforcement to the departments of labor and treasury .

title iv of erisa establishes the pension benefit guaranty corporation .

in order for an employer - sponsored retirement plan to qualify for federal income tax deferrals and deductions , it must comply with the pension - related provisions of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

the pension - related provisions of the irc require plans to cover rank - and - file workers , and they include "nondiscrimination rules" that prohibit qualified plans from favoring highly - compensated employees with respect to eligibility or benefits .

title iii of erisa covers jurisdictional , administrative and enforcement matters .

under this title , various enforcement and regulatory responsibilities are coordinated between the department of labor , the treasury department , and the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) .

under section 3001 of erisa , before the treasury department issues a determination letter regarding whether a plan has met certain requirements under the internal revenue code , the treasury department must allow certain employees , as well as the department of labor and the pbgc , the opportunity to comment on the application .

section 3002 provides that if the secretary of labor or the pbgc want to bring a claim against a party for violation of the participation , vesting , or funding provisions of erisa , the secretary and the pbgc must give the secretary of the treasury a reasonable opportunity to review the brief .

erisa also gives the secretary of the treasury the right to intervene in these cases .

section 3003 provides that unless collection of the tax is in jeopardy , the secretary of the treasury must notify the secretary of labor before sending a notice of deficiency relating to a tax imposed on a prohibited transaction .

the secretary of the treasury must also give the secretary of labor an opportunity to comment on the imposition of the tax .

under section 3004 of erisa , whenever the secretary of the treasury and the secretary of labor are required to carry out provisions in erisa ( or a federal law amended by erisa ) that relate to the same subject matter , the secretaries must consult with each other to develop rules , regulations , practices , and forms .

this collaboration is to encourage efficient administration of the provisions , and prevent duplication of efforts by the agencies , as well as creation of additional burden for plan administrators , employers , participants and beneficiaries .

title iv of erisa established the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) as a government - owned corporation to protect the retirement income of participants and beneficiaries in private - sector defined benefit pension plans .

defined contribution plans such as esops , profit - sharing plans , 401 ( k ) , 403 ( b ) , thrift / savings plans , and stock bonus plans are not insured by the pbgc .

the insurance program treats pension plans differently depending on whether they are single - employer plans or multiemployer plans ( i.e. , collectively bargained plans to which more than one company makes contributions ) .

the pbgc maintains separate reserve funds for single - employer plans and multiemployer plans .

the pbgc receives no appropriations from congress .

its revenues come from premiums paid by employers that sponsor defined benefit pension plans , the assets of the terminated plans that it has taken over , investment income on its trust funds , and amounts recovered from the general assets of firms that terminate underfunded pension plans .

although it receives no appropriations , the multiemployer pension plan amendments act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-364 ) requires the pbgc's receipts and disbursements to be included in the federal budget .

the pbgc does not have the legal authority to set its own premiums , which are set in law by congress .

the pbgc single - employer insurance program receives two types of premiums from plan sponsors: a per - capita premium that is charged to all single - employer defined benefit plans and a variable premium charged to underfunded plans .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 increased the per capita premium from $19 per year to $30 per year for single - employer plans and indexed future premiums to average national wage growth .

the per - capita premium is $34 in 2009 .

the variable premium is equal to $9 per $1,000 of underfunded vested benefits .

the interest rate for determining the amount of underfunding subject to the variable rate premium is based on a composite corporate bond rate for the month preceding the month in which the premium payment year begins .

under prior law , an underfunded plan was exempted from the variable - rate premium if it was not underfunded in any two consecutive years out of the previous three years .

under the ppa , the variable premium is assessed on all underfunded plans , regardless of the plan's funding status in earlier years .

for employers with 25 or fewer employees , the variable premium is $5 per participant .

the ppa made permanent a surcharge premium for certain distress terminations that was added by p.l .

109-171 and was to expire in 2010 .

an annual surcharge of $1,250 per participant will be assessed for three years against any firm that terminates an underfunded pension plan during bankruptcy if it later emerges from bankruptcy .

the pbgc guarantees only "basic benefits. .

basic benefits include pension benefits beginning at normal retirement age ( usually age 65 ) , certain early retirement and disability benefits , and benefits for survivors of deceased plan participants .

only vested benefits are insured .

erisa sets a limit on the benefits insured by the pbgc .

this limit is adjusted annually for increases in wage growth in the economy .

for pension plans ending in 2009 , the maximum yearly pension guarantee is $54,000 for a participant retiring at age 65 .

the maximum insured benefit is reduced actuarially if a participant retires before age 65 or if the pension plan provides benefits in a form other than a life annuity .

benefits are insured at their nominal value: once the insured benefit amount is determined , it is not adjusted for inflation .

benefit increases that went into effect less than five years before a plan was terminated are not fully insured .

insurance on these benefits is phased in , guaranteeing 20% of the increase in benefits for each full year since the amendment that increased plan benefits was adopted .

a sponsor of a single - employer plan can voluntarily end the pension plan in one of two ways: ( 1 ) a "standard" termination if the plan is fully funded ; or ( 2 ) a "distress" termination that allows a sponsor in serious financial trouble to terminate a plan that may be less than fully funded .

in addition , the pbgc may terminate a plan involuntarily if certain conditions are met .

the pbgc becomes responsible for paying benefits in the case of a distress or involuntary termination .

an employer can end a plan through a standard termination only if the plan's assets are sufficient to cover all of the plan's liabilities .

participants and beneficiaries must be informed of the amounts due them , including the data and underlying actuarial assumptions used to compute the benefits .

an actuary must certify that the assets are sufficient to meet all plan liabilities .

if the rules for a standard termination have been met , the plan sponsor purchases annuities from a commercial insurer or distributes lump - sum payments to beneficiaries .

the employer then has no further liability to the pbgc or plan participants and can recapture any remaining assets after paying all applicable taxes .

an employer can terminate an underfunded plan under a distress termination only if one of the following conditions applies: bankruptcy proceedings seeking liquidation have been filed by or against the company under chapter 7 of the bankruptcy code ; the company is undergoing reorganization under chapter 11of the code and the bankruptcy court has approved a plan termination ; the company is unable to pay its debts when due and will be unable to continue in business unless the plan is ended ; or the company has experienced unreasonably burdensome pension costs solely as a result of a decline in its workforce .

one of the criteria for a distress termination must be met by each company that is a contributing sponsor of the plan or a "substantial member" of the sponsor's controlled group .

generally , a substantial member is a company whose assets comprise 5% or more of the total assets of the controlled group .

the controlled group includes corporate parents and affiliates of the plan sponsor .

the pbgc may end a pension plan even if a company has not filed to do so on its own initiative .

pbgc may end the plan if: the plan has not met the minimum funding requirements ; the plan cannot pay current benefits when due ; a lump - sum payment has been made to a participant who is a substantial owner of the sponsoring company ; or the loss to the pbgc is expected to increase unreasonably if the plan is not ended .

in a distress termination , or in an involuntary termination initiated by the pbgc , a pension plan sponsor is liable to the pbgc for any unfunded benefit liabilities .

the plan sponsor and members of the controlled group are jointly and severally liable for such obligation , so each member can be held responsible for the entire liability .

each contributing sponsor also would be liable to the pbgc if the plan had an accumulated funding deficiency or a waived funding deficiency .

the employer liability to the pbgc is due on the termination date , except that the pbgc can prescribe commercially reasonable terms for payment of employer liability that exceeds 30 percent of the net worth of the employer .

if a company sells or transfers a business with an underfunded pension plan for the purpose of evading pension liabilities and the plan is ended within five years of the sale or transfer , the firm can be held liable for unfunded liabilities existing at the time of sale .

the pbgc must be notified of certain events , including: ( 1 ) if the plan is deemed not in compliance with the law ; ( 2 ) if an amendment has been adopted decreasing benefits ; ( 3 ) if there has been a substantial drop in the number of active participants ; ( 4 ) if the plan does not meet the minimum funding standards or is unable to pay benefits ; or ( 5 ) if there is a distribution of $10,000 or more to a substantial owner .

the pbgc also must be notified if a controlled group member leaves the group , liquidates , declares an extraordinary dividend , or redeems 10% or more of total voting stock .

as amended by the ppa , erisa requires that if a defined benefit plan terminates while it is underfunded through a distress termination under erisa §4041 ( c ) , or is subject to an involuntary termination under erisa §4042 , the plan sponsor must provide to plan participants the same information that the plan is required to submit to the pbgc — subject to confidentiality limitations — within 15 days of the pbgc filing .

this requirement applies to notices of intent to terminate and involuntary termination determinations .

multiemployer pension plans were covered by pbgc insurance by the multiemployer pension plan amendments act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-364 ) .

the rules for multiemployer plans differ from those applicable to single - employer plans because of the special nature of these arrangements .

the pbgc is required to provide financial assistance to insolvent multiemployer plans , whether or not they are terminated , when the assistance is needed to enable the plan to pay guaranteed benefits .

the pbgc guarantees 100% of the first $11 of monthly benefits earned per year of service plus 75% of the next $33 of monthly benefits per year of service .

the 75% guarantee is reduced to 65% if the plan does not meet specified funding requirements .

the annual insurance premium charged for each plan participant in a multiemployer plan is $9 in 2009 and is indexed to wage growth in future years .

employers who leave a multiemployer plan for any reason continue to be liable for a portion of any underfunding .

the purpose of the withdrawal liability is to protect the remaining contributing employers and the pbgc from having to assume the burden of funding the pension obligations of employers who cease contributing to the plan .

the withdrawal liability is imposed at the time of withdrawal and does not depend on the actual termination of the plan .

this rule is designed to discourage withdrawals by requiring each employer to continue funding its share of the plan's unfunded vested liability .

withdrawal liability is equal to an employer's share of the plan's unfunded vested liability determined under one of several rules that may be adopted by the plan , and is payable to the plan in annual installments for a period of up to 20 years .

an employer first entering a multiemployer plan is allowed a six - year "free look" during which it can participate in the plan without incurring withdrawal liability .

this provision is not available if the employer would account for 2% or more of total contributions to the plan .

this glossary contains terms used within erisa and the internal revenue code .

it also contains certain abbreviations used within this report .

