in 2007 , much higher than expected defaults and delinquencies in the "subprime" segment of the mortgage market , led to a significant slowdown of the housing market .

most of these mortgages were financed not by traditional banks , but by global capital markets through asset or mortgage - backed securities .

thus , rather than being confined to the institutions who made the loans initially , the losses caused by the unexpected volume of mortgage defaults have been felt throughout the financial system by any person or institution who bought such securities .

in addition , financial guaranty insurance companies , often known as "monoline" insurers , have also been impacted because they provided insurance for various asset - backed bond issues .

these insurers also insure a variety of other bonds .

consequently , if the ratings of a bond insurer should fall ( due to widespread default problems associated with a particular category of bonds ) , then the ratings of other bonds insured by the same firm will also decline .

such spillover and contagion effects are raising questions regarding the possibility of a government - sponsored rescue of bond insurers in difficulty .

although the federal government does not currently oversee insurers , various proposals for broad federal oversight of all insurers have been introduced , including s. 40 / h.r .

3200 in the 110 th congress .

the house financial services subcommittee on capital markets , insurance , and government sponsored enterprises held a hearing on "the state of the bond insurance industry" on february 14 , 2008 , and the full financial services committee is scheduled to examine "municipal bond turmoil: impact on cities , towns , and states" on march 12 , 2008 .

at the time of writing , there have been no bills focused on the current bond insurance market introduced .

this report begins with a description of the bond insurance industry and its business model , including the relatively recent move into providing insurance for asset - backed securities .

an analysis of the current market difficulties follows along with the various possibilities of spillover effects .

finally , a number of broader policy questions are briefly discussed .

this report will be updated as events warrant , particularly if and when congress takes action on the issue .

the bond insurance industry is small relative to the entire industry as a whole .

according to the association of financial guaranty insurers ( afgi ) , total premiums collected in 2006 by the 12 insurers and reinsurers that represented nearly all the industry were $3.2 billion .

in comparison , the total direct premium collected by u.s. property / casualty insurers in 2006 was $447.8 billion , and that collected by life and health insurers was $619.7 billion .

while the total premium volume is fairly low , the total net par value of the bonds insured by its members is much higher , namely $2.3 trillion with four companies , ambac , fgic , fsa , and mbia , insuring approximately $2.0 trillion of that $2.3 trillion .

the oldest of the insurers , ambac assurance corporation , was established less than 40 years ago .

the bond insurance sector is relatively small because the companies are restricted , under the state chartering laws , to providing only one kind of insurance , financial guaranty insurance , which is why they are often referred to as monolines .

while this restriction applies to the business activity of providing financial guarantees to securities , it does not limit the types of securities that can be insured .

bond insurance basically guarantees bond purchasers that interest payments will be made on time , and if the issuers default , that principal will eventually be returned .

this insurance is typically purchased by the issuer of the bond for a one - time payment .

the purpose of this insurance , therefore , is to "credit enhance" or raise the credit rating that would have been assigned based upon the financial strength of the original issuer to that of the insurance company guaranteeing the bond .

a higher credit rating may be useful for issuers wanting to attract more investors , in particular smaller bond issuers or those unfamiliar to most investors .

many institutions also prefer highly rated "aaa" securities either because risk - based capital requirements are less for institutions holding such securities or , in the case of mutual funds , because of specific investment requirements .

issuers without the necessary capital reserves can still obtain higher ratings for their securities by purchasing bond insurance .

as noted above , the current difficulty in the bond insurance market is rooted in the unexpected rise in mortgage defaults and foreclosures , which caused an increase in defaults on a number of mortgage - backed securities , including many that had previously been thought to be essentially risk - free .

this crisis affects bond insurers in a number of ways .

the most straightforward is that , if they insure any securities that default due to the non - performance of the underlying mortgages , the bond insurer would be responsible for paying off these securities , which would mean an increase in future payments to be made by the insurer .

a second , more immediate impact would be on the insurer's balance sheet , particularly if the insurance protection is provided in the form of cds , rather than a traditional policy .

even if default has not occurred , as the probability of default on a security covered by a cds increases , the insurers offering the protection must show a loss on their books , even if the immediate cash flow has not changed .

finally , the bond insurers may be affected by generally increased skepticism on the part of investors and the ratings agencies .

over the past months , market sentiment on bond insurers has turned substantially negative .

stock prices for bond insurers are down substantially , nearly 90% in the last year for ambac , which has been downgraded to aa by one rating agency ( fitch ) , but has to this point kept aaa ratings from moodys and standard & poor's .

other downgrades have included fgic to aa by fitch and standard & poor's , and sca to a by fitch .

one insurer , aca , has been downgraded all the way to junk levels by standard and poor's .

several insurers have scrambled to raise capital to avoid being downgraded .

two large insurers , mbia and ambac , have been successful in raising sufficient capital to maintain aaa ratings from at least two of the rating agencies .

multi - billion dollar paper losses have been reported , primarily from the value of the insurers' cds contracts .

new york state insurance superintendent eric dinallo has held meetings with various banks and other financial institutions attempting to arrange some kind of rescue package to prevent further downgrades .

no rescue package has been forthcoming from superintendent dinallo's efforts , although they may have contributed to the ability of some of the insurers to raise new capital .

losses in the hundreds of billions of dollars throughout the financial system have been foreseen by some analysts .

different market participants have come up with dramatically different views on the future of the bond industry .

two competing views are summarized below , the first promoted , unsurprisingly , by many in the bond industry , while the second is voiced more by outside skeptics .

the direct impact of a monoline insurer being downgraded from aaa is critical for that company .

what may not be obvious , however , are the effects on other actors in the financial system , some of whom may never have even heard of the asset - backed securities and credit default swaps that are the catalyst for the current problems .

these participants and possible impacts are discussed below .

the future of the individual bond insurers revolve around the actual extent of their losses on asset - backed securities and whether or not they are able to retain their aaa ratings .

while the answer to these questions are largely unknowable at the moment , the situation does seem to raise three significant policy questions: is an immediate federal government response necessary to address the situation and avert possible widespread losses and systemic risk ? .

was a regulatory failure at least partially responsible for allowing conditions for a potential crisis situation to exist ? .

what regulatory changes , in particular those addressing the use of derivatives , may prevent future financial instability ? .

if the potential losses are truly so high , it would seem to be in the self - interest of a wide number of financial institutions to help the insurers retain their aaa rating with or without direct government intervention .

unless a single , very well capitalized individual or firm becomes convinced that buying out a large bond insurer made business sense , the odds of a purely private rescue seem small .

this is primarily due to the collective action problems due to the large number of actors involved .

even if the overall losses would be huge , for each individual bank or insurer affected , the most logical course of action may be to sit back and let somebody else put their money up to solve the problem .

in such a case , government coordination , even if no government money is directly involved , might avert the larger loss .

this was essentially the solution to the 1998 long term capital management ( ltcm ) failure that was brokered by the federal reserve .

the bond insurer situation , however , is much more complicated than ltcm was .

there are several bond insurers in difficulty and hundreds or thousands of institutions that could be affected if the insurers fail .

to this point , the direct government intervention has been much less , than in the ltcm rescue .

the primary government official pushing for some sort of solution right now is superintendent dinallo , who is the insurance regulator of the state where most bond insurers are based , but who does not have the same overall status that the leadership of the federal reserve did in the ltcm crisis .

the current absence of federal involvement at the micro level points to the more macro questions about regulatory failure .

the bond insurers , like all insurers , are state regulated entities .

while most are domiciled in new york , the largest , ambac is domiciled in wisconsin , and the insurer most negatively affected by the current crisis , aca , is domiciled in maryland .

questions by members of congress about whether state insurance regulators have the ability to ensure the solvency of insurers were raised in earnest in the late 1980s after several large insolvencies and have continued as the financial services marketplace has become increasingly complex since then .

the current bond insurer difficulties will likely cause such questions to be raised again due to the central role played by the relatively new and sophisticated financial instruments , such as credit derivatives and collateralized debt obligations .

in addition to the question of how insurers should be regulated , the crisis also may raise questions about whether and how financial derivatives , such as the credit default swaps offered by the bond insurers , should be regulated .

currently , some derivatives trading is regulated by the commodity futures trading commission under the commodity exchange act .

other derivative instruments , including cds , are traded in over - the - counter ( off - exchange ) markets that are essentially unregulated .

congress has repeatedly considered the question of whether unregulated derivatives markets have the potential to facilitate fraud , price manipulation , or financial instability ; for example , in december 2007 , the senate passed legislation ( h.r .

2419 , title xiii ) that would expand the cftc's authority over currently unregulated energy derivatives .

unregulated financial derivatives markets have increased in size such that a widespread crisis in derivatives could cause substantial damage to the rest of the financial system and lead to a downturn in the real economy .

this sort of systemic risk is seen as a major rationale for regulating other financial services , such as banks .

if derivatives are posing a similar systemic risk , some may point to this in arguing for their regulation as well .

