in january 2000 , the national intelligence council ( nic ) released a report asserting that , "[n]ew and reemerging infectious diseases will pose a rising threat to u.s. and global security over the next 20 years .

these diseases will endanger u.s. citizens at home and abroad , threaten u.s. armed forces deployed overseas , and exacerbate social and political instability in key countries and regions in which the united states has significant interests. .

nic cited a number of factors that heighten the infectious diseases threat , including increasing drug resistance , slow development of new antibiotics , urban sprawl , environmental degradation , and the growing ease and frequency of cross - border movements .

over the past decade , there has been considerable debate about countries' abilities to contain and prevent infectious disease outbreaks .

in 2002 , the international community struggled to identify an unknown infectious disease that rapidly spread across 31 countries , infected more than 8,400 people , and killed 813 of those who contracted it .

in 2003 , when the disease was ultimately contained , scientists called the agent severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) .

that same year , influenza a / h5n1 ( bird flu ) reemerged and spread to more than 50 countries .

as of april 17 , 2008 , 381 people have contracted h5n1 , 240 of whom died .

about 63% of those who contracted the disease have died .

a number of u.s. agencies , centers , and departments implement a range of programs aimed at treating and containing the global spread of tuberculosis .

congress designates funds for global tb interventions only to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , while other agencies and departments draw from general funds ( see table a - 5 in the appendix ) .

because agencies and departments might use discretionary funds to support global tb initiatives , some u.s. international tb activities might not be included here , such as research conducted by the national institute of health ( nih ) to develop a new tb drug with a shorter treatment regimen .

a number of organizations collaborate to combat tb globally .

most of these adhere to guidelines and recommendations that who and its partners drafted .

who is the directing and coordinating authority for health within the united nations system .

it is responsible for providing leadership on global health matters , shaping the health research agenda , setting norms and standards , articulating evidence - based policy options , providing technical support to countries , and monitoring and assessing health trends .

since pepfar was launched in fy2004 , overall u.s. spending on international tb initiatives has hovered around $90 million ( see table a - 5 in the appendix ) .

in fy2004 , congress appropriated $85.1 million to usaid for global tb efforts , $92.0 million in fy2005 , $91.5 million in fy2006 , and $94.9 million in fy2007 .

in fy2008 , congress significantly boosted support for global tb programs , providing $162.2 million to usaid for international tb efforts and directing ogac to provide not less than $150 million for joint hiv / tb programs .

although congress voted to increase support for global tb efforts , some members expressed concern that the additional funds might be provided at the expense of other global health programs .

the section below presents some issues congress might consider as it debates the appropriate level of funding for global tb initiatives .

who asserts that weak health systems play a key role in the continued spread of tb across africa .

many health practitioners argue that inadequate access to rapid and accurate diagnostic tests significantly contribute to the rise in new tb cases on the continent .

more than a century after its development , in most developing countries , tb is primarily identified through microscopic examination of sputum .

this tool , however , only detects from 40% to 60% of tb cases , and as little as 20% of hiv co - infected cases .

although sputum testing has limited reliability , this procedure is the most widely used in developing countries and is usually performed only after tb treatment has failed — after which the patient could have transmitted the disease to others .

about 85% of all countries who reported tb testing practices to who indicated that all suspected pulmonary tb cases undergo sputum testing .

of the 22 hbcs , 7 did not meet the minimum requirement of at least one sputum testing laboratory per 100,000 persons ( see table a - 7 in the appendix ) .

health experts also advocate for improved access to advanced testing technology , because sputum tests do not reliably detect smear - negative tb cases , particularly among hiv - positive patients .

culturing , a process requiring laboratory diagnosis , is the most definitive method of detecting tb , particularly in smear - negative cases .

who recommends that countries have at least one laboratory per 5 million people that is capable of culturing samples .

seven of the 22 high - burden countries meet this minimum requirement: brazil ( 5.1 ) , cambodia ( 1.1 ) , china ( 1.4 ) , russia ( 34.0 ) , south africa ( 1.3 ) , thailand ( 5.1 ) , and vietnam ( 1.0 ) meet this criteria .

south africa is the only country in sub - saharan africa that meets this criteria .

in order to prescribe medications properly , laboratories must be capable of conducting drug susceptibility tests ( dst ) .

prescribing the wrong medication or dosage not only minimizes the effectiveness of tb treatments , but can also lead to drug resistance .

who recommends that countries have at least one dst lab per 10 million people .

of the 22 high - burden countries , bangladesh and nigeria have no dst labs , nine countries have one dst lab to serve their entire population ( about one - third of high - burden countries ) , and nine meet the minimum of one per 10 million people: brazil , cambodia , china , indonesia , russia , south africa , thailand , uganda , and vietnam .

in many countries , patients might experience lapses in tb treatments , because clinics might not have the medicines in stock .

irregular drug deliveries are often caused by poor data collection , deficient road and transport conditions , and poor - quality distribution systems .

inconsistent use of medication can reduce the potency of tb treatments , extend the term of use , and result in drug resistence .

health advocates argue that in order to boost the impact of tb programs , congressional support for tb efforts must be accompanied by funding of health systems , including laboratory systems .

the african health capacity investment act of 2007 ( h.r .

3812 / s. 805 ) aims to address some of these issues .

the bills authorize funds to improve health care capacity on the continent .

related activities include training african health care workers , providing incentive to retain health worker , and establishing off - site hiv / aids testing and treatment facilities for health care providers .

the bill also requires the president to develop a strategy that would coordinate health - related strategies with other donors .

shortages of properly trained health care workers and sufficiently equipped health centers in high - burden countries , particularly in africa , complicate efforts to properly contain and treat tb cases .

most of the 22 high - burden countries do not have enough health workers to meet the most basic health care needs , including identifying and treating tb cases and monitoring drug usage ( see table a - 8 in the appendix ) .

in addition , many health centers are unable to contain airborne infections like tb .

high hiv prevalence in some parts of africa further complicates shortage issues , because hiv and tb patients are usually housed within close proximity of each other in poorly equipped facilities .

who maintains that in order for countries to effectively control tb and prevent increases in mdr - tb and xdr - tb cases , hiv / aids and tb patients should be housed separately and teams of health workers should be trained specifically to manage drug resistance and work in hospitals or isolation units dedicated to tb patients .

another challenge is that in some countries with high hiv prevalence , a significant number of health workers are hiv - positive , posing a risk to themselves and their patients .

who contends that all of these issues converge to cause the extremely high mortality in kwazulu - natal .

it is widely understood that mdr - tb is caused in large part by poor treatment adherence .

health worker shortages lessen the likelihood that the dispensing of medication will be properly supervised .

who fears that the inability to manage sufficiently first - and second - line treatments will lead to a rise in xdr - tb cases .

global health advocates urge congress to increase support for health worker training , fund initiatives that supplement the salaries and provide incentives for indigenous health workers , and stop recruiting health practitioners from countries with shortages to fill u.s. health positions .

global health experts are concerned about how hiv / aids and tb are converging to worsen mortality rates , particularly in africa .

early diagnosis and treatment of both diseases can extend life expectancy and , in the case of tb , decrease transmission rates .

greater awareness about the intersection of these diseases has led many health practitioners to routinely test tb patients for hiv .

while who applauds those efforts , it has expressed concern that hiv patients are not yet routinely tested for tb in most high - burden countries .

who asserts that countries could significantly improve tb case identification if health professionals would routinely test all those newly diagnosed with hiv for tb .

proponents of this idea contend that the practice could ameliorate outcomes of hiv and tb programs , reduce overall program costs , and make tb and hiv / aids efforts more efficient .

in fy2006 , ogac reportedly spent nearly $50 million on tb efforts in the 15 focus countries and about $120 million on addressing hiv / tb co - infection in fy2007 .

health advocates urge congress to increase funding for programs that integrate hiv / aids and tb responses .

congress directed ogac to spend not less than $150 million of the $4.7 billion appropriated to ogac on joint hiv / tb programs through fy2008 consolidated appropriations , division j , foreign operations appropriations .

many health experts urge congress to increase support for tb research that could lead to the development of treatments with shorter regimens , which might improve adherence .

on average , patients must take their medicines daily for six - to - eight months to be fully cured .

supporters contend that improved adherence might reduce the incidence of emergent drug - resistant tb strains .

who and others are seeking to develop new tb treatments that will be effective against mdr - tb , can cure patients between one and two months , and will cure latent tb infection .

researchers are also attempting to develop drugs that will be affordable and easily managed in resource - limited settings .

advocates maintain that congressional support for tb research should include tb vaccine research .

health experts assert that bacille calmette - guerin ( bcg ) , a vaccine currently administered to millions of newborns around the world , effectively prevents tb in childhood , but not in adulthood .

proponents urge congress to support organizations like aeras global tb vaccine foundation , which are seeking to develop a vaccine that protects the innoculated throughout their lives .

tb experts stress the need for new diagnostic tests that could be more easily used in low - resource settings .

at present , culturing is required to provide a definitive diagnosis .

culturing , however , takes weeks and requires laboratory capacities that are usually unavailable in many resource - limited settings .

advocates urge congress to support efforts , such as who's tuberculosis diagnostics initiative ( tbdi ) , which forms partnerships with the private sector , academic researchers , and national and local health officials to facilitate and accelerate the development of diagnostic tools .

in 2007 , representatives gene green and sherrod brown introduced h.r .

1532 and s. 1551 , the comprehensive tuberculosis elimination act of 2007 .

the bills amend section 317e of the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

247b - 6 ) to authorize funds for the research and development of tb vaccines , new treatments , and more effective diagnosis tools that could be used in low - resource settings .

in october 2007 , the house passed and the senate foreign relations committees reported out companion tb bills , s. 968 and h.r .

1567 , the stop tuberculosis ( tb ) now act .

the bills are aimed at fighting tuberculosis overseas and authorize $330 million in fy2008 and $450 million in fy2009 for related foreign assistance programs .

they also authorize $70 million in fy2008 and $100 million in fy2009 for anti - tb programs at cdc .

debate about whether to forcefully detain those infected with xdr - tb has intensified , particularly in south africa .

in january 2007 , who issued a statement indicating that "if a patient wilfully refuses treatment and , as a result , is a danger to the public , the serious threat posed by xdr - tb means that limiting that individual's human rights may be necessary to protect the wider public. .

forcefully detaining people carrying xdr - tb has a number of human rights implications .

the low quality of some health facilities in high - burden countries complicates arguments about involuntary detention .

a number of individuals being forcefully isolated in south african health centers reportedly held protests and walked out of facilities , complaining of poor treatment and prison - like conditions .

one patient was reportedly shot while attempting to leave the premises .

several provinces in south africa have reportedly taken legal action to force drug resistant tb patients to stay in hospitals in isolation units surrounded by wire fences and protected by guards .

the south african medical research council ( mrc ) asserts that forcibly quarantining individuals is a complicated issue , because mdr - and xdr - tb patients might never be cured ( mdr - and xdr - tb are difficult to cure in low - resource settings ) , forcing the patients to be confined until death .

mrc does not support coerced treatment , because of "the lower success rate of [resistant forms of tb] and the reduced life expectancy of mdr - tb patients. .

some observers point out that forced isolation is also complicated by socio - economic factors .

about 10 million south africans — about 25% of the population — receive some form of social welfare .

south african policy mandates that those who are hospitalized at the country's expense lose their government assistance .

many mdr - tb patients choose not to stay in hospitals , in part because they can not earn money or receive assistance while hospitalized and mdr - tb treatment takes between 18 and 24 months .

tuberculosis experts are increasingly studying the intersection of poverty and tuberculosis .

the stop tb partnership has recently commissioned the world bank to study the economic impacts of tb at the household and macro level in africa .

at the household level , some analysts contend that people sickened by tb experience reduced earning potential , which in impoverished areas might induce them to avoid or discontinue treatment as soon as symptoms abate .

at the macro level , observers assert that the crowded , poorly planned , unsanitary conditions that often characterize urban slums facilitate transmission of tb .

some 1 billion people are believed to live in urban slums , and the figure is expected to reach 2 billion in the next 30 years .

in the world's poorest countries , about 80% of the urban population live in slums .

some health advocates are beginning to argue that tb control should be considered an integral part of poverty reduction strategies .

