the u.s. secret service ( usss ) within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has two missions — criminal investigations and protection .

criminal investigation activities encompass financial crimes , identity theft , counterfeiting , computer fraud , and computer - based attacks on the nation's financial , banking , and telecommunications infrastructure .

the protection mission is the more publicly visible of the two , covering the president , vice president , their families , former presidents , and major candidates for those offices , along with the white house and the vice president's residence ( through the service's uniformed division ) .

protective duties of the service also extend to foreign missions ( such as embassies , consulates , and foreign dignitary residences ) in the district of columbia and to designated individuals , such as the homeland security secretary and visiting foreign dignitaries .

separate from these specific mandated assignments , usss is responsible for certain security activities such as national special security events ( nsses ) , which include presidential inaugurations , the major party quadrennial national conventions , as well as international conferences and events held in the united states .

the most recent congressional action ( not including appropriations ) on the service is the federal restricted buildings and grounds improvement act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-98 ) , enacted during the 112 th congress , which amended 18 u.s.c .

1752 and made it a crime for unauthorized individuals to enter a building that is secured by usss .

congress , arguably , has begun to focus its attention on legislation related to the service's financial and computer crime investigation mission activities .

legislation in the 113 th congress includes a house committee - referred bill on cyber privacy security ; a house committee - referred bill on information technology security ; a senate committee - referred bill on data security and breaches ; and a senate committee - referred bill on personal data privacy and security .

additionally , the house oversight and government reform committee held a hearing entitled "white house perimeter breach: new concerns about the secret service," on september 30 , 2014 , which addressed a security breach on september 19 th , where a person gained unauthorized entrance into the white house after climbing the perimeter fence , and previous incidents .

the committee inquired if deficient protection procedures , insufficient training , inadequate funding , personnel shortages , or low morale contributed to these security breaches .

later , on the same day as the hearing , it became public knowledge that earlier in the year a private security contractor at a federal facility , while armed , was allowed to share an elevator with president barack obama during a site visit , in violation of u.s. secret service security protocols .

the following day , october 1 , 2014 , usss director julia pierson resigned .

this report discusses potential policy questions for the upcoming 114 th congress concerning the service's mission and organization through an examination of the usss history and its statutory authorities , mission , and present activities within dhs .

the policy questions presented in this report are only considerations , since the service is widely perceived to be operating and performing its missions effectively for the past 11 years as part of dhs .

additionally , appendix a provides a list of the direct assaults on and threats to presidents , presidents - elect , and candidates .

appendix b provides a list of statutes addressing usss activities .

since 1865 , as part of the u.s. treasury department , usss has evolved into a federal law enforcement agency with statutory authority to conduct criminal investigations and protect specific federal officials , individuals , and sites .

congress transferred usss to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in 2002 legislation .

the "investigation mission" and "protection mission" have distinctive characteristics and histories , and each has been affected by informal decisions and congressional action .

since usss's transfer to dhs , any statute still in effect authorizing or requiring the treasury secretary to perform some function connected to the usss's previous statutory responsibilities has now been assumed by the dhs secretary .

this report does not detail every law enacted that has affected usss , but instead attempts to identify congressional actions that addressed the role and responsibility of the service .

additionally , appendix b in this report provides a list and brief description of the statutes identified in this report .

in light of the historical information presented above on the evolution of the statutory foundation for the usss and its present budget authority , congress might wish to consider the following policy questions , among others .

with the service effectively operating and performing its missions within dhs since 2003 , the policy questions presented in this report are potential future considerations .

what is the optimum or preferred mission of the usss and whether the mission should consist of both investigation and protection ? .

is the current allocation of resources ensuring one or both usss missions are efficiently achieved ? .

the two usss missions — investigation and protection — have evolved over 143 years .

the original and oldest mission , which began in 1865 , is the investigation mission .

statutorily , the protection mission did not begin until 1906 .

in fy2014 , however , the protection mission received approximately 63% of the agency's funding .

in fy2014 , the protection mission was appropriated approximately $920 million , and the investigation mission was appropriated $368 million .

as described earlier in this report , usss's protection mission employs the majority of the service's agents and receives a larger share of the agency's resources .

additionally , the majority of congressional action concerning usss has been related to its protection mission .

this difference may be the result of the costs associated with an increase in protecting individuals , events , and facilities .

the relevant statutes discussed above illustrate the service's expanding protection mission which includes what federal officials are authorized , through statute , usss protection ; the role and responsibilities of the secret service uniform division ; and the service's role in security for nsses .

while congress has maintained usss's role investigating financial crimes , congressional action primarily has addressed , and continues to address , the service's protection mission .

an example of this is congress's enactment of p.l .

110 - 326 , the former vice president protection act of 2008 , which requires the service to protect former vice presidents , their spouses , and minor children for a period up to six months after leaving office .

another example of congressional interest in the service's protection mission occurred in the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act , when congress specifically stated that the usss could not use any funds to protect any federal department head , except the dhs secretary , unless the service is reimbursed .

one could argue potential terrorist attacks and possible direct assaults have resulted in an increase in the need for the service's protection activities .

the service's protection mission has expanded and become more "urgent" due to the increase in terrorist threats and the expanded arsenal of weapons that terrorists could use in an assassination attempt or attacks on facilities .

the usss transfer from the treasury department to dhs could be seen as a response to the changing nature of the terrorist threat .

the establishment of a single mission , or a distinct primary and secondary mission , for the usss is one option for congress in light of this increased terrorist threat .

one argument for this is that the majority of the service's resources are used for its protection mission , and that congress has raised the issue of the service's competing missions of protection and investigation .

it can be argued , however , that the service trains its agents in both investigations and protection with no loss of a protectee in the last 52 years .

some have argued , however , that there needs to be an independent examination of the service's dual mission to evaluate the effectiveness of usss's training .

if there were an evaluation of the service's two missions , it might be determined that it is ineffective for the usss to conduct its protection mission and investigate financial crimes .

specifically , in 2012 , usss was engaged in an increased protection workload , which included protection of major presidential candidates , ensuring security for the 2012 presidential nominating conventions , and preparing for the potential transfer of presidential administrations and the january 2013 inauguration .

in march 2012 , former usss director sullivan stated that usss candidate protection began in november 2011 when the dhs secretary , in consultation with the congressional advisory committee , implemented a usss protection detail for herman cain .

governor mitt romney , senator rick santorum , and representative newt gingrich also received protection details .

this type of increased protection resulted in agents that are normally assigned to investigation missions being assigned to protection detail .

from 1865 to the present , usss has been investigating financial crimes , its only activity for the first three decades , and protecting senior executive branch officials , most notably the president .

recently the service has increased its efforts in cybersecurity and its protection activities due to certain events , such as the terrorist attacks of september 2001 and the wars in iraq and afghanistan .

the missions of the service have evolved and conformed to presidential , departmental , and congressional requirements .

due to evolving technology and tactics used in crimes — including financial , cyber , terrorism , and attempted assassinations — usss has had to evolve .

as the cost of this law enforcement increases , and the number of protectees increases ( at least during presidential campaign election years ) , the service is continuing to balance and fulfill its two missions .

appendix a .

presidential death threats and direct assaults against presidents presidential safety is and has been a concern throughout the nation's history .

for example , fears of kidnapping and assassination threats to abraham lincoln began with his journey to washington , dc , for the inauguration in 1861 .

a much more recent example is the breach of secret service security at a white house state dinner on november 24 , 2009 , where two uninvited guests gained entry to the event .

this resulted in a house homeland security committee hearing on december 3 , 2009 , where the director of the secret service , mark j. sullivan , admitted that the breach was a "human error" by secret service personnel manning a security checkpoint .

at the 2009 hearing , director sullivan stated that there has been no increase of death threats to president obama when compared to death threats against presidents george w. bush and william j. clinton even though some media sources have reported otherwise .

in 1917 , congress enacted legislation that made it a crime to threaten the president .

crs does not have access to information on presidential death threats due to the security classification of this information .

the extent to which presidents have been threatened or targeted remains a matter of conjecture .

concern for presidential safety is genuine due to the number of attempted and successful assaults against presidents .

ten presidents have been victims of direct assaults by assassins , with four resulting in death .

since the secret service started protecting presidents in 1906 , seven assaults have occurred , with one resulting in death ( president john f. kennedy ) .

the following table provides information on assaults against presidents who were protected by the secret service ; it does not include information on assaults against presidents prior to the service assuming the responsibility of presidential safety .

appendix b .

statutes addressing u.s. secret service activitie .

