the u.s. dept .

of agriculture ( usda ) forecasts that u.s. agricultural exports for fy2008 will reach a record high of $91 billion , and forecasts that imports will reach $75.5 billion , also a record ( figure 1 ) .

if these forecasts hold , the u.s. agricultural trade balance in fy2008 would be $15.5 billion .

since fy1991 , high value exports ( intermediate products such as wheat flour , feedstuffs , and vegetable oils or consumer - ready products such as fruits , nuts , meats , and processed foods ) have outpaced such bulk commodity exports as grains , oilseeds , and cotton .

in fy2008 , high value agricultural exports are forecast to account for 60% of the value of total agricultural exports .

much of the growth in u.s. agricultural exports in 2007 and 2008 is expected to come from strong demand for bulk commodities such as wheat , feed grains , oilseeds , and cotton .

agricultural exports are important both to farmers and to the u.s. economy .

production from almost a third of u.s. cropland moves into export channels , according to usda .

usda estimates that from 21% to 23% of u.s. agricultural production ( crops and livestock ) is exported .

exports account for almost half of wheat production , more than one - third of soybeans , and a fifth of corn .

the share of exports of specialty crops such as almonds is 70% , while for other specialty crops such as walnuts or grapefruit , the export share is as high as 40% .

export share of livestock products is lower than for crops , as most meat and dairy products are consumed domestically .

u.s. agricultural exports generate employment , income , and purchasing power in both the farm and nonfarm sectors .

according to usda , each $1 received from agricultural exports stimulates another $1.64 in supporting activities to produce those exports .

recent data show that agricultural exports generate an estimated 806,000 full - time civilian jobs , including 455,000 jobs in the non - farm sector .

many variables interact to determine the level of u.s. agricultural exports: income , population growth , and tastes and preferences in foreign markets ; u.s. and foreign supply and prices ; and foreign import barriers and exchange rates .

u.s. domestic farm policies that affect price and supply , and trade agreements with other countries , also influence the level of u.s. agricultural exports .

while many of these factors are beyond the scope of congressional action , farm bills have typically included a trade title ( title iii in the 2002 farm bill , the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ) that authorizes programs that guarantee the private financing of u.s. agricultural exports , subsidize agricultural exports , promote u.s. farm products in overseas markets , or address foreign trade barriers .

all of the agricultural export programs authorized in the farm bill are administered by the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

title iii of the house - passed ( h.r .

2419 ) and the senate committee - reported farm bills reauthorize and extend these programs from 2008 through 2012 , with increased funding for some of usda's export promotion programs .

the bills include new legislative authority for discretionary appropriations for initiatives aimed at strengthening u.s. participation in international food standard - setting organizations and enabling individuals and groups to challenge unfair trade barriers in international trade dispute settlement .

on december 14 , 2007 , the senate passed its version of the 2007 farm bill .

the house of representatives had passed its version on july 27 , 2007 .

the bills , which would establish u.s. farm policy for 2008 through 2012 , each contain a trade title ( title iii ) that authorizes and amends usda agricultural export programs and u.s. international food aid programs .

the bills incorporate many of the recommendations made by the administration in its farm bill trade proposals , especially changes in usda's export credit guarantee programs to make them consistent with world trade organization ( wto ) rules limiting export subsidies .

the trade title in each bill also incorporates administration proposals for increased funding for export market promotion and for addressing sanitary and phytosanitary barriers to u.s. agricultural exports .

both bills also reflect provisions of farm legislation introduced earlier in the 110 th congress , notably legislation introduced by members representing the interests of fruit , vegetable , and tree nut ( specialty crop ) producers who advocate increased federal support for their production and marketing activities , including export market promotion .

export credit guarantee programs , administered by usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) , in association with the farm service agency ( fsa ) , guarantee payments for commercial financing of u.s. agricultural exports .

u.s. financial institutions providing loans to foreign buyers for the purchase of u.s. agricultural commodities can obtain , for a fee , guarantees from usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

if a foreign buyer defaults on the loan , the u.s. financial institution files a claim with the ccc for reimbursement , and the ccc assumes the debt .

the aim of these programs is to facilitate exports to buyers in countries where official credit guarantees will help to maintain or increase u.s. export sales .

the gsm - 102 program guarantees repayment of short - term financing ( six months to three years ) extended to eligible countries that purchase u.s. farm products .

the gsm - 103 program guarantees repayment of commercial financing up to 10 years to buyers in eligible countries to purchase u.s. farm products .

the supplier credit guarantee program ( scgp ) guarantees payment by foreign buyers of u.s. commodities and products that are sold by u.s. suppliers on a short - term deferred payment basis .

the duration of the credit is short , generally up to 180 days , although the 2002 farm bill permits guarantees of up to 360 days .

the facility guarantee program ( fgp ) guarantees financing of goods and services exported from the united states to improve or establish agriculture - related facilities in emerging markets that will improve the handling , marketing , storage , or distribution of imported u.s. agricultural commodities and products .

the 2002 farm bill authorizes export credit guarantees of $5.5 billion worth of agricultural exports annually through fy2007 , while giving fas the flexibility to determine the allocation between short - and intermediate - term programs .

the actual level of guarantees depends on market conditions and the demand for financing by eligible countries .

in fy2006 , financing for $1.4 billion of u.s. agricultural exports was guaranteed under the program ( table 1 ) .

export credit guarantee programs have become an issue in wto dispute settlement as a result of a dispute raised by brazil against certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program .

the wto dispute panel in the cotton case ruled in 2005 that three u.s. export credit guarantee programs ( gsm - 102 , gsm - 103 , and scgp ) were prohibited subsidies because the financial benefits returned to the government by these programs did not cover their long - run operating costs .

this ruling by the dispute settlement panel applied not only to cotton but to other commodities as well .

the panel recommended that the united states take steps to remove the adverse effects of these subsidies or to withdraw them entirely .

the administration suspended operation of gsm - 103 in 2006 and asked congress to repeal the legislative authorization for the program and make other changes in the president's fy2007 and fy2008 budget requests .

the effectiveness of the credit guarantee programs also has been an issue .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) reviewed the programs and found that export credit guarantees were only moderately effective in meeting program goals .

omb noted also that there were substantial defaults , particularly in the sgcp program , a situation that led usda to suspend operations of scgp in 2006 .

the administration , in its farm bill trade proposals , recommended changes in ccc export credit guarantee programs that would bring them into compliance with the findings of the wto dispute resolution panel in the brazil cotton case .

to accomplish this , the administration asked congress to remove the 1% cap on fees that can be collected under the short - term credit guarantee program ( gsm - 102 ) and to eliminate specific legislative authority for the intermediate export credit guarantee program ( gsm - 103 ) and the sgcp .

usda also proposed repeal of the sgcp because of approximately $227 million in defaults and evidence of fraudulent activity .

the administration proposed to change the facility guarantee program ( fgp ) to attract users who commit to purchasing u.s. agricultural products .

no fgp funds have been allocated under the current farm bill .

both versions of the f arm bill make the changes in usda's export credit guarantee programs recommended by the administration: repeal of gsm - 103 and the sgcp and removal of the 1% cap on origination fees for gsm guarantees .

the gsm - 102 program is extended through fy2012 .

the current farm bill authorizes direct export subsidies of agricultural products through the export enhancement program ( eep ) and the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) .

the last year of substantial eep activity was 1995 , and there has been no eep spending under the current farm bill .

deip spending , which has varied considerably , averaged $18 million per year under the 2002 farm bill ( table 2 ) .

eep was established in 1985 , first by the secretary of agriculture under authority granted in the commodity credit corporation charter act , and then under the food security act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-198 ) .

eep's main stated rationale , at its inception , was to combat "unfair" trading practices of competitors ( other subsidizing countries such as the european union ) in world agricultural markets .

the general sales manager administers eep .

most eep subsidies have been used to assist sales of wheat .

many exporters have received subsidies , but from 1985 to 1995 , three exporting firms received almost half the total of all eep subsidies , which totaled more than $7 billion .

the united states agreed to reduce its agricultural export subsidies under the 1994 wto uruguay round agreement on agriculture and , in ongoing multilateral trade negotiations , advocates that all agricultural export subsidies be eliminated .

deip , most recently reauthorized in the commodity program title , not the trade title , of the 2002 farm bill , was established under the 1985 farm act to assist exports of u.s. dairy products .

its purpose was to counter the adverse effects of foreign dairy export subsidies , primarily those of the european union .

wto export subsidy reduction commitments apply also to deip .

eep has been controversial since its inception .

many oppose the program outright on grounds of economic efficiency .

eep , they argue , like all export subsidies , interferes with the operations of markets and distorts trade .

others , noting that the uruguay round agreement on agriculture restricts but does not prohibit agricultural export subsidies , point out that as long as competitors , such as the european union , use export subsidies , the united states should also be prepared to use them .

the effectiveness of eep also has been an issue .

several studies of the use of eep found that wheat exports would have declined if eep were eliminated , suggesting that the eep program increased wheat exports .

other analysts , however , found that subsidizing wheat exports under eep resulted in displacing exports of unsubsidized grains .

while many oppose subsidizing dairy products for reasons similar to those held by eep opponents , deip has strong support in congress .

omb also has evaluated the effectiveness of eep and deip .

omb found that the export subsidy programs were only moderately effective in meeting program goals of countering export subsidies or unfair trade practices of other countries .

in omb's judgment , the export subsidy programs have not been able to demonstrate an ability to permanently expand exports or build u.s. market share in targeted countries .

the agency does note that deip was successful in offsetting eu export subsidies for dairy products to mexico , which permitted the united states to develop and maintain a market for dairy product exports to that country .

the administration proposed the repeal of eep because , it argued , eep is not a useful tool for u.s. agricultural exports , it has been inactive for many years , and eliminating it would not materially affect u.s. agricultural exports .

the administration notes also that using eep would be inconsistent with the u.s. goal of eliminating export subsidies in the wto doha round of multilateral trade negotiations .

the administration made no proposals for either eliminating or reauthorizing deip , however .

the senate version of the farm bill calls for the repeal of eep , while the house bill extends authority for eep through fy2012 .

both the senate and house farm bills also extend the authorization for deip in title i , the commodity title , through fy2012 .

the 2002 farm bill authorizes mandatory funding for four programs to promote u.s. agricultural products in overseas markets: the market access program ( map ) , the foreign market development program ( fmdp ) , the emerging markets program ( emp ) , and the technical assistance for specialty crops program ( tasc ) .

 ( see table 3 for spending activity for export market development under the 2002 farm bill. ) .

map promotes primarily value - added products .

the types of activities undertaken through map are advertising and other consumer promotions , market research , technical assistance , and trade servicing .

nonprofit industry organizations and private firms are eligible to participate in map promotions on a cost - share basis .

no foreign for - profit company may receive map funds for the promotion of a foreign - made product .

about 60% of map funds typically support generic promotion ( i.e. , non - brand name commodities or products ) , and about 40% support brand - name promotion ( i.e. , a specific company product ) .

only firms classified as small businesses by the small business administration may receive direct map assistance for branded promotions .

map is exempt from wto export subsidy reduction commitments .

the 2002 farm bill authorizes map through fy2007 .

the funding level for the program ( previously capped at $90 million annually ) gradually increases to $200 million for fy2006 and fy2007 .

the 2002 farm bill also reauthorizes ccc funding for fmdp through fy2007 at an annual level of $34.5 million .

the program , which began in 1955 , is similar to map in most major respects .

its purpose is to promote u.s. agricultural exports by undertaking activities such as consumer promotions , technical assistance , trade servicing , and market research .

in contrast to map , fmdp mainly promotes generic or bulk commodities .

as with map , projects under fmdp are jointly funded by the government and industry groups , and the government reimburses the industry organization for its part of the cost after the project is finished .

like map , fmdp is exempt from wto export subsidy reduction commitments .

emp provides funding for technical assistance activities intended to promote exports of u.s. agricultural commodities and products to emerging markets in all geographic regions , consistent with u.s. foreign policy .

an emerging market is defined in the authorizing legislation as any country that is taking steps toward a market - oriented economy through food , agricultural , or rural business sectors of the economy of the country .

additionally , an emerging market country must have the potential to provide a viable and significant market for u.s. agricultural commodities or products .

eligible countries must have per capita incomes of less than $10,065 in 2005-2006 and a population greater than 1 million .

funding for the emp is set at $10 million each fiscal year through fy2007 in the 2002 farm bill .

tasc aims to assist u.s. organizations by providing funds for projects that address sanitary , phytosanitary ( sps ) , and technical barriers that prohibit or threaten u.s. specialty crop exporters .

the 2002 farm bill defines specialty crops as all cultivated plants , and the products thereof , produced in the united states , except wheat , feed grains , oilseeds , cotton , rice , peanuts , sugar , and tobacco .

the types of activities covered include seminars and workshops , study tours , field surveys , pest and disease research , and pre - clearance programs .

the 2002 farm bill authorizes $2 million of ccc funds each fiscal year through fy2007 for the tasc program .

a basic issue raised by map and fmdp , and in some cases all the export programs , is whether the federal government should have an active role in helping agricultural producers and agribusinesses market their products overseas .

some argue that map and fmdp are forms of corporate welfare in that they fund activities that private firms would and could fund for themselves .

others argue that the principal beneficiaries are foreign consumers and that funds could be better spent , for example , to educate u.s. firms on how to export .

program supporters counter that foreign competitors , especially eu member countries , also spend money on market promotion , and that u.s. marketing programs help keep u.s. products competitive in third - country markets .

omb's reviews of the effectiveness of the market development efforts determined that the programs were moderately effective , but that the programs did not necessarily serve a clear need .

many of the groups that receive market development funds , it reported , receive at least some corporate funding and could afford to support their own export promotion efforts .

omb did note that the tasc program has helped to reduce barriers to u.s. agricultural exports , citing the example of tasc - funded efforts to open taiwan's apple market to u.s. apples .

the administration proposed an increase in mandatory funding for map by $250 million over 10 years .

the additional funds would be used to address perceived inequities between farm bill program crops ( grains , oilseeds , and cotton ) and non - program crops ( especially specialty crops ) .

organic agriculture would be allowed to compete for map funding to help develop the export of organic products .

in addition , the administration proposed to increase mandatory funding for tasc to $68 million over 10 years and to increase the maximum allowable project award to $500,000 .

to address sps issues generally , the administration called for the establishment of a new grant program of $20 million over 10 years to further focus resources on international sps barriers for all agricultural commodities .

to enhance usda participation in international standard - setting bodies , such as the codex alimentarius , the international plant protection convention , and the world animal health organization , the administration requested the authorization of long - term mandatory funding of $15 million over 10 years .

both the senate bill and the house bill reauthorize usda's agricultural export promotion programs through fy2012 .

the senate bill increases map funding by $100 million over the five fiscal years fy2008-fy2012 , while the house bill increases map funding by $125 million .

both bills specifically authorize map to promote exports of organically produced commodities .

the house bill authorizes ccc funding for fmdp through fy2012 with no change in the funding levels authorized in the 2002 farm bill ( i.e. , $34.5 million ) .

the senate bill reauthorizes fmdp through fy2012 but increases its funding by $22 million over five fiscal years .

h.r .

2419 also increases funding for tasc , which the 2002 farm bill authorizes at $2 million of ccc funds per fiscal year .

total funding for tasc in h.r .

2419 over five years would amount to $38 million .

the senate bill provides a total of $29.2 million for tasc over five years .

both bills authorize discretionary appropriations ( "such sums as necessary" ) to assist limited resource persons and organizations associated with agricultural trade to address unfair trade practice of foreign countries and to reduce trade barriers .

included among trade title proposals from the administration , this measure would help smaller groups and industries who want to challenge trade practices of other countries but lack the technical and analytical expertise to successfully mount a challenge .

the house - passed bill also authorizes discretionary appropriations to enhance u.s. participation in international standard - setting organizations , such as the codex alimentarius commission or the world organization for animal health .

the intent of this measure , also proposed by the administration , is to help bring u.s. interests to bear in standard - setting organizations when sanitary , phytosanitary , or technical trade are on the agenda .

