a variety of offices at the federal level respond to complaints , grievances , and concerns from the public about government programs , services , and operations .

these entities , which differ in important respects , are variously referred to as complaint - handling , advocacy , public counsel , coordinative , and ombudsman offices .

despite their differences , they exhibit a common purpose — to represent the public in such matters — which is reflected in the classic ombudsman: that is , a high - ranking official who may be situated outside the executive and possessing independent resources and powers .

this notion , which has developed over more than a century , has its modern genesis in sweden and its evolution largely in european parliamentary regimes .

an "ombudsman," which is a swedish word that broadly means "one who represents someone," is viewed as a servant of the public .

as such , the position has been described as follows: an independent high - level officer who receives complaints , who pursues inquires [sic] into the maters [sic] involved , and who makes recommendations for suitable action .

he may also investigate on his own motion .

he makes periodic public reports .

his remedial weapons are persuasion , criticism and publicity .

he cannot as a matter of law reverse administrative action .

in brief , the concept of ombudsman has come to mean , in the words of former senator edward long , "a guardian of the people's rights against abuses and malfunctions by government , its programs , and its officials — a sort of watchman over the law's watchmen. .

the u.s. federal government has not adopted the "classic" ombudsman .

instead , the government has multifarious forms of ombudsmen - like offices .

even the entities that carry the same title ( of "ombudsman," for example ) differ in their powers , functions , duties , activities , jurisdictions , independence , and resources .

in comparison to one another , for instance , some offices are limited to receiving complaints or grievances from the public and passing them on to relevant units within the agency — without necessarily following up on them .

other complaint - handling entities do follow up on such charges , examine the agency's operations , and , in some cases , mediate or resolve disputes between the aggrieved party and the agency .

still other entities may be proactive ; that is , they seek out certain clientele groups to notify them about relevant government services , assist them in gaining access to these , and ensure that such services are delivered properly and fully .

separate from these functions and duties , some ombudsman - like offices issue reports ( periodic and / or episodic ) to agency officials , congress , and / or the public , while others have no such obligation or practice .

several recent statutes reflect these different characteristics , as well as varying position titles .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , which expanded the government's powers to combat terrorism , established a new entity or added to the responsibilities and roles of existing ones to help protect civil rights and civil liberties .

three with enhanced responsibilities are in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) : a privacy officer and an officer for civil rights and civil liberties , along with additional special duties for the inspector general ( ig ) .

in addition , a new position — the civil liberties protection officer — was created in the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) , to help protect civil liberties and privacy in policies and procedures under the odni .

the national defense authorization act for fy2008 incorporated a number of separate bills , including the wounded warrior act .

the legislation is designed to aid returning wounded military personnel in receiving appropriate medical care , when they are in the service ( and in the department of defense ) , as well as after they are discharged ( and under the jurisdiction of the department of veterans affairs ) .

the provisions — based on the recommendations of several governmental commissions ( notably , the dole - shalala commission ) and congressional panels that were highly critical of the care given to injured veterans — established federal recovery coordinators and transition patient advocates to assist them .

these positions are intended to reduce , if not prevent , complications , uncertainties , and delays from arising in the first place and , if they do arise , mitigate their impact .

if such problems arise , the coordinators and advocates are positioned to respond on their own or at the behest of the veterans .

freedom of information act ( foia ) amendments signed into law on december 31 , 2007 , created several new positions to assist the public in gaining access to government information .

public liaisons in each federal agency are to be designated by a chief foia officer , who is also responsible for monitoring foia implementation and facilitating public understanding of the purposes of foia's exemptions .

the purposes of the public liaisons are to serve as an official to whom a foia requester can raise concerns about service from the foia requester center ; to assist in reducing agency delays in responding to requests and increase the transparency and understanding of the status of requests ; and to assist in the resolution of disputes between a requester and the agency .

the law also required the creation of an office of government information services ( ogis ) in the national archives and records administration ; it is to review executive - branch agency compliance with foia policies , recommend foia policy changes to congress and the president , offer mediation services between foia requesters and administrative agencies , and issue advisory opinions if mediation has not resolved a dispute .

the american national red cross governance modernization act of 2007 established an ombudsman in the american national red cross ( anrc ) .

although it is not a federal agency , the anrc is federally chartered and charged with assisting federal government efforts in disaster relief .

the ombudsman's office , while modest at this stage , serves as a neutral party that provides voluntary , confidential , and informal processes designed to facilitate the resolution of problems between the anrc and others .

illustrating the ad hoc and specialized focus of ombudsmen - like offices at the federal level is one advanced in the 111 th congress by the house permanent select committee on intelligence .

it has proposed an ombudsman for intelligence community ( ic ) security clearances , who would be appointed by the director of national intelligence .

applicants for a security clearance in any component in the ic would be given contact information for the ombudsman , who would report annually to the house and senate select committees on intelligence with regard to the number of persons contacting the ombudsman and a summary of their concerns , complaints , and questions .

attempts to establish a government - wide ombudsman at the federal level or to standardize ombudsman - like offices have received attention — from congress , the executive , international organizations , academia , relevant professional societies , and the press — sporadically since at least the mid - 1960s .

these across - the - board plans , however , have remained on the drawing board .

by comparison , national - level offices of ombudsman have proliferated in sweden and elsewhere .

finland established such an office nearly 100 years ago .

in the 1960s , new zealand , the netherlands , spain , tanzania , great britain , and northern ireland established ombudsmen .

in the 1970s , france , portugal , and austria established such offices .

countries including south africa , hungary , the czech republic , columbia , the republic of georgia , and zimbabwe have established national or sub - national offices of ombudsman in the last 20 years to curb human rights abuses and aid in democratic transitions .

according to the international ombudsman institute , about 120 countries currently employ ombudsmen at the national or sub - national level of government .

the european union appointed its first european ombudsman on july 12 , 1995 .

some of the ombudsmen in other countries serve at the national level and have broader jurisdictions and a greater degree of independence — especially those in parliamentary regimes — than their american namesakes .

this overview is not a comprehensive study of various complaint - handling , ombudsman , or advocacy offices .

instead , it examines and provides examples of ombudsman - like offices , recognizing their variations .

differences among these instrumentalities include those noted below .

origins: was the office created internally within an agency , or mandated by congress or the president ? .

powers and duties: does the entity simply receive complaints and pass them along , or does it also follow up on complaints after an agency response ; does it resolve disputes between the agency and the complainant , or does it engage in proactive efforts , such as providing outreach and special assistance to individuals ? .

jurisdictions: is there one complaint - handling entity for an entire agency , or several entities with separate jurisdictions ; if the latter , how confined are these ? .

locations: is the ombudsman - like office situated within a "parent" agency or made independent of it ? .

resources: what is the level of funding and resources that the entity receives ? .

controls: who appoints and removes the officer , and who determines the office's budget and spending priorities ? .

these criteria are not discrete .

the characteristics overlap and are utilized in a variety of combinations in federal agencies and organizations , offering a gamut of ways and means for the public to petition the government .

the variations among the attributes also suggest important differences in the capacity and capability of each office .

interest in institutionalizing a centralized or standardized complaint - handling role in the federal government began in the mid - 1960s .

although no proposals along these lines have been adopted , a number of studies and recommendations have emerged over the years .

these have come from members of congress , executive and administrative officers , and nongovernmental organizations .

although most earlier studies are dated or limited to certain entities , these efforts reveal a wide variety of complaint - handling mechanisms at the federal level .

differences in the current collection of offices and positions that respond to complaints , grievances , concerns , and questions from the public arise along a number of distinct dimensions: their powers and duties , jurisdictions , locations , controls , neutrality , resources , and use of electronic and traditional communications .

variations among the offices are reflected in their titles: federal student aid ombudsman ; medicare beneficiary ombudsman ; taxpayer advocate ; ombudsman at the federal deposit insurance corporation ; federal recovery coordinators and transition patient advocates for wounded military personnel ; aviation noise ombudsman ; environmental protection agency public liaison ; superfund ombudsman ; freedom of information act office of government information services and public liaisons ; construction metrication ombudsman ; and privacy and civil liberties officer or , alternatively , civil liberties and civil rights officer .

although there is no authoritative , comprehensive , detailed survey of current federal complaint - handling offices , earlier studies ( even if dated and limited ) , along with the coverage here , provide useful information with which to describe , examine , and compare them .

one observation , for instance , is that such offices appear to be growing in number and prominence as well as range of activities , duties , and services .

as noted throughout this report , federal complaint - handling offices exhibit different forms , capacities , and designations .

the variations range from the individual office's powers , resources , duties , and functions , to its jurisdiction , location , controls , neutrality , and adoption of new technologies — notably the internet .

the activities , services , and duties of ombudsman - like entities , for instance , cross a wide spectrum , from the nearly passive to the proactive .

the range extends from simply receiving a complaint and passing it on to appropriate offices ; to following up on it and notifying the complainant of the results ; to helping resolve disputes between the agency and complainant .

some offices report findings to agency officials , congress , and / or the public , while others do not .

some are proactive — for instance , conducting outreach efforts to the public or select groups — while others are not .

a few even embark on preemptive efforts — that is , they intervene on behalf of clientele from the beginning to the end of a service , thereby reducing , if not preventing , problems from arising in the first place — while most offices do not .

the variations among the offices reflect their piecemeal establishment — at different times , for different reasons , and for different purposes , duties , and functions .

some , for instance , are designed to assist a particular clientele who conduct business with an agency or who are the primary recipients of its services .

other entities may be intended to meet the needs of the public at large or broad sectors of it .

variations also arise over time and across policy areas , as the needs and demands of government and society change .

recent constructs demonstrate this .

the departments of defense and veterans affairs federal recovery coordinators for wounded military veterans were prompted by instances of inadequate medical care .

and the creation of a privacy officer and an officer for civil rights and civil liberties in the homeland security department was due to concerns about the possible intrusiveness and potential impact of the government's new anti - terrorism powers .

efforts to establish a government - wide ombudsman , create complaint - handling offices throughout the executive branch , and / or standardize such entities have existed since the mid - 1960s .

none of these one - size - fits - all initiatives , however , has been enacted into law .

instead , the legislative and administrative solutions — to meet the challenge of responding to a large and growing number of inquiries , grievances , and concerns from the public — have arisen on an ad hoc basis , focusing on particular agencies and specific problem areas .

even in the few cases where a single statute has called for similar offices in a number of agencies — such as freedom of information act ( foia ) pubic liaisons , construction metrication ombudsmen , and banking agency ombudsmen — these entities have been highly specialized , responding to a select clientele in a distinct policy or subject area .

as a consequence of their varied attributes and development , ombudsman - like entities vary in their roles , capabilities , and independence .

these constructs thus reflect certain fundamental characteristics of american national government: dispersed and decentralized power , the absence of uniformity and standardization among similar institutions , and competition between the executive and legislature for control over government organizations and operations .

american national red cross although it is not a federal government agency , the american national red cross ( anrc ) is an organization chartered by public law .

its charter established the basic purposes of the organization , one of which is serving as a disaster relief organization for the united states .

congress also mandated , in the governance modernization act of 2007 , an anrc ombudsman , who began operating in october 2007 .

besides the ombudsman , the office presently consists of three positions: two analysts , who compile annual reports to congress and the anrc board of governors , and an ombudsman service representative , who receives incoming telephone complaints .

while the ombudsman position was created by congress , the duties of the office have been delineated by the organization's board of governors .

the post is to serve as a neutral party that provides a voluntary , confidential , and informal process to facilitate fair and equitable resolutions to problems brought before it ; and explores a range of alternatives or options to resolve the problems .

the position serves as both an internal and external ombudsman , fielding complaints from employees , blood donors , volunteers , financial donors , disaster victims , and other red cross clients .

department of commerce , bureau of the census , small business ombudsman in the department of commerce , the bureau of the census houses an office of the small business ombudsman .

it is the "primary advocate between the small business community and the census bureau and ... provide[s] services and opportunities for the small business community in an effort to simplify and reduce the reporting burden on requested forms. .

as such , the ombudsman provides technical assistance through a small business toll free number and a small business website ; provides internet assistance for small businesses in completing report forms ; and expands the use of electronic reporting , data sharing , and the use of administrative records .

department of defense the department of defense ( dod ) has a number of different ombudsman - like offices .

most of these , however , are "internal ; "that is , the offices and positions , such as the federal recovery coordinators , provide services to military and civilian personnel within the department .

nonetheless , dod also has several different types of external ombudsman - like offices , as the following examples illustrate: base transition coordinators ( btcs ) attached to individual military bases undergoing realignments and closings ( brac ) , whose involvement ends with the completion of the base closure and reuse ; defense procurement and acquisition policy ( dpap ) ombudsman , whose jurisdiction covers both domestic and foreign contractors ; ombudsman of the employer support of the national guard and reserve ( esgr ) , a permanent office whose participation on behalf of eligible service personnel might be a one - time event or recurrent ; and select ombudsmen operating at navy medical centers , whose voluntary participation on behalf of family members of patients at individual command centers might be short - term and sporadic or long - term and continuous .

base transition coordinators for military base reuse introducing its community guide to military base reuse , the department of defense recognizes that it "has been closing military bases and assisting defense - impacted communities through its defense economic adjustment program for more than 35 years. .

the program has increased in prominence most recently , because of the base realignment and closing ( brac ) initiative affecting a large number of military bases .

among the many local , state , and federal entities involved in each case is a dod base transition coordinator ( btc ) , described as "the local , on - site , federal point of contact who works as an ombudsman for the community. .

as such , the btc "is a key contact , problem solver and information source for the local community , especially in relation to environmental cleanup and property disposal. .

defense procurement and acquisition policy ombudsman the role of the dpap ombudsman is to assist companies , both domestic and foreign , interested in performing contracts to satisfy dod requirements , following the instructions of the dpap contract policy and international contracting directorate .

in the case of a foreign company , it may contact the ombudsman if the company "has difficulty fully understanding contracting rules and regulations , or if it thinks it was unfairly excluded from defense procurement.... " the dpap ombudsman also provides contact information for the benefit of u.s. companies in doing business with various foreign governments .

employer support of the national guard and reserve ombudsman the employer support of the national guard and reserve ( esgr ) ombudsman is designed to ensure smooth transitions for soldiers returning from their military duty by ensuring that they return to their civilian jobs — or equivalent positions — without complication .

this assignment results in the esgr being a combination of an internal ombudsman ( for active duty military personnel ) as well as an external ombudsman ( for discharged personnel reentering the private sector ) .

president richard m. nixon established the esgr in 1971 as a "conduit between the dod and the nation's employers when the united states changed to an all - volunteer force," by ensuring that service members would have their prior civilian jobs or equivalent jobs when they returned to their homes .

in 1994 , congress passed the uniformed service employment and reemployment rights act ( userra ) .

its purposes are ( 1 ) to encourage noncareer service in the uniformed services by eliminating or minimizing the disadvantages to civilian careers and employment which can result from such service ; ( 2 ) to minimize the disruption to the lives of persons performing service in the uniformed services as well as to their employers , their fellow employees , and their communities , by providing for the prompt reemployment of such persons upon their completion of such service , and ( 3 ) to prohibit discrimination against persons because of their service in the uniformed services .

the esgr is currently tasked to recognize outstanding support from employers of service members ; increase awareness of the law ; and resolve employment conflicts through informal mediation .

more than 900 ombudsmen are located within 56 esgr "field committees" that help resolve disputes between employers and employees .

complaints against an employer can be filed online .

if the ombudsman is not making progress toward the resolution of a dispute within seven days , the case is referred to the department of labor .

the ombudsmen , however , report their findings and suggestions to the office of the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs .

a service member seeking to nominate his or her employer for outstanding service can fill out an online nomination form at the esgr website .

nmcp navy family ombudsman the navy family ombudsman , operating out of the naval medical center portsmouth ( nmcp ) , assists families of military personnel needing medical services there .

the ombudsman duties include providing information , referrals , and contacts with regard to complaints , concerns , and questions .

the ombudsman , "an officially appointed volunteer," serves as: the primary communications link between families and the command ; the channel of official information from the command ; and a link to related services and facilities , including legal assistance , military medical facilities , professional counseling , and various relief societies .

through outreach programs and other ways , the ombudsman also acts "as an advocate for the command's families. .

usnhguam ombudsman the ombudsman attached to the u.s. navy hospital in guam is , like the one at the nmcp , a volunteer , trained to "offer support and guidance to command families and acts as an official liaison between command and the command families. .

as such , the ombudsman serves as the primary link between the command families and the command ; serves as a communicator of information between the two ; communicates regularly with command families , via newsletters , careline , phone tree , and e - mail ; provides information and outreach to family members ; interacts and cooperates with relevant organizations , including the american red cross as well as appropriate military legal and medical treatment entities ; refers individuals in need of professional assistance to appropriate resources ( for counseling , for instance ) ; and acts as an advocate for command families .

department of education federal student aid ombudsman the department of education houses the federal student aid ( fsa ) ombudsman .

created in 1998 by amendments to the 1965 act of higher education , the fsa ombudsman's office received its first cases in late september 1999 .

appointed by the fsa's chief operating officer ( coo ) , the fsa ombudsman serves as a neutral fact - finder in disputes between students with loans and the fsa .

the officer serves at the discretion of the coo ( there is no fixed term for the position ) and reports directly to the coo .

the ombudsman can recommend resolutions , but cannot compel the fsa to overturn its previous decisions .

the service is free , but operates only as a last resort — provided the fsa has not already begun legal proceedings against a person receiving the loan .

though the ombudsman cannot enforce his or her decisions , the position was created to resolve disputes from a neutral , independent viewpoint ; informally conduct impartial fact - finding about complaints ; recommend solutions ( without the authority to reverse decisions ) ; work to bring about changes that will help prevent future problems for other student loan borrowers ; and research problems and determine whether the complainants have been treated fairly .

if the ombudsman determines that a complaint is justified , he or she is to help a student negotiate with the agency or other parties involved in the dispute .

prior to requesting help from the fsa ombudsman , a person seeking assistance is asked to review an online checklist of other options for resolving the dispute .

if the person then determines himself or herself qualified for ombudsman assistance , he or she may send a letter to the office , telephone , or fill out the online ombudsman assistance request form .

the ombudsman office does not assist the public in filling out loan forms , nor does it help find ways to pay off loans .

department of health and human services the department of health and human services ( hhs ) houses a number of distinct complaint - handling and client - assistance offices .

among them are the following .

food and drug administration ombudsman when food and drug administration ( fda ) employees were found to be inadequately performing their duties in reviewing pre - market generic drug applications , the commissioner issued a "managerial fiat" creating the fda office of the ombudsman .

the ombudsman provides several services , including the following: reviews marketing or investigational applications ; provides information on import or export issues ; offers explanations in response to citizen petitions or general inquiries ; and ensures a fair hearing of claims of unfair or unequal treatment .

the office also serves as the fda's product jurisdiction officer , who determines the jurisdiction of a product headed for review if the jurisdiction is questionable .

the office , however , predominantly handles complaints about regulatory issues or fda policies .

long - term care ombudsman the long - term care ombudsman ( ltco ) began as a demonstration program in 1972 , but was mandated by statute in the older americans act , which is currently administered by the administration on aging ( aoa ) .

the ltco office consists of more than 1,000 paid , and nearly 14,000 volunteer , staffers , who are located in the 50 states and three additional locales — washington , dc , guam , and puerto rico .

serving an estimated 280,000 people per year , the ombudsman identifies , investigates , and resolves complaints made by , or on behalf of , residents ; provides information to residents about long - term care services ; represents the interests of residents before governmental agencies and seek administrative , legal , and other remedies to protect residents ; analyzes , comments on , and recommends changes in laws and regulations pertaining to the health , safety , welfare , and the rights of residents ; educates and informs consumers and the general public regarding issues and concerns related to long - term care , and facilitates public comment on laws , regulations , policies , and actions ; promotes the development of citizen organizations to participate in the program ; provides technical support for the development of resident and family councils to protect the well - being and rights of residents ; and advocates for changes to improve residents' quality of life and care .

ltc ombudsmen are a blend of state and federal oversight .

though each state ombudsman office operates differently , most house their office of the state ltc ombudsman within the individual state's unit on aging .

the national long term care ombudsman resource center offers "support , technical assistance and training to the state long term care ombudsman programs and their statewide networks of almost 600 regional ( local ) programs. .

the ombudsmen tread a line between acting as neutral fact - finders and as advocates for older americans .

additionally , the ombudsmen often deal with third party private entities — an apparent rarity for federal government ombudsmen .

medicare beneficiary ombudsman created by the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 , the medicare beneficiary ombudsman is intended to ensure that those eligible for medicare have reliable and current information about their medicare benefits and whether they have the information needed to make good health care decisions ; their rights and protections under the medicare program ; and the procedures for getting problems and disputes resolved .

the ombudsman is to aid medicare recipients in filing appeals if they believe their insurance did not pay proper amounts for their medical services .

recipients can also file complaints or ask for help joining or leaving a given medicare program .

the job of the ombudsman requires him or her to take an overview of the medicare system and ensure that the appeals process is operating properly at all government levels .

the officer reports to both the medicare administrator and the director of the office of external affairs , and is also required to submit an annual report to congress .

specialized jurisdictional ombudsmen the fda also has four additional ombudsmen who serve as the points of contact for specific public complaints connected to the subject of their jurisdiction .

the specialized ombudsmen are located at four centers: center for biologics evaluation and research ( cber ) ; center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) ; center for devices and radiological health ( cdrh ) ; and center for veterinary medicine ( cvm ) ombudsman if any of them cannot resolve or remedy a complaint , the issue is to be sent to the fda office of ombudsman .

department of homeland security the department of homeland security ( dhs ) houses a number of ombudsman - like offices .

in addition to several connected with immigration and transportation matters , three others are an outgrowth of the authorities and responsibilities that the department received under legislation dealing with anti - terrorism .

the 2004 intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) , importantly , gave additional duties to the privacy officer and officer for civil rights and civil liberties , as well as the inspector general , in the department of homeland security .

all three entities originated in the homeland security act of 2002 , which established the department .

privacy officer the privacy officer's "mission is to minimize the impact on the individual's privacy , particularly the individual's personal information and dignity , while achieving the mission of the department of homeland security. .

according to dhs , to meet this end , the officer , who reports directly to the secretary , requires compliance with the letter and spirit of federal laws promoting privacy ; centralizes freedom of information act and privacy act operations within the privacy office to provide policy and programmatic oversight and support operational implementation within the components ; provides education and outreach to build a culture of privacy and adherence to fair information principles across the department ; communicates with the public through published materials , formal notices , public workshops , and meetings ; and coordinates with the officer for civil rights and civil liberties , to ensure that relevant programs , policies , and procedures are addressed in an integrated and comprehensive manner and that congress receives appropriate reports .

officer for civil rights and civil liberties the mission of the dhs officer for civil rights and civil liberties ( ocrcl ) is to "protect civil rights and civil liberties and to support homeland security by providing the department with constructive advice on the full range of civil rights and civil liberties issues the department will face , and by serving as an information and communication channel with the public regarding all aspects of these issues. .

according to its statutory authority , the ocrcl is to review and assess information concerning abuses of civil rights , civil liberties , and profiling on the basis of race , ethnicity , or religion , by employees and officials of dhs ; make public through the internet , radio , television , or newspaper advertisements information on the responsibilities and functions of , and how to contact , the ocrcl ; help the dhs secretary , directorates , and offices of dhs to develop , implement , and periodically review dhs policies and procedures to ensure that the protection of civil rights and civil liberties is appropriately incorporated into dhs programs and activities ; oversee compliance with constitutional , statutory , regulatory , policy , and other requirements relating to the civil rights and civil liberties of individuals affected by the programs and activities of dhs ; coordinate with the privacy officer to ensure that programs , policies , and procedures involving civil rights , civil liberties , and privacy considerations are addressed in an integrated and comprehensive manner ; and that congress receives appropriate reports regarding such programs , policies , and procedures ; and investigate complaints and information indicating possible abuses of civil rights or civil liberties , unless the inspector general of the department determines that any such complaint or information should be investigated by the inspector general .

office of inspector general the third component , the inspector general in the department of homeland security , has been given certain ombudsman - like responsibilities ( similar to those required of the ig in the department of justice ) .

the dhs ig is to receive and review complaints and information from any source alleging abuses of civil rights and liberties by dhs officials and employees , including contractors ; initiate investigations of such alleged abuses ; consult with and refer investigations which the ig decides not to investigate to the officer for civil rights and civil liberties ; and publicize and provide convenient public access to information regarding the procedures to file complaints and the status of corrective action taken by the department .

transportation security administration office of civil rights and liberties the transportation security administration ( tsa ) operates two distinct ombudsman - like offices .

one handles internal matters , for the most part , while the other deals with external complaints .

most public inquiries and concerns are handled by the office of civil rights and liberties in the external compliance division of tsa .

the office's mission is: to ensure that the civil rights and liberties of the traveling public are respected throughout screening processes , without compromising security ; to ensure that agency processes and procedures do not discriminate against the traveling public , and respect the constitutional freedoms of the traveling public ; to ensure that the external compliance division meets its mission by providing civil rights guidance and services to tsa program offices , including security offices , technology offices , and communications offices ; and to review tsa policies and procedures to ensure that the civil rights and liberties of the traveling public are taken into account .

united states citizenship and immigration services ombudsman the 2002 homeland security act created the united states citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) ombudsman .

unlike most other ombudsman - like offices in the federal government , the uscis ombudsman operates separately from the agency about which it receives complaints .

the ombudsman , instead , is located under the aegis of the department of homeland security and reports to the dhs secretary or deputy secretary , not to a uscis official .

the uscis ombudsman's mission , as specified in its establishing legislation , is threefold: assist individuals and employers in resolving problems with uscis ; identify areas in which individuals and employers have problems dealing with uscis ; and propose changes to mitigate identified problems .

a client seeking ombudsman services may fill out an online form and mail it to the uscis washington , dc , office , where it is to be reviewed .

potential clients should receive a response to their case within 45 days .

as with other complaint - handling offices , complainants may leave anonymous postings on the office's website .

like the federal student aid ombudsman , the uscis ombudsman can neither overturn the agency's decisions nor make exceptions to its regulations .

the ombudsman may , however , facilitate a resolution and offer formal and informal recommendations to uscis to help it serve patrons .

the office also submits an annual report to the house and senate judiciary committees .

unlike offices that act as conduits only , the uscis ombudsman serves as an advocate for the complainants — including those experiencing delays because of the backlogs in processing immigration requests .

the office also conducts outreach programs , including teleconferences and site visits .

it is attempting , moreover , to create an online form that can be submitted via the internet to expedite complaint processing , as well as establish a virtual ombudsman office online that would offer a way to eliminate costly data entry .

department of the interior , office of insular affairs , cnmi ombudsman the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) , office of insular affairs in the department of the interior ( doi ) has an affiliated ombudsman with a confined jurisdiction and clientele: the ombudsman is charged with providing "assistance to the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands' 30,000 [foreign] workers with labor and immigration complaints. .

often known as the federal ombudsman , the office was established to assist foreign workers to gain a better understanding of the laws and policies affecting them .

in so doing , according to a press release , the ombudsman's office "works hand - in - hand with the cnmi's department of labor and immigration , the u.s. attorney's office , and the department of the interior to ensure activities are properly coordinated and developed. .

department of justice office of inspector general the usa patriot act of 2001 , passed shortly after the 9 / 11terrorist attacks , gave the office of inspector general ( oig ) in the department of justice ( doj ) certain ombudsman - related responsibilities , particularly related to civil rights and liberties matters .

one of the provisions of the act , which expanded government powers in anti - terrorism efforts , directs the ig to designate an official to carry out certain duties: review information and receive complaints alleging a violation of civil rights and civil liberties ; make information about the functions and responsibilities of the office , including how to contact the official , available through the internet , radio , newspapers , and television ; and report semi - annually to the house and senate committees on the judiciary about the implementation of these requirements .

these functions are connected to complaints from individuals alleging abuses of civil rights and civil liberties by doj employees , including contractors .

to respond to relevant allegations , the ig has established two special entities — a civil rights and civil liberties complaints unit , along with a special section in the oig investigations division — which are directed to review information and receive complaints alleging such abuses ; identify the more serious allegations and assign them to oig employees for investigation ; and refer other complaints to department components for their review and handling ( and refer still others to different federal departments and agencies which have jurisdiction over the policies in question ) .

department of transportation , federal aviation administration , aviation noise ombudsman an aviation noise ombudsman ( ano ) is located in the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , department of transportation .

created by the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 , the office "serves as a public liaison for issues about aircraft noise questions or complaints. .

the ano usually intervenes , however , only when a complainant thinks faa officials who had been contacted about noise problems are not responsive to an inquiry or grievance .

department of the treasury several different types of ombudsman - like offices are located in the department of the treasury .

one responds to the general public , while the others respond to a select clientele in the banking industry .

internal revenue service taxpayer advocate service the taxpayer advocate service ( tas ) , headed by the national taxpayer advocate ( nta ) , in the internal revenue service ( irs ) has undergone a number of permutations over its history , which dates from the late 1970s .

formerly titled the office of ombudsman , tas is located within the internal revenue service , but operates independently of any other office within the agency .

each state , the district of columbia , and puerto rico has at least one local taxpayer advocate , who attempts to expedite lingering taxpayer issues and recommend "administrative and legislative changes" to irs policies and operations .

the first taxpayer advocate was appointed by the irs commissioner in 1979 .

in 1988 , the office of taxpayer ombudsman was officially mandated by congress in p.l .

100-647 .

later , the 1996 taxpayer bill of rights 2 — intended "to provide increased taxpayer protections" — changed the title and altered the responsibilities of the office by creating the taxpayer advocate .

two years later , the irs restructuring and reform act of 1998 , which also created an irs oversight board , changed the name of the office and its head again: the office of the taxpayer advocate under the supervision and direction of the national taxpayer advocate .

the 1998 act also strengthened the office's oversight functions .

the nta is now required to submit an annual report to the house committee on ways and means and the senate committee on finance by june 30 of each year .

the report must include advocate initiatives to improve irs services , as well as potential recommendations to the existing system .

no employee of the irs , including the commissioner , is permitted to review or comment on the report before it is submitted to congress .

in addition , the 1998 amendments reinforced the expanded duties of the office of the taxpayer advocate , requiring it to assist taxpayers in resolving problems with the internal revenue service ; identify areas in which taxpayers have problems in dealings with the internal revenue service ; propose changes , to the extent possible , in the administrative practices of the internal revenue service to mitigate problems ; and identify potential legislative changes that may be appropriate to mitigate such problems .

in 2000 , the office became known as the taxpayer advocate service ( tas ) , which handles both systemic irs issues and individual taxpayer complaints .

the advocate currently reports directly to the irs commissioner and has no term limit .

the national taxpayer advocate is appointed by the secretary of the treasury , after consultation with both the commissioner of the irs and the irs oversight board .

though the tas has the word "advocate" in its title , the position has a two - fold goal: it advocates for fair and efficient operation of the irs , as well as directly for individual taxpayers themselves .

any person or business suffering "economic harm" or "experiencing delays" in the resolution of a tax problem has free access to a taxpayer advocate .

a taxpayer may seek an advocate by contacting the tas via a toll - free number and asking an irs employee to complete and submit a required form ( form 911 ) .

the taxpayer may also request and fill it out himself or herself .

the completed form is sent to the appropriate taxpayer advocate , who — once assigned — is required to remain an advocate for the private party until any irs dispute is resolved .

the advocate , whose service is confidential , is independent of all other irs offices .

office of the comptroller of the currency ombudsman the ombudsman in the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) — which operates under the community development and regulatory improvement act of 1994 — is one of five in "appropriate federal banking agencies" established by the act and one of two in the department of the treasury .

the ombudsman is to act as a liaison between the agency and any affected person with respect to any problem in dealing with the agency resulting from its regulatory activities ; and assure that safeguards exist to encourage complainants to come forward and preserve confidentiality .

in so doing , the occ ombudsman is to report weaknesses in occ policy and may stay any appealable agency decision .

office of thrift supervision ombudsman the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) is one of the five federal entities required by the community development and regulatory improvement act of 1994 to have an ombudsman .

all five ombudsmen are to follow the same statutory directives , that is , to serve as liaisons between the agency and any affected parties with respect to problems in dealing with agency regulatory activities and to encourage complainants to come forward .

the jurisdictions and clientele differ among these ombudsmen .

the ots ombudsman is to respond to questions , concerns , and complaints from federally chartered thrift institutions .

he or she is to "assist the thrift community in resolving such matters relating to regulatory oversight that may hinder their institution. .

although hired and paid by ots , the ombudsman is to be "an advocate for equity ... and is required to perform his duties in an objective and neutral manner. .

department of veterans affairs the department of veterans affairs ( dva ) houses several ombudsman - like offices , including the following .

board of veterans' appeals ombudsman for military service members who claim that they have been unfairly denied medical treatment for an injury received or condition caused during duty , the board of veterans' appeals ( bva ) is to determine whether they are eligible to receive benefits .

the bva ombudsman is to assist in this matter in two basic ways: remedy unsatisfactory experiences with the department ; and make certain that communication with the bva is clear and timely .

the bva website also offers links to a variety of va offices , including the debt management center and the national personnel records center .

like similar ombudsman positions , the bva ombudsman does not have the ability to require other va centers or offices to take specific action .

the ombudsman , however , receives complaints from eligible parties and attempts to ensure that the bva is operating effectively .

federal recovery coordinators and transition patient advocates for injured combat veterans , there are two newly created statutory positions to handle aspects of their recovery .

though neither the transition patient advocate ( tpa ) nor the federal recovery coordinator operates in the classic ombudsman capacity , they both serve to help returning soldiers navigate the veterans' medical system .

one hundred tpas currently operate within va hospitals across the country .

the tpa program , which began in may 2007 , consists almost entirely of former soldiers who offer assistance and advice as peers to soldiers who return from service with a severe injury .

the tpas are part of a three - person team assigned to each returning operation iraqi freedom and operation enduring freedom ( oif / oef ) soldier with a severe injury .

the other two members of the team are a program manager and a case manager — usually a nurse or social worker .

the tpa's job is to "ensure a smooth transition of wounded service members through va's health care system. .

in so doing , the tpa can aid in meeting the everyday needs — including scheduling medical appointments — of a returning soldier who is enrolled at any of the 1,308 va facilities .

in addition to the 100 tpas working at the veterans affairs medical treatment centers , the va joined forces with the department of defense ( dod ) to add 10 "federal recovery coordinator" positions .

the two departments created the coordinator positions after the report of the president's commission on care for america's returning wounded warriors , commonly known as the dole - shalala commission , recommended their creation .

the recovery care coordinators , who are separate from a three - person case management team , are to coordinate services between va and dod and , if necessary , private sector facilities ; serve as the ultimate resource for families with questions or concerns about va , dod , or other federal benefits ; and ensure the appropriate oversight and coordination for care of active duty service members and veterans with major amputations , severe traumatic brain injury , spinal cord injury , severe sight or hearing impairments , and severe multiple injuries .

the federal recovery coordinator focuses on the long - term recovery of each returning wounded soldier , whereas the tpa focuses on day - to - day needs .

also , in contrast to the tpas , the recovery coordinators may offer their services to all returning injured soldiers , regardless of whether they are receiving treatment at va facilities .

environmental protection agency the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has several prominent complaint - handling offices .

office of inspector general public liaison the public liaison ( formerly the ombudsman ) currently operates within the office of inspector general ( oig ) of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

congress created an ombudsman function within the office of solid waste and emergency response with an amendment to the resource conservation and recovery act in 1984 .

the position initially dealt only with hazardous waste matters .

later , epa extended the position past its 1988 legislative authorization and expanded its jurisdiction to include superfund sites .

after a july 2001 gao report critical of the ombudsman office , epa proposed a controversial transfer of the office of congressional and public liaison to the office of inspector general ( oig ) .

the gao report found several structural weaknesses in the ombudsman office at the time: epa's national ombudsman is located within the office of solid waste and emergency response ( oswer ) , the organizational unit whose decisions the ombudsman is responsible for investigating , and his budget and staff resources are controlled by unit managers within oswer.... [t]his arrangement undermines another fundamental requirement of an effective ombudsman: impartiality .

epa administrator christine todd whitman determined that moving the ombudsman into the ig office would give the ombudsman "more independence and the impartiality necessary to conduct credible inquires," while critics of the move — including robert j. martin , the epa ombudsman at the time — insisted that the transfer would "put the ombudsman even more firmly under the authority" of epa administrators .

in january 2002 , martin filed a motion in federal district court to block the proposed move .

three months later , however , a federal district judge dismissed the motion , paving the way for the ombudsman to be moved into the oig .

martin resigned his post , which was renamed public liaison , shortly after the move .

according to the epa , the public liaison receives , reviews , and processes complaints and allegations about agency programs and activities ; writes and publishes reports of agency needs and desired assessments ; and prevents and detects fraud , waste , and abuse .

in addition to the public liaison , 10 regional epa ombudsmen receive complaints about regulatory polices regarding superfund sites .

the public can contact the office of congressional and public liaison , located in washington , dc , by telephone , mail , facsimile , or e - mail .

although the public liaison cannot require epa to make changes to policies or practices , he or she can "refer" cases to agency management for "review or action," or refer the case to an outside agency — such as the federal bureau of investigation — for further review , if warranted .

in most cases , the complaint comes in through the public liaison's "hotline," which includes a toll - free phone number .

it may also be submitted via e - mail , traditional mail , or in - person .

complainants may remain anonymous .

the liaison then reviews the complaint and determines whether the agency has performed its duties in an acceptable manner .

all other waste management complaints are to be handled by the liaison , while criminal investigations are to be referred to a different office .

small business ombudsman the epa created the small business ombudsman ( sbo ) function in 1982 .

in 1986 , the sbo began also serving as the epa's asbestos ombudsman .

the position is established to serve as a liaison between small businesses and the epa to promote understanding of agency policy and small business needs and concerns ; staff a small business hotline that provides regulatory and technical assistance information ; maintain and distribute an extensive collection of informational and technical literature developed by the various epa program offices ; make personal appearances as a speaker or panelist at small business - related meetings ; meet with more than 45 key national trade associations representing several million small businesses and with state and regional ombudsmen who serve businesses on the local level ; provide guidance on the development of national policies and regulations that impact small businesses ; and track development and implementation of regulations affecting small business in support of the regulatory flexibility act .

the ombudsman's primary responsibility is to respond to telephone inquiries about regulatory requirements and pollution prevention .

the office also prepares a semi - annual newsletter that is sent to its constituency , which includes members of the public , small business owners , legislators , employees , and agency managers .

in addition to the main asbo office , there are 10 regional fairness boards , each consisting of five members , who are small business owners in their local communities .

federal deposit insurance corporation ombudsman the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , which insures deposits in u.s. banks , includes an office of the ombudsman ( oo ) .

it is one of five such offices established by the community development and regulatory improvement act of 1994 .

the oo has two primary charges under the act: act as a liaison between the agency and any affected person with respect to any problem such party may have in dealing with the agency resulting from the regulatory activities of the agency ; and assure that safeguards exist to encourage complainants to come forward and preserve confidentiality .

the oo , however , does not act as an "advocate" for individual complainants and it cannot conduct in - depth investigations or require changes in management decisions .

nonetheless , it may clarify fdic policies and direct complaints to the appropriate division or office , while maintaining the complainant's anonymity .

the rash of bank failures in 2008 and 2009 , moreover , prompted an expansion in the ombudsman office ; it includes a new unit designed to give "borrowers an additional venue for having their concerns addressed by the fdic," additional staff , and a new guide for borrowers confronted by a failed bank and the subsequent receivership process .

freedom of information act entities the freedom of information act ( foia ) amendments of 2007 created two ombudsman - like posts: public liaisons and an office of government information services .

public liaisons the 2007 amendments to the freedom of information act required the creation of public liaison positions throughout much of the executive branch to ensure prompt and proper responses to the public's foia requests .

the amendments called for the designation of "one or more foia public liaisons" in each agency , leaving the determination of the size of the staff up to department and agency heads .

as instructed by the amendments , "each agency shall make available its foia public liaison , who shall assist in the resolution of any disputes between the requester and the agency. .

the liaison is permitted , moreover , to attempt non - binding dispute resolutions as an alternative to litigation .

in addition , each agency is to designate a chief foia officer who will , in turn , "designate one or more foia public liaisons. .

office of government information services the 2007 foia amendments also provided for the creation of an office of government information services ( ogis ) within the national archives and records administration .

the law required the new office to review policies and procedures of administrative agencies under this section ; review compliance with this section by administrative agencies ; and recommend policy changes to congress and the president to improve the administration of this section .

the office began operations in september 2009 .

general services administration construction metrication ombudsman the general services administration ( gsa ) has established a highly specialized ombudsman with narrow jurisdiction: the construction metrication ombudsman ( cmo ) , located in the administration's senior procurement executive .

the cmo , as with counterparts in other agencies , stems from a statutory requirement that the head of each executive agency that awards construction contracts within the united states and its territories shall designate a senior agency official to serve as a construction metrication ombudsman who shall be responsible for reviewing and responding to complaints from prospective bidders , subcontractors , suppliers , or their designated representatives related to — ( a ) guidance or regulations issued by the agency on the use of the metric system of measurement in contracts for the construction of federal buildings ; and ( b ) the use of the metric system of measurement for services and materials required for incorporation in individual projects to construct federal buildings .

in so doing , the cmo is required to respond to each complaint in writing within 60 days and make a recommendation to the head of the agency for an appropriate resolution .

after the agency head has made a decision , based on this recommendation , the ombudsman is to communicate it in writing to the affected parties and to the public in a timely manner , as well as to all appropriate offices within the agency .

the cmo is also charged with monitoring the implementation of the decision .

national aeronautics and space administration procurement ombudsman and center procurement ombudsman in 1996 , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) established a procurement ombudsman , along with related center procurement ombudsmen in the administration's eight centers .

created administratively ( npd 5101.32 ) , the procurement ombudsman is to "take action to resolve concerns , disagreements , and recommendations submitted by interested parties that cannot be resolved at the center level , or those having agency - wide implications. .

basically , the office was created "to address the procurement concerns of nasa contractors before they become problems. .

to accomplish this , the nasa ombudsman is to respond to relevant inquiries and concerns , work with appropriate nasa officials to resolve concerns , and refer specific matters to appropriate center procurement ombudsmen .

additional responsibilities for the agency and center procurement ombudsmen include collecting and distributing relevant facts and information , reviewing and resolving complaints relative to certain types of contracts , and maintaining a log to track individual cases from receipt to disposition .

national credit union administration ombudsman the national credit union administration ( ncua ) houses an ombudsman , who "investigates complaints and recommends solutions" related to "regulatory issues that cannot be resolved at the operational ( regional ) level. .

the ombudsman is to help the complainants resolve disputes by defining options and recommending actions to the parties involved .

the ombudsman , however , cannot decide on matters in dispute or advocate the position of the complainant , ncua , or other parties .

the position is one of five created by the community development and regulatory improvement act of 1994 , which also covers the federal deposit insurance corporation , federal reserve board of governors , office of thrift supervision , and office of the comptroller of the currency .

the enactment directs them to act as liaisons between the agency and any affected persons with respect to problems associated with regulatory activities and to encourage complainants to come forward .

office of the director of national intelligence civil liberties protection officer the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 provided for a number of ombudsman - like offices connected with the protection of civil rights , civil liberties , and individual privacy .

in addition to those in the department of homeland security is the civil liberties protection officer ( clpo ) in the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) ; the clpo is appointed by and reports directly to the director .

the civil liberties protection officer's duties , among others , are to ensure that the protection of civil liberties and privacy is appropriately incorporated in the relevant odni policies and procedures ; the use of technologies sustains , and does not erode , privacy ; and complaints and other information indicating possible abuses of civil liberties and privacy in the administration of programs and operations of the odni are reviewed and assessed and , as appropriate , investigated .

small business administration two separate offices in the small business administration ( sba ) — ombudsman and advocacy — provide various types of complaint - handling services , information , outreach , and other forms of assistance to clients in the small business community .

in light of their possible overlap , the two offices issued a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to foster increased cooperation between them , recognizing that "both work to provide a more small business friendly regulatory environment. .

the mou spells out their separate roles and responsibilities .

sba ombudsman congress created the sba's small business and agriculture regulatory enforcement ombudsman , now known as the national office of the ombudsman , in the small business regulatory fairness enforcement act of 1996 .

under the act , the office is designed to establish a means to receive comments from small businesses regarding federal agency compliance and enforcement activities ; conduct hearings in each of the 10 federal regions to solicit comments on small business concerns to ensure that these businesses have an avenue through which they can comment on agency enforcement activities ; and issue annual reports to the sba administrator and congress evaluating the enforcement activities of agency personnel , including a rating of the agency's responsiveness to small businesses .

in receiving comments , the ombudsman serves as a liaison between small businesses and federal agencies .

these comments are to be forwarded to federal agencies for a high - level review ; and the agencies are requested to consider the fairness of their enforcement actions , after which the ombudsman is to send a copy of the agencies' responses to the small businesses .

in some cases , fines have been lowered or eliminated and decisions changed in favor of small businesses .

nonetheless , the ombudsman cannot change , stop , or delay a federal agency enforcement action .

sba office of advocacy sba also houses a distinct office of advocacy , headed by a chief counsel .

the office , established in 1976 , is broadly designed to examine the role of small businesses in the american economy , including the impact and effectiveness of regulations on them , and make recommendations with regard to such determinations .

in so doing , the office is to provide relevant data and information to the small business community and the federal government .

the advocacy office may also file amicus curiae briefs on regulatory matters before federal appellate courts .

the regional advocates are to help to ensure communication between the small business community and the chief counsel , and provide a link between the counsel , local businesses , and state and local governments .

part of this process may involve receiving complaints and concerns from small businesses , but the advocate is not obligated to respond to individual pleas as is the ombudsman .

u.s. agency for international development acquisition and assistance ombudsman the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) established an acquisition and assistance ( aa ) ombudsman in 1999 , in part prompted by the earlier federal acquisition streamlining act .

the role of the ombudsman is to ensure "equitable treatment of all parties participating in usaid's grants and contracts ( for acquisitions and assistance ) throughout the process. .

the aa ombudsman is tasked with managing complaints about specific aa proceedings and with facilitating the resolution of differences through an informal , impartial administrative review of the agency action in question .

operating as a neutral intermediary , the ombudsman is to maintain the anonymity and confidentiality of complainants .

u.s. consumer product safety commission small business ombudsman in 1996 , the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) established a small business ombudsman ( sbo ) to serve as a liaison to that community to answer inquiries , provide information , and proffer advice and guidance about compliance with the statutes , regulations , and policies under the cpsc's jurisdiction .

the sbo also is to provide technical guidance to small businesses attempting to resolve problems with the office of compliance and the office of hazard identification and reduction .

along with these activities , the ombudsman is to maintain a liaison with its counterpart in the small business administration and "an ongoing dialogue with national trade associations that represent small businesses. .

u.s .

postal service consumer advocate in 1970 , congress passed the postal reorganization act ( pra ) , which transformed the struggling united states post office department into the united states postal service ( usps ) , an independent establishment in the executive branch .

one of its components is a consumer advocate .

the workload of usps , the largest federal civilian employer , is heavy .

it delivers more than 212 billion pieces of mail annually to more than 120 million homes and businesses in the united states and its territories and commonwealths .

when customer complaints arise over its service , responses usually follow several stages , initially with the local post office .

at the national level , the postal service established a consumer advocate of the postal service as another way to improve customer service .

the advocate , created in 1971 by then - postmaster winton m. blount , is to respond to customer concerns in several ways .

it aids customers whose insured parcels were lost or damaged during mailing .

if usps denies the indemnity claim , the customer advocate adjudicates an appeal .

the advocate also independently measures customer satisfaction and customer perspectives , relying on nearly 900,000 survey results annually .

a patron seeking assistance from the consumer advocate can request it from the local mail carrier ; call , write , or visit the local post office ; or call the usps national hotline .

