in 2007 , canada and brazil initiated separate but similar wto cases against certain u.s. farm programs as they relate to u.s. commitments made to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

both canada's ( ds357 ) and brazil's ( ds365 ) cases make two broad charges .

first , they contend that the united states has exceeded the subsidy spending limit it committed to for domestic agricultural support programs .

second , they charge that the united states operates its agricultural export credit guarantee program in such a manner as to provide prohibited subsidies to those exports made under the programs .

on december 17 , 2007 , the wto's dispute settlement body ( dsb ) announced the establishment of a single panel to hear both cases against u.s. farm programs .

panel membership is based on mutual agreement of the parties involved — brazil , canada , and the united states .

however , by late february 2008 the case had stalled due to the inability of the three parties to agree on a panel of arbitrators to preside over the case .

under wto rules , brazil is legally entitled to ask the wto director - general to compose the panel if the parties are unable to agree on the members within 20 days after the establishment of a panel .

however , brazil did not pursue this course of action .

then , in late april 2008 , brazil and canada informally agreed to postpone proceeding with their case pending the u.s. offer to substantially cut domestic agricultural subsidies as part of the doha round of wto trade negotiations .

presently , no date has been announced for the resumption of the case .

if resumed , the first order of business will be the formation of a panel .

should a panel be formed , it would then have six months to rule on this case .

subsequent appeals of any negative ruling and disagreement over appropriate retaliatory levels , etc. , could push resolution of the dispute well into the future .

however , the importance of the case is not diminished to the u.s. agricultural community .

u.s. agriculture depends heavily on international markets to sell its surpluses .

in fy2008 , u.s. agricultural exports were a record $115.5 billion and represented 30% of gross farm income .

this report begins with background on the evolution of the canadian and brazilian wto cases .

this is followed by a section that describes in detail the nature of the two major charges made against u.s. farm programs in the two cases and the u.s. response to those charges .

finally , the report briefly discusses the implications of the case and the potential role of congress .

each of these sections may be read independent of the other ; thus , readers only interested in the specific charges and their implications may proceed directly to those sections of the report .

this section provides a historical record of the evolution of both canada's and brazil's wto cases against u.s. farm programs .

it includes a timeline ( table 1 ) of the official events as well as a descriptive narrative of the likely motivations and circumstances behind each country's case .

both the canadian ( ds357 ) and brazilian ( ds365 ) cases raise two principal charges against u.s. farm programs .

each of these is discussed below .

in response to canada's request for consultations on u.s. subsidies , then - u.s. secretary of agriculture mike johanns declared in early 2007 that the united states would vigorously defend u.s. farm programs against any possible wto challenge by canada .

a spokesman for the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) declared that this dispute was an unnecessary diversion of resources and time from the doha round negotiations .

the official also stated that u.s. farm programs were designed to be in compliance with its wto obligations and believed that the panel would agree .

the official also added that some measures identified by canada and brazil had ceased to exist prior to the 2002 farm bill , and that others were not part of the consultations with canada .

with respect to the ruling that export credit guarantees operate like illegal export subsidies , provisions in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ; section 3101 ( a ) ) , enacted into law on june 18 , 2008 , would appear to have brought the export credit guarantee program into compliance with wto rules by eliminating the "subsidy" component of export credit guarantees .

this includes repeal of authority for both the gsm - 103 program ( which guaranteed longer - term — 3-10 years — financing ) and the supplier credit guarantee program ( which guaranteed very short - term — up to 1 year — financing of exports ) , as well as repeal of the 1% cap on loan origination fees for the gsm - 102 program ( which guaranteed intermediate - term — up to 3 years — financing ) .

the 1% fee cap had prevented charging market - based fees and had contributed to the export credit program operating as a wto - illegal export subsidy .

the new farm bill ( sec .

3101 ( b ) ) also caps the credit subsidy for the program at $40 million annually .

however , the 2008 farm bill did not address the issue surrounding the disqualification of direct payments from the wto's green box ams exclusion due to the planting restriction on fruits , vegetables , and wild rice on program base acres .

instead , direct payments are extended ( sec .

1103 ) with no change to the current planting restriction , except for 84,000 acres of pilot programs in seven states ( sec .

1107 ( d ) ) .

this retention of the status quo in the face of the cotton panel's ruling and recommendation has important wto implications , as it would appear to favor the charge that the united states has exceeded its total ams limit in at least two years ( 1999 and 2000 ) if direct payments are included in the ams calculation ( figure 1 ) .

many market analysts suggest that these two cases brought by brazil and canada are harbingers of future challenges to u.s. commodity programs .

if either country were to successfully pursue its case , it could affect most u.s. program commodities , since the charges against the u.s. export credit guarantee program and ams limit extend to all major program crops .

should any eventual changes in u.s. farm policy be needed to comply with a wto ruling , congress likely would be called upon to address this issue ( including adjustment , if not full removal , of the planting restriction on base acres receiving direct payments ) .

ultimately , congress is responsible for passing farm program legislation that complies with u.s. commitments in international trade agreements .

when confronted with a negative wto dispute settlement ruling , a country has essentially five options to choose from: eliminate the subsidy ; reduce the subsidy to diminish its adverse effect ; revise the program function to reduce the linkage between the subsidy and the adverse effect ( referred to as decoupling ) ; pay a mutually acceptable compensatory payment to offset the adverse effects of the subsidy ; or suffer the consequences of trade retaliation .

while a wto case can result in punitive sanctions being authorized , the proceedings of a formal case can take many months , and sometimes years , to reach a conclusion .

for example , the u.s. - brazil cotton case was initiated by brazil's request for wto consultations on september 27 , 2002 .

a panel was established nearly six months later on march 18 , 2003 .

the panel's final report was delivered to the dsb on september 8 , 2004 .

the case was appealed and the appellate body's final report was adopted by the dsb on march 21 , 2005 , nearly 30 months after the initial request for consultations .

subsequently , brazil requested a wto compliance panel to review whether the united states had fully complied with the panel's rulings .

the wto compliance panel issued its final ruling on december 18 , 2007 , thus extending the length of the u.s. - brazil cotton case to over five years .

many market watchers question the relevance of expending legal resources to establish an historical ams violation in light of the high commodity prices that have persisted since mid - 2007 .

u.s. farm program payments made under the marketing loan provisions and ccp program have to be triggered by low commodity prices before payments are made .

most long - run commodity market projections predict high commodity prices and low government program support to persist well into the future , thus , keeping u.s. domestic support outlays well within current ams limits without any further changes to the programs .

additional uncertainty arises from the ongoing doha round of trade negotiations , where a successful conclusion could potentially mitigate or end canada's and brazil's interest in continuing its case against the u.s. farm programs .

given the importance of agricultural trade in the u.s. agricultural economy , congress will likely be monitoring developments in the wto ams dispute .

the house and senate agriculture committees regularly hold hearings on agricultural trade negotiations .

if the ongoing doha round of wto trade negotiations were to successfully conclude with a text for further multilateral trade reform , it is likely that congress would hold hearings and consult with the administration concerning the possible renewal of fast - track , or trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , legislation , which expired on july 1 , 2007 .

such hearings and consultations would be a major vehicle for members to express their views on the u.s. - brazil / canada ams trade dispute , on the negotiating issues that it raises , and on the potential implications for u.s. farm policy .

