rising food prices are having impacts across the world , but especially among poor people in the low - income developing countries .

according to the united nations food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , its index of food prices in march 2008 was 80 points higher than in march 2007 , a rise of 57% .

in 2007 , the index rose by 36% over its 2006 level .

the international food policy research institute ( ifpri ) reports that since 2000 , a year of low food prices , the wheat price in international markets has more than tripled , corn prices have doubled , and the price of rice rose to unprecedented levels in march 2008 .

such unprecedented increases in food prices have raised concerns about the ability of poor people to meet their food and nutrition needs and in a number of countries have lead to civil unrest .

food price escalation affects the cost of living for everyone , but the poor are most severely impacted because the share of spending for food in their total expenditure is higher than for better off populations .

according to fao , food represents about 10% - 20% of consumer spending in industrialized nations , but from 60% - 80% in poor developing countries .

low - income consumers in both rural and urban areas in poor countries have been adversely affected by the rise in food prices .

high food prices have resulted in social unrest and food riots in egypt , cameroon , cote d'ivoire , senegal , burkina faso , ethiopia , indonesia , madagascar , the philippines , and elsewhere .

in haiti , several deaths resulted from violent protests of price increases for staple foods .

popular discontent about food price inflation lead to the fall of the haitian government .

most recently , violence marked protests of high food prices in somalia .

in pakistan and thailand , governments have deployed troops to prevent the seizure of food from farmers' fields and from warehouses .

more than 33 countries , most of which are in sub - saharan africa , are adversely affected by food prices increases .

the world bank has estimated that more than 100 million people are being pushed into poverty as a result of the escalation of food prices .

market analysts predict that global grain and oilseed supplies will rebound in 2008 because of current high market prices .

however , most analysts , including the united nations food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , also anticipate that food prices will remain at significantly higher levels than previously .

an immediate consequence of soaring food prices is a shortfall in funding for international emergency food aid .

the escalation in food prices , and its long term effects , has also lead to suggestions that a higher priority and more resources be devoted to enhancing food security and agricultural productivity in developing countries .

a number of interrelated factors have been identified as causes of escalating prices for food .

droughts in australia and eastern europe and poor weather in canada , western europe , and ukraine have reduced available supplies .

as a result of adverse weather conditions , global stocks of corn , wheat , and soybeans are at historically low levels .

some suggest that the apparent increases in harsh and frequent climatic shocks are due to climate change .

it is , however , an open question as to whether the abnormal growing conditions of 2007 were a one - time event or part of a more systemic change in climate .

countries around the world , but especially asian rice - producing countries , have introduced export restrictions .

in response to high prices for food grains , some countries have introduced grain export restrictions to augment domestic supplies and hopefully contain the effects of high prices on their own consumers .

such export restrictions are intended to augment domestic supplies and hopefully contain the effects of high prices on consumers .

however , such measures exacerbate the food supply situation in importing countries .

rising oil and energy prices have affected all levels of the food production and marketing chain , from fertilizer costs to harvesting , transporting , and processing food .

these rising fuel costs are reflected in higher food prices .

the costs for transporting food aid from the united states to beneficiaries in developing countries are already high .

in fy2007 , for example , of every dollar provided for u.s. food aid , about 56 cents represented the cost of transporting commodities .

rising fuel rices could make shipping food even more expensive in 2008 .

higher incomes in emerging markets like china and india have resulted in strong demand for food commodities , meat , and processed foods and higher prices in world markets .

the increased demand for food and energy in emerging markets is considered by many to be a structural change that will affect the supply and demand for food and feed well into the future .

increased demand for biofuels has reduced the availability of agricultural products for food or feed use .

some think that the competition between crops for food and crops for fuel will affect food supply and prices for years into the future .

the food price impact of biofuels demand has caused some policy makers to suggest that biofuel subsidies and mandates be reconsidered .

others have suggested that there is not a conflict between meeting food and fuel demands for agricultural products .

countries affected by the rising prices have responded in various ways .

as noted above , some food exporting countries have restricted exports .

while such moves can increase the availability of domestic supplies in the short run , it can lower domestic farmers' incentives to produce , and reduce the availability of supplies to importing countries .

a number of food importing countries have reduced or eliminated import duties so as to reduce the cost of food .

some have introduced price controls , while at the same time augmenting input subsidies for farmers to induce them to increase production .

a few other countries have addressed mounting food prices by expanding existing social safety net programs that provide food or cash to poor people ; however , most low - income countries lack the administrative capacity and financial resources to implement such programs .

the un food and agriculture organization ( fao ) is monitoring the steps that governments of developing countries are taking to mitigate the effects of global price increases .

one immediate consequence of the rise in global food prices is the emergence of a shortfall in funding for international food aid .

both the united nations' world food program ( wfp ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) are experiencing food aid funding shortfalls as a result of high food and fuel prices .

the united states responded initially to the wfp's appeal for food aid and its own food aid funding shortfall by announcing a release of $200 million from the bill emerson humanitarian trust ( beht ) , a reserve of commodities and cash that can be used to meet unanticipated emergency food aid needs .

congress also is considering an fy2008 emergency supplemental appropriation for food aid requested by the administration .

some portion of the emerson trust release and some of an emergency supplemental would be allocated to meeting wfp and usaid food aid funding shortfalls .

the president announced on may 1 , 2009 a request for congress to appropriate an additional $770 million in fy2009 to deal with the international food situation .

both fy2008 and fy2009 supplemental requests are part of war funding supplementals .

some policy options under consideration in the debate over the reauthorization of food aid programs in the farm bill , now under consideration in congress , could affect the way in which the united states provides emergency food aid .

these include providing legislative authority to purchase non - u.s. commodities for emergency food aid in countries or regions close to where food emergencies are occurring and earmarking a portion of food aid for development rather than emergency uses .

in addition to near - term measures to meet food needs in low - income countries , aid agencies are focusing on medium - and long - term efforts to enhance food security and agricultural productivity .

many suggest that changes in the world market for food and fuel are long - term and structural , and , consequently , that more attention should be given to efforts to reduce poverty , increase food production , and enhance food security , especially in the poor developing countries .

there have been calls especially for increasing the priority and allocation of resources to agricultural development in sub - saharan africa .

official development assistance for agriculture , however , has been declining since the 1980's .

world bank data show , for example , that in 1980 , the bank provided 30% of its annual lending to agricultural projects , but by 2007 , that had declined to 12% .

data from the development assistance committee ( dac ) of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) show that the share of agricultural development assistance in total official development assistance ( oda ) has declined substantially from the 1980s , when it was 13% of total oda .

by 2006 , the overall percentage of oda from all donors bilateral and multilateral going to agriculture was 4% .

u.s. aid for agriculture also has declined in relative terms since the early 1980s .

in 1983-84 , u.s. assistance for agriculture represented 11.4% of total development assistance from dac member countries , while by 2006 , the percentage of bilateral development assistance accounted for by u.s. agricultural development assistance had fallen to 2.3% of the total provided .

in terms of u.s. assistance for agriculture in comparison with total u.s. assistance , aid for agriculture declined from 20% in 1980 to 3% in 2006 .

other oecd data show that although the total amount of aid for agriculture has decreased , there has been a relative increase in the proportion of agricultural development assistance going to africa in recent years , but this has been an increasing share of a decreasing total .

however , the partnership to cut hunger and poverty in africa , an organization that advocates for increased support for african agricultural development , found that u.s. assistance to african agriculture had increased in real terms between 2000 and 2004 .

the world bank and usaid are two aid agencies that are promoting agricultural development and growth in low - income countries .

both indicate that african agricultural development should be a priority .

but competing aid priorities , congressional earmarks , and institutional factors could make it difficult to re - order u.s. development assistance priorities .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) provided almost $600 million of development assistance to africa in fy2006 .

of that amount , $353.8 million was allocated to a wide range of agricultural activities , such as research and development of new agricultural technologies ( including biotechnology ) , assistance with managing natural resources , including water resources , and support for agro - forestry development .

a report , prepared by the partnership to cut hunger and poverty in africa , chaired by peter mcpherson , examined u.s. agricultural development assistance to africa during the period 2000-2004 .

it identified two main factors that affect usaid's allocation of resources to agricultural development .

these are competing priorities and congressional earmarks that influence funding for agricultural development assistance , and institutional factors that affect the scale and potential effectiveness of development resources .

priorities established by usaid officials , such as giving higher priority to assisting development of african agriculture , are difficult to translate into budgetary allocations because decisions are shaped by so many other executive branch institutions and by congress , according to the partnership .

usaid funds devoted to agricultural development compete with allocations to other important priorities for u.s. foreign assistance , notably health ( including hiv / aids ) , education , and humanitarian assistance ( mainly p.l .

480 food aid ) .

funding for health - related assistance in africa has grown dramatically through usaid and special presidential initiatives to fight hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

congressional earmarks , the partnership says , limit the flexibility of agricultural development assistance at the country level .

the partnership estimates that 90% of usaid's development assistance devoted to agriculture is pre - allocated to specific areas , such as trade capacity building , micro enterprise development , biodiversity , and plant biotechnology .

congressional earmarks , in the view of the authors of that study , limit the flexibility of development assistance programs to respond to the most important needs at the field level and thus reduce the effectiveness of assistance .

the partnership found that spending on agriculture - related objectives in africa from 2000 to 2004 was spread across 24 countries and four regional programs , resulting in average annual funding of about $6 million per year per country .

these funds were further dispersed among multiple contractors and grantees .

this approach , the partnership concludes , raises questions over whether agricultural projects are large enough to have a lasting effect and whether their combined effects collectively generate a sustainable development impact .

the partnership asserts that usaid agriculture program managers must compete for development resources with other sectors on the basis of quantifiable and near - term results reported through usaid's internal management system .

this process , the partnership suggests , may put projects that have longer - term impacts such as investment in infrastructure or in human capacity at a disadvantage vis - à - vis projects that have a shorter term impact .

the partnership questioned the effectiveness of coordination of agricultural development assistance within usaid , among other u.s. agencies that provide agriculture - related assistance , and with other bilateral donor countries and international institutions .

it highlighted the absence of a mechanism for usaid to closely coordinate agricultural development strategy , resource allocation , and field program activities with these other u.s. agencies ( especially the u.s. department of agriculture ) , other donors , and multilateral development institutions .

improved coordination , according to the partnership , would help to decrease costs and increase the effectiveness of assistance by integrating priority setting and resource allocation and by boosting the scale of such efforts .

a final institutional consideration raised by the partnership is that costs of u.s. development assistance are higher because of the costs incurred by tying aid to procurement from u.s. sources ( including the requirement that us .

food aid must be procured in the united states and shipped on u.s. - flagged vessels ) , and by the requirement to use predominately u.s. contractors to implement development projects .

two other u.s. assistance initiatives provide resources for agricultural development assistance .

one is the initiative to end hunger in africa ( ieha ) and the other is the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) .

the ieha , launched in 2002 , is a multi - year effort to increase agricultural productivity and rural incomes .

usaid specifically links the ieha with the u.n. millennium development goal ( mdg1 ) of cutting the number of hungry people in africa and the world in half by 2015 .

ieha focuses funding on investments with the greatest potential for raising smallholder producers' productivity and incomes .

in fy2006 , usaid estimates ieha funding at $47 million .

the initiative has projects in ghana , kenya , mali , mozambique , uganda , and zambia , and regional activities in east , west , and southern africa .

in ghana , for example , usaid reports that ieha activities focus primarily on improving the productivity of the agricultural sector .

in fy2006 , usaid allocated $14.2 million to agricultural development assistance in ghana , which is about 20% of all u.s. foreign assistance to ghana that year .

in mali , another ieha focus country , the initiative emphasizes removing obstacles to agribusiness development and actively promoting agribusiness .

about a quarter of total u.s. foreign assistance to mali ( $10.4 million ) was allocated to agricultural development in fy2006 .

no new countries have been added to the ieha since 2006 .

the millennium challenge account ( mca ) , administered by the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , was established in january 2004 as a new vehicle for providing u.s. foreign assistance .

establishment of the mca was announced at the march 2002 international conference on financing for development in monterrey , mexico .

the mca aims to help fulfill the u.s. commitment to the u.n. millennium development goals aimed primarily at reducing poverty and , eliminating hunger , and fostering sustainable development .

the president pledged to allot $5 billion annually by fy2006 to the mcc .

countries that have created the necessary enabling environment for economic growth through market - oriented , pro - growth policies , good governance and investment of their own resources in health and education can qualify for assistance under the mcc .

the partnership says that the mcc has potential importance for agricultural development in africa for two reasons: the mcc represents a large , and potentially larger , pool of resources for development assistance .

congress appropriated almost $1 billion in fy2004 , $1.5 billion in fy2005 , and $1.752 billion in each of fy2006 and fy2007 .

these funds are available until expended .

spreading such a large volume of funds over a relatively few countries could dwarf the small programs of development assistance that usaid generally operates in its recipient countries .

half of the 20 low income countries that were deemed eligible for mcc grants in 2007 are in africa .

compacts under the mcc have been entered into with 8 african countries: madagascar , cape verde , benin , ghana , mali , mozambique , lesotho , and tanzania .

agriculture is a key sector for mcc funding .

the mcc looks to the eligible developing country to develop its own mca proposal , but informs countries that increasing economic growth and reducing poverty requires them to emphasize investments that raise the productive potential of a county's citizens and firms and help integrate its economy into the global product and capital markets .

one of six key areas of focus for mcas is agricultural development .

other key areas are education , enterprise and private sector development , governance , health , and trade capacity building .

the mcc website reports that almost all of the mca country proposals submitted include an agriculture component .

although as noted above , most u.s. food aid to africa goes to address emergency food needs , a smaller portion of such aid is used in development projects , many of which aim to enhance food security .

in fy2007 , of $1.2 billion of u.s. commodity food aid provided to africa , just over $1 billion was provided as emergency food aid , while $167 million was allocated to development projects , many of which focus on agriculture .

non - emergency food aid financed projects are the largest amount of funding devoted to promoting food security in the usaid portfolio of projects in africa .

observers have noted problems of scale of activity funded with food aid and also lack of coordination with other development assistance .

however , usaid's food security strategy emphasizes that it will reduce the number of countries in which it carries out food aid development projects and that it will integrate p.l .

480 development projects into a country's overall agricultural development assistance program .

to address problems of food security in poor countries resulting from high food prices , the president of the world bank , robert zoellick , recently called for a "new deal for global food policy. .

in his view , not only would such a new deal require a higher priority to food security especially in poor countries , but also attention to the interrelated challenges of energy , yields , and climate change .

zoellick said that immediate food needs such as those identified by the wfp should be met , but attention also should be paid to meeting the millennium development goal ( mdg ) which calls for reducing by half global hunger and malnutrition by 2015 .

zoellick called for "a shift from traditional food aid to a broader concept of food and nutrition assistance...." cash or vouchers , he suggested , as opposed to commodity support , would be appropriate and enable the assistance to build local food markets and farm production .

if commodities were needed , he said , they should be purchased from local farmers .

the world bank could support emergency measures to help the poor meet their food needs while encouraging incentives to produce and market food as part of sustainable development .

the world bank identified four key elements for a comprehensive medium - to long - term approach to fostering growth in developing country agriculture in its 2008 world development report .

they include ( 1 ) improving producer incentives ( including the removal of subsidies which benefit richer farmers more ) ; ( 2 ) providing quality core public goods , eg , science ( research ) , infrastructure and human capital ; ( 3 ) strengthening institutions to provide more access to rural finance and risk management , improve property rights , and ensure greater opportunities for collective action by farmers ; and ( 4 ) ensuring sustainable use of natural resources .

according to world bank president zoellick , africa should be a particular priority .

echoing ms. sheeran's call for a green revolution to boost productivity in africa , he announced that the world bank will double its lending to agriculture in africa from $400 million currently to $800 million by 2010 .

