this report provides background information and issues for congress on the polar security cutter ( psc ) program — the coast guard's program for acquiring new polar icebreakers .

the psc program has received a total of $1,034.6 million ( i.e. , about $1.0 billion ) in procurement funding through fy2019 .

the coast guard's proposed fy2020 budget requests $35 million in procurement funding for the psc program , which is enough to cover fy2020 program - management costs .

the issue for congress is whether to approve , reject , or modify the administration's fy2020 procurement funding request for the psc program , and , more generally , whether to approve , reject , or modify the coast guard's overall plan for procuring new polar icebreakers .

congress's decisions on this issue could affect coast guard funding requirements , the coast guard's ability to perform its polar missions , and the u.s. shipbuilding industrial base .

for a brief discussion of the coast guard's great lakes icebreakers , see appendix e .

a separate crs report covers acquisition of general - purpose cutters for the coast guard .

another crs report provides an overview of various issues relating to the arctic .

the coast guard's proposed fy2020 budget requests $35 million in coast guard procurement funding for the psc program .

table 1 summarizes congressional appropriation action on the program's fy2019 funding request .

appendix a .

current u.s. polar icebreakers and polar research ships this appendix provides background information on current u.s. polar icebreakers and polar research ships .

three coast guard polar icebreakers two heavy polar icebreakers — polar star and polar sea polar star ( wagb - 10 ) and polar sea ( wagb - 11 ) , sister ships built to the same general design ( figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 ) , were acquired in the early 1970s as replacements for earlier u.s. icebreakers .

they were designed for 30-year service lives , and were built by lockheed shipbuilding of seattle , wa , a division of lockheed that also built ships for the u.s. navy , but which exited the shipbuilding business in the late 1980s .

the ships are 399 feet long and displace about 13,200 tons .

they are among the world's most powerful nonnuclear - powered icebreakers , with a capability to break through ice up to 6 feet thick at a speed of 3 knots .

because of their icebreaking capability , they are considered ( in u.s. parlance ) heavy polar icebreakers .

in addition to a crew of 134 , each ship can embark a scientific research staff of 32 people .

polar star was commissioned into service on january 19 , 1976 , and consequently is now more than 10 years beyond its originally intended 30-year service life .

due to worn - out electric motors and other problems , the coast guard placed the ship in caretaker status on july 1 , 2006 .

congress in fy2009 and fy2010 provided funding to repair polar star and return it to service for 7 to 10 years ; the repair work , which reportedly cost about $57 million , was completed , and the ship was reactivated on december 14 , 2012 .

polar sea was commissioned into service on february 23 , 1978 , and consequently is also more than 10 years beyond its originally intended 30-year service life .

in 2006 , the coast guard completed a rehabilitation project that extended the ship's expected service life to 2014 .

on june 25 , 2010 , however , the coast guard announced that polar sea had suffered an engine casualty , and the ship was unavailable for operation after that .

the coast guard placed polar sea in commissioned , inactive status on october 14 , 2011 .

the coast guard transferred certain major equipment from polar sea to polar star to facilitate polar star' s return to service , and continues to use polar sea as a source of spare parts for polar star .

one medium polar icebreaker — healy healy ( wagb - 20 ) ( figure a - 3 ) was funded in the early 1990s as a complement to polar star and polar sea , and was commissioned into service on august 21 , 2000 .

the ship was built by avondale industries , a shipyard located near new orleans , la , that built numerous coast guard and navy ships , and which eventually became part of huntington ingalls industries ( hii ) .

 ( hii subsequently wound down shipbuilding activities at avondale , and the facility is no longer building ships. ) .

although it is referred to ( in u.s. parlance ) as a medium polar icebreaker , healy is actually larger than polar star and polar sea — it is 420 feet long and displaces about 16,000 tons .

compared to polar star and polar sea , healy has less icebreaking capability ( which is why it is referred to as a medium polar icebreaker rather than a heavy polar icebreaker ) , but more capability for supporting scientific research .

the ship can break through ice up to 4½ feet thick at a speed of 3 knots , and embark a scientific research staff of 35 ( with room for another 15 surge personnel and 2 visitors ) .

the ship is used primarily for supporting scientific research and conducting other operations in the arctic .

three national science foundation ( nsf ) polar research ships nathaniel b. palmer nathaniel b. palmer was built for the nsf in 1992 by north american shipbuilding , of larose , la .

called palmer for short , it is operated for nsf by edison chouest offshore ( eco ) of galliano , la , a firm that owns and operates research ships and offshore deepwater service ships .

palmer is 308 feet long and has a displacement of about 6,500 tons .

it has a crew of 22 and can embark a scientific staff of 27 to 37 .

it was purpose - built as a single - mission ship for conducting and supporting scientific research in the antarctic .

it is capable of breaking ice up to 3 feet thick at speeds of 3 knots , which is sufficient for breaking through the ice conditions found in the vicinity of the antarctic peninsula , so as to resupply palmer station , a u.s. research station on the peninsula .

the ship might be considered less an icebreaker than an oceanographic research ship with enough icebreaking capability for the antarctic peninsula .

palmer 's icebreaking capability is not considered sufficient to perform the mcmurdo resupply mission .

laurence m. gould like palmer , the polar research and supply ship laurence m. gould was built for nsf by north american shipping .

it was completed in 1997 and is operated for nsf on a long - term charter from eco .

it is 230 feet long and has a displacement of about 3,800 tons .

it has a crew of 16 and can embark a scientific staff of 26 to 28 ( with a capacity for 9 more in a berthing van ) .

it can break ice up to 1 foot thick with continuous forward motion .

like palmer , it was built to support nsf operations in the antarctic , particularly operations at palmer station on the antarctic peninsula .

sikuliaq sikuli a q ( see - koo - lee - auk ) , which is used for scientific research in polar areas , was built by marinette marine of marinette , wi , and entered service in 2015 .

it is operated for nsf by the college of fisheries and ocean sciences at the university of alaska fairbanks as part of the u.s. academic research fleet through the university national oceanographic laboratory system ( unols ) .

sikuliaq is 261 feet long and has a displacement of about 3,600 tons .

it has a crew of 22 and can embark an additional 26 scientists and students .

the ship can break ice 2½ or 3 feet thick at speeds of 2 knots .

the ship is considered less an icebreaker than an ice - capable research ship .

summary table a - 1 summarizes the above six ships .

in addition to the ships shown in table a - 1 , another u.s. - registered polar ship with icebreaking capability — the arctic oil - exploration support ship aiviq — was used by royal dutch shell oil company to support an oil exploration and drilling effort ( now ended ) in arctic waters off alaska .

the ship , which completed construction in 2012 , is owned by eco and chartered by royal dutch shell .

it was used primarily for towing and laying anchors for drilling rigs , but is also equipped for responding to oil spills .

appendix b .

required numbers of u.s. polar icebreakers this appendix provides background information on required numbers of u.s. polar icebreakers .

june 2013 dhs polar icebreaker mission need statement dhs in june 2013 approved a mission need statement ( mns ) for the polar icebreaker recapitalization project .

the mns states the following ( emphasis added ) : this mission need statement ( mns ) establishes the need for polar icebreaker capabilities provided by the coast guard , to ensure that it can meet current and future mission requirements in the polar regions.... current requirements and future projections based upon cutter demand modeling , as detailed in the hlmar [high latitude mission analysis report] , indicate the coast guard will need to expand its icebreaking capacity , potentially requiring a fleet of up to six icebreakers ( 3 heavy and 3 medium ) to adequately meet mission demands in the high latitudes ... .

the analysis took into account both the coast guard statutory mission requirements and additional requirements for year - round presence in both polar regions detailed in the naval operations concept ( noc ) 2010... .

the analysis also evaluated employing single and multi - crewing concepts.... strategic home porting analysis based upon existing infrastructure and distance to operational areas provided the final input to determine icebreaker capacity demand .

while the mns can be viewed as an authoritative u.s. government statement regarding required numbers of u.s. polar icebreakers , it can be noted that the key sentence in the above - quoted passage from the mns ( i.e. , the sentence in bold ) includes the terms "potentially" and "up to. .

these terms , which are often overlooked in discussions of required numbers of u.s. polar icebreakers , make the key sentence less ironclad as a requirements statement than it would have been if the terms had not been included , and could be interpreted as an acknowledgment that the requirement might amount to something less than three heavy and three medium polar icebreakers .

it can also be noted , as stated in the above - quoted passage from the mns , that the mns was informed by the high latitude mission analysis report ( hilmar ) , and that the hlmar took into account not only coast guard statutory mission requirements , but additional department of defense ( dod ) requirements for year - round presence in both polar regions as detailed in the 2010 naval operations concept ( noc ) .

this is potentially significant , because dod appears to have subsequently dropped its 2010 requirement for year - round presence in the polar regions .

the use in the mns of the terms "potentially" and "up to," combined with dod's decision to drop its requirement for year - round presence in the polar regions , together raise a question , other things held equal , as to whether required numbers of u.s. polar icebreakers might be something less than three heavy and three medium polar icebreakers .

it is also possible , however , that there have been other changes since the mns was issued in 2013 that would have the effect , other things held equal , of increasing u.s. requirements for polar icebreakers .

the net result of this situation appears uncertain .

in recent years , coast guard officials have tended to refer simply to a total coast guard requirement for three heavy and three medium polar icebreakers .

for example , in the october 25 , 2016 , summary of a request for information ( rfi ) that the coast guard released the next day to receive industry feedback on its notional polar icebreaker acquisition approach and schedule , the coast guard states that "the united states coast guard has a need for three heavy polar icebreakers and three medium polar icebreakers with the priority being heavy polar icebreakers. .

a requirement for three heavy and three medium polar icebreakers is often abbreviated as 3+3 .

short of a 3+3 requirement , coast guard officials in the past have sometimes stated that , as a bare minimum number of heavy polar icebreakers , the coast guard needs two such ships .

for example , at a november 17 , 2015 , hearing before the europe , eurasia , and emerging threats subcommittee and the western hemisphere subcommittee of the house foreign affairs committee , then - vice admiral charles michel , the vice commandant of the coast guard , stated during the discussion portion of the hearing that the "coast guard needs at least two heavy icebreakers to provide year - round assured access and self - rescueability in the polar regions. .

similarly , at a june 14 , 2016 , hearing before the coast guard and maritime transportation subcommittee of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , admiral michel testified that "our commandant also testified that we need self - rescue capability for our heavy icebreaker and that includes the existing polar star that we have out there now .

so that means at least two [ships] , [and] the high latitude study says three heavy polar icebreakers is what the coast guard's requirement is .

so that's kind of where we're talking about for heavy icebreakers. .

a september 25 , 2017 , government accountability office ( gao ) report on polar icebreakers states that the coast guard has been unable to address all polar icebreaking requests since 2010 .

for example , the coast guard reported fulfilling 78 percent ( 25 of 32 ) of u.s. government agency requests for polar icebreaking services during fiscal year 2010 through 2016 .

coast guard officials cited various factors affecting the coast guard's ability to meet all requests , particularly the unavailability of its heavy polar icebreakers .

a july 2018 gao report stated that the coast guard operates one medium icebreaker , the healy , which has an expected end of service life in 2029 .

despite the requirement for three medium icebreakers , coast guard officials said they are not currently assessing acquisition of the medium polar icebreakers because they are focusing on the heavy icebreaker acquisition and plan to assess the costs and benefits of acquiring medium polar icebreakers at a later time .

in addition to the hilmar , a number of other studies have been conducted in recent years to assess u.s. requirements for polar icebreakers and options for sustaining and modernizing the coast guard's polar icebreaker fleet .

polar icebreakers operated by other countries in discussions of u.s. polar icebreakers , observers sometimes note the size of the polar icebreaking fleets operated by other countries .

table b - 1 shows a coast guard summary of major icebreakers around the world ; the figures in the table include some icebreakers designed for use in the baltic sea .

observers sometimes highlight the difference between the number of u.s. polar icebreakers and the much larger number of russian polar icebreakers .

in considering these relative numbers , it can be noted that russia's arctic coastline is much longer than the u.s. arctic coastline , that many more people live in russia's arctic ( about roughly 2 million ) than in the u.s. arctic ( fewer than 68,000 as of july 1 , 2017 ) , and that maritime transportation along russia's arctic coast is critical for supporting numerous russian arctic communities .

countries with interests in the polar regions have differing requirements for polar icebreakers , depending on the nature and extent of their polar interests and activities .

july 2017 national academies ( nasem ) report a july 2017 report on the acquisition and operation of polar icebreakers by the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( nasem ) that was directed by congress in section 604 of the coast guard authorization act of 2015 ( h.r .

4188 / p.l .

114-120 of february 8 , 2016 ) concluded the following: introduction the united states has strategic national interests in the polar regions .

in the arctic , the nation must protect its citizens , natural resources , and economic interests ; assure sovereignty , defense readiness , and maritime mobility ; and engage in discovery and research .

in the antarctic , the united states must maintain an active presence that includes access to its research stations for the peaceful conduct of science and the ability to participate in inspections as specified in the antarctic treaty .

the committee's charge... was to advise the u.s. house of representatives and the u.s. senate on an assessment of the costs incurred by the federal government in carrying out polar icebreaking missions and on options that could minimize lifecycle costs .

the committee's consensus findings and recommendations are presented below .

unless otherwise specified , all estimated costs and prices for the future u.s. icebreakers are expressed in 2019 dollars , since that is the year in which the contracts are scheduled to be made .

supporting material is found in the appendices .

findings and recommendations 1 .

finding: the united states has insufficient assets to protect its interests , implement u.s. policy , execute its laws , and meet its obligations in the arctic and antarctic because it lacks adequate icebreaking capability .

for more than 30 years , studies have emphasized the need for u.s. icebreakers to maintain presence , sovereignty , leadership , and research capacity — but the nation has failed to respond....the strong warming and related environmental changes occurring in both the arctic and the antarctic have made this failure more critical .

in the arctic , changing sea ice conditions will create greater navigation hazards for much of the year , and expanding human industrial and economic activity will magnify the need for national presence in the region .

in the antarctic , sea ice trends have varied greatly from year to year , but the annual requirements for access into mcmurdo station have not changed .

the nation is ill - equipped to protect its interests and maintain leadership in these regions and has fallen behind other arctic nations , which have mobilized to expand their access to ice - covered regions .

the united states now has the opportunity to move forward and acquire the capability to fulfill these needs.... 2 .

recommendation: the united states congress should fund the construction of four polar icebreakers of common design that would be owned and operated by the united states coast guard ( uscg ) .

the current department of homeland security ( dhs ) mission need statement ( dhs 2013 ) contemplates a combination of medium and heavy icebreakers .

the committee's recommendation is for a single class of polar icebreaker with heavy icebreaking capability .

proceeding with a single class means that only one design will be needed , which will provide cost savings .

the committee has found that the fourth heavy icebreaker could be built for a lower cost than the lead ship of a medium icebreaker class... .

the dhs mission need statement contemplated a total fleet of "potentially" up to six ships of two classes — three heavy and three medium icebreakers .

details appear in the high latitude mission analysis report .

the mission need statement indicated that to fulfill its statutory missions , uscg required three heavy and three medium icebreakers ; each vessel would have a single crew and would homeport in seattle .

the committee's analysis indicated that four heavy icebreakers will meet the statutory mission needs gap identified by dhs for the lowest cost .

three of the ships would allow continuous presence in the arctic , and one would service the antarctic .

as noted in the high latitude report , uscg's employment standard is 185 days away from home port ( dafhp ) for a single crew .

three heavy icebreakers in the arctic provide 555 dafhp , sufficient for continuous presence .

in addition , the medium icebreaker uscg cutter healy's design service life runs through 2030 .

if greater capacity is required , uscg could consider operating three ships with four crews , which would provide 740 dafhp .

the use of multiple crews in the arctic could require fewer ships while providing a comparable number of dafhp .

for example , two ships ( instead of the recommended three ) operating in the arctic with multiple crews could provide a similar number of annual operating days at a lower cost , but such an arrangement may not permit simultaneous operations in both polar regions and may not provide adequate redundancy in capability .

more important , an arrangement under which fewer boats are operated more often would require more major maintenance during shorter time in port , often at increasing cost .

in addition , if further military presence is desired in the arctic , uscg could consider ice - strengthening the ninth national security cutter .

one heavy icebreaker servicing the antarctic provides for the mcmurdo breakout and international treaty verification .

the availability of the vessel could be extended by homeporting in the southern hemisphere .

if the single vessel dedicated to the antarctic is rendered inoperable , uscg could redirect an icebreaker from the arctic , or it could rely on support from other nations .

the committee considers both options to be viable and believes it difficult to justify a standby ( fifth ) vessel for the antarctic mission when the total acquisition and lifetime operating costs of a single icebreaker are projected to exceed $1.6 billion .

once the four new icebreakers are operational , uscg can reasonably be expected to plan for more distant time horizons .

uscg could assess the performance of the early ships once they are operational and determine whether additional capacity is needed .

uscg is the only agency of the u.s. government that is simultaneously a military service , a law enforcement agency , a marine safety and rescue agency , and an environmental protection agency .

all of these roles are required in the mission need statement for a polar icebreaker .

uscg , in contrast to a civilian company , has the authorities , mandates , and competencies to conduct the missions contemplated for the polar icebreakers .

having one agency with a multimission capability performing the range of services needed would be more efficient than potentially duplicating effort by splitting polar icebreaker operations among other agencies .

the requirement for national presence is best accomplished with a military vessel .

in addition , uscg is fully interoperable with the u.s. navy and the nation's north atlantic treaty organization partners .

uscg is already mandated to operate the nation's domestic and polar icebreakers .

continuing to focus this expertise in one agency remains the logical approach.... government ownership of new polar icebreakers would be less costly than the use of lease financing ( see appendix c ) .

the government has a lower borrowing cost than any u.s. - based leasing firm or lessor .

in addition , the lessor would use higher - cost equity ( on which it would expect to make a profit ) to cover a portion of the lease financing .

the committee's analysis shows that direct purchase by the government would cost , at a minimum , 19 percent less than leasing on a net present value basis ( after tax ) .

there is also the risk of the lessor going bankrupt and compromising the availability of the polar icebreaker to uscg .

for its analysis , the committee not only relied on its extensive experience with leveraged lease financing but also reviewed available government accountability office reports and office of management and budget rules , examined commercial leasing economics and current interest rates , and validated its analysis by consulting an outside expert on the issue.... chartering ( an operating lease ) is not a viable option... .

the availability of polar icebreakers on the open market is extremely limited .

 ( the committee is aware of the sale of only one heavy icebreaker since 2010. ) .

u.s. experience with chartering a polar icebreaker for the mcmurdo resupply mission has been problematic on two prior charter attempts .

chartering is workable only if the need is short term and mission specific .

the committee notes that chartering may preclude uscg from performing its multiple missions... .

in the committee's judgment , an enlarged icebreaker fleet will provide opportunities for uscg to strengthen its icebreaking program and mission .

although the number of billets that require an expert is small compared with the overall number of billets assigned to these icebreakers , more people performing this mission will increase the pool of experienced candidates .

this will provide personnel assignment officers with a larger pool of candidates when the more senior positions aboard icebreakers are designated , which will make icebreaking more attractive as a career path and increase the overall level of icebreaking expertise within uscg .

importantly , the commonality of design of the four recommended heavy icebreakers will reduce operating and maintenance costs over the service life of these vessels through efficiencies in supporting and crewing them .

having vessels of common design will likely improve continuity of service , build icebreaking competency , improve operational effectiveness , and be more cost - efficient.... 3 .

recommendation: uscg should follow an acquisition strategy that includes block buy contracting with a fixed price incentive fee contract and take other measures to ensure best value for investment of public funds .

icebreaker design and construction costs can be clearly defined , and a fixed price incentive fee construction contract is the most reliable mechanism for controlling costs for a program of this complexity .

this technique is widely used by the u.s. navy .

to help ensure best long - term value , the criteria for evaluating shipyard proposals should incorporate explicitly defined lifecycle cost metrics.... a block buy authority for this program will need to contain specific language for economic order quantity purchases for materials , advanced design , and construction activities .

a block buy contracting program with economic order quantity purchases enables series construction , motivates competitive bidding , and allows for volume purchase and for the timely acquisition of material with long lead times .

it would enable continuous production , give the program the maximum benefit from the learning curve , and thus reduce labor hours on subsequent vessels .

the acquisition strategy would incorporate ( a ) technology transfer from icebreaker designers and builders with recent experience , including international expertise in design , construction , and equipment manufacture ; ( b ) a design that maximizes use of commercial off - the - shelf ( cots ) equipment , applies polar codes and international standards , and only applies military specifications ( mil - spec ) to the armament , aviation , communications , and navigation equipment ; ( c ) reduction of any "buy american" provisions to allow the sourcing of the most suitable and reliable machinery available on the market ; and ( d ) a program schedule that allows for completion of design and planning before the start of construction .

these strategies will allow for optimization of design , reduce construction costs , and enhance reliability and maintainability.... 4 .

finding: in developing its independent concept designs and cost estimates , the committee determined that the costs estimated by uscg for the heavy icebreaker are reasonable .

however , the committee believes that the costs of medium icebreakers identified in the high latitude mission analysis report are significantly underestimated .

the committee estimates the rough order - of - magnitude ( rom ) cost of the first heavy icebreaker to be $983 million .

 ( see appendix d , table d - 6. ) .

of these all - in costs , 75 to 80 percent are shipyard design and construction costs ; the remaining 20 to 25 percent cover government - incurred costs such as government - furnished equipment and government - incurred program expenses .

if advantage is taken of learning and quantity discounts available through the recommended block buy contracting acquisition strategy , the average cost per heavy icebreaker is approximately $791 million , on the basis of the acquisition of four ships .

the committee's analysis of the ship size to incorporate the required components ( stack - up length ) suggests an overall length of 132 meters ( 433 feet ) and a beam of 27 meters ( 89 feet ) .

this is consistent with uscg concepts for the vessel .

costs can be significantly reduced by following the committee's recommendations .

reduction of mil - spec requirements can lower costs by up to $100 million per ship with no loss of mission capability... .

the other recommended acquisition , design , and construction strategies will control possible cost overruns and provide significant savings in overall life - cycle costs for the program .

although uscg has not yet developed the operational requirements document for a medium polar icebreaker , the committee was able to apply the known principal characteristics of the uscg cutter healy to estimate the scope of work and cost of a similar medium icebreaker .

the committee estimates that a first - of - class medium icebreaker will cost approximately $786 million .

the fourth ship of the heavy icebreaker series is estimated to cost $692 million .

designing a medium - class polar icebreaker in a second shipyard would incur the estimated engineering , design , and planning costs of $126 million and would forgo learning from the first three ships ; the learning curve would be restarted with the first medium design .

costs of building the fourth heavy icebreaker would be less than the costs of designing and building a first - of - class medium icebreaker... .

in developing its rom cost estimate , the committee agreed on a common notional design and basic assumptions.... two committee members then independently developed cost estimating models , which were validated internally by other committee members .

these analyses were then used to establish the committee's primary cost estimate.... 5 .

finding: operating costs of new polar icebreakers are expected to be lower than those of the vessels they replace .

the committee expects the operating costs for the new heavy polar icebreakers to be lower than those of uscg's polar star .

while uscg's previous experience is that operating costs of new cutters are significantly higher than those of the vessels they replace , the committee does not believe this historical experience applies in this case .

there is good reason to believe that operating costs for new ships using commercially available modern technology will be lower than costs for existing ships... .

the more efficient hull forms and modern engines will reduce fuel consumption , and a well - designed automation plant will require fewer operation and maintenance personnel , which will allow manning to be reduced or freed up for alternative tasks .

the use of cots technology and the minimization of mil - spec , as recommended , will also reduce long - term maintenance costs , since use of customized equipment to meet mil - spec requirements can reduce reliability and increase costs .

a new vessel , especially over the first 10 years , typically has significantly reduced major repair and overhaul costs , particularly during dry - dock periods , compared with existing icebreakers — such as the polar star — that are near or at the end of their service life... .

the polar star has many age - related issues that require it to be extensively repaired at an annual dry - docking .

these issues will be avoided in the early years of a new ship .

however , the committee recognizes that new ship operating costs can be higher than those of older ships if the new ship has more complexity to afford more capabilities .

therefore , any direct comparisons of operating costs of newer versus older ships would need to take into account the benefits of the additional capabilities provided by the newer ship .

uscg will have an opportunity to evaluate the manning levels of the icebreaker in light of the benefits of modern technology to identify reductions that can be made in operating costs.... 6 .

recommendation: uscg should ensure that the common polar icebreaker design is science - ready and that one of the ships has full science capability .

all four proposed ships would be designed as "science - ready," which will be more cost - effective when one of the four ships — most likely the fourth — is made fully science capable .

including science readiness in the common polar icebreaker design is the most cost - effective way of fulfilling both the uscg's polar missions and the nation's scientific research polar icebreaker needs... .

the incremental costs of a science - ready design for each of the four ships ( $10 million to $20 million per ship ) and of full science capability for one of the ships at the initial build ( an additional $20 million to $30 million ) are less than the independent design and build cost of a dedicated research medium icebreaker... .

in briefings at its first meeting , the committee learned that the national science foundation and other agencies do not have budgets to support full - time heavy icebreaker access or the incremental cost of design , even though their science programs may require this capability .

given the small incremental cost , the committee believes that the science capability cited above should be included in the acquisition costs .

science - ready design includes critical elements that cannot be retrofitted cost - effectively into an existing ship and that should be incorporated in the initial design and build .

among these elements are structural supports , appropriate interior and exterior spaces , flexible accommodation spaces that can embark up to 50 science personnel , a hull design that accommodates multiple transducers and minimizes bubble sweep while optimizing icebreaking capability , machinery arrangements and noise dampening to mitigate interference with sonar transducers , and weight and stability latitudes to allow installation of scientific equipment .

such a design will enable any of the ships to be retrofitted for full science capability in the future , if necessary... .

within the time frame of the recommended build sequence , the united states will require a science - capable polar icebreaker to replace the science capabilities of the healy upon her retirement .

to fulfill this need , one of the heavy polar icebreakers would be procured at the initial build with full science capability ; the ability to fulfill other uscg missions would be retained .

the ship would be outfitted with oceanographic overboarding equipment and instrumentation and facilities comparable with those of modern oceanographic research vessels .

some basic scientific capability , such as hydrographic mapping sonar , should be acquired at the time of the build of each ship so that environmental data that are essential in fulfilling uscg polar missions can be collected .

7 .

finding: the nation is at risk of losing its heavy polar icebreaking capability — experiencing a critical capacity gap — as the polar star approaches the end of its extended service life , currently estimated at 3 to 7 years .

the polar star , built in 1976 , is well past its 30-year design life .

its reliability will continue to decline , and its maintenance costs will continue to escalate .

although the ship went through an extensive life - extending refit in 2011 – 2012 , the polar star's useful life is estimated to end between 2020 and 2024 .

as uscg has recognized , the evaluation of alternative arrangements to secure polar icebreaking capacity is important , given the growing risks of the polar star losing its capability to fulfill its mission.... 8 .

recommendation: uscg should keep the polar star operational by implementing an enhanced maintenance program ( emp ) until at least two new polar icebreakers are commissioned .

even if the committee's notional schedule for new polar icebreakers is met , the second polar icebreaker would not be ready until july 2025... .

the committee's proposed emp could be designed with planned — and targeted — upgrades that allow the polar star to operate every year for its antarctic mission .

the necessary repairs could be performed in conjunction with the ship's current yearly dry - docking schedule within existing annual expenditures , estimated to average $5 million .

in particular , the emp would require improvements in the ship's operating systems , sanitary system , evaporators , main propulsion systems , and controllable pitch propellers .

in the committee's judgment , the emp could be accomplished within uscg's average annual repair expenditures for the polar star , which currently range between $2 million and $9 million .

coast guard high latitude study provided to congress in july 2011 in july 2011 , the coast guard provided to congress a study on the coast guard's missions and capabilities for operations in high - latitude ( i.e. , polar ) areas .

the study , commonly known as the high latitude study , is dated july 2010 on its cover .

the high latitude study concluded the following: [the study] concludes that future capability and capacity gaps will significantly impact four [coast guard] mission areas in the arctic: defense readiness , ice operations , marine environmental protection , and ports , waterways , and coastal security .

these mission areas address the protection of important national interests in a geographic area where other nations are actively pursuing their own national goals... .

the common and dominant contributor to these significant mission impacts is the gap in polar icebreaking capability .

the increasing obsolescence of the coast guard's icebreaker fleet will further exacerbate mission performance gaps in the coming years... .

the gap in polar icebreaking capacity has resulted in a lack of at - sea time for crews and senior personnel and a corresponding gap in training and leadership .

in addition to providing multi - mission capability and intrinsic mobility , a helicopter - capable surface unit would eliminate the need for acquiring an expensive shore - based infrastructure that may only be needed on a seasonal or occasional basis .

the most capable surface unit would be a polar icebreaker .

polar icebreakers can transit safely in a variety of ice conditions and have the endurance to operate far from logistics bases .

the coast guard's polar icebreakers have conducted a wide range of planned and unscheduled coast guard missions in the past .

polar icebreakers possess the ability to carry large numbers of passengers , cargo , boats , and helicopters .

polar icebreakers also have substantial command , control , and communications capabilities .

the flexibility and mobility of polar icebreakers would assist the coast guard in closing future mission performance gaps effectively... .

existing capability and capacity gaps are expected to significantly impact future coast guard performance in two antarctic mission areas: defense readiness and ice operations .

future gaps may involve an inability to carry out probable and easily projected mission requirements , such as the mcmurdo resupply , or readiness to respond to less - predictable events .

by their nature , contingencies requiring the use of military capabilities often occur quickly .

as is the case in the arctic , the deterioration of the coast guard's icebreaker fleet is the primary driver for this significant mission impact .

this will further widen mission performance gaps in the coming years .

the recently issued naval operations concept 2010 requires a surface presence in both the arctic and antarctic .

this further exacerbates the capability gap left by the deterioration of the icebreaker fleet... .

the significant deterioration of the coast guard icebreaker fleet and the emerging mission demands to meet future functional requirements in the high latitude regions dictate that the coast guard acquire material solutions to close the capability gaps.... to meet the coast guard mission functional requirement , the coast guard icebreaking fleet must be capable of supporting the following missions: arctic north patrol .

continuous multimission icebreaker presence in the arctic .

arctic west science .

spring and summer science support in the arctic .

antarctic , mcmurdo station resupply .

planned deployment for break - in , supply ship escort , and science support .

this mission , conducted in the antarctic summer , also requires standby icebreaker support for backup in the event the primary vessel cannot complete the mission .

thule air base resupply and polar region freedom of navigation transits .

provide vessel escort operations in support of the military sealift command's operation pacer goose ; then complete any freedom of navigation exercises in the region .

in addition , the joint naval operations concept establishes the following mission requirements: assured access and assertion of u.s. policy in the polar regions .

the current demand for this mission requires continuous icebreaker presence in both polar regions .

considering these missions , the analysis yields the following findings: the coast guard requires three heavy and three medium icebreakers to fulfill its statutory missions .

these icebreakers are necessary to ( 1 ) satisfy arctic winter and transition season demands and ( 2 ) provide sufficient capacity to also execute summer missions .

single - crewed icebreakers have sufficient capacity for all current and expected statutory missions .

multiple crewing provides no advantage because the number of icebreakers required is driven by winter and shoulder season requirements .

future use of multiple or augmented crews could provide additional capacity needed to absorb mission growth .

the coast guard requires six heavy and four medium icebreakers to fulfill its statutory missions and maintain the continuous presence requirements of the naval operations concept .

consistent with current practice , these icebreakers are single - crewed and homeported in seattle washington .

applying crewing and home porting alternatives reduces the overall requirement to four heavy and two medium icebreakers .

this assessment of nonmaterial solutions shows that the reduced number of icebreakers can be achieved by having all vessels operate with multiple crews and two of the heavy icebreakers homeporting in the southern hemisphere .

leasing was also considered as a nonmaterial solution .

while there is no dispute that the coast guard's polar icebreaker fleet is in need of recapitalization , the decision to acquire this capability through purchase of new vessels , reconstruction of existing ships , or commercial lease of suitable vessels must be resolved to provide the best value to the taxpayer .

the multi - mission nature of the coast guard may provide opportunities to conduct some subset of its missions with non government - owned vessels .

however , serious consideration must be given to the fact that the inherently governmental missions of the coast guard must be performed using government - owned and operated vessels .

an interpretation of the national policy is needed to determine the resource level that best supports the nation's interests... .

the existing icebreaker capacity , two inoperative heavy icebreakers and an operational medium icebreaker , does not represent a viable capability to the federal government .

the time needed to augment this capability is on the order of 10 years .

at that point , around 2020 , the heavy icebreaking capability bridging strategy expires .

at a july 27 , 2011 , hearing on u.s. economic interests in the arctic before the oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard subcommittee of the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee , the following exchange occurred: senator olympia j. snowe: on the high latitude study , do you agree with — and those — i would like to also hear from you , admiral titley , as well , on these requirements in terms of coast guard vessels as i understand it , they want to have — i guess , it was a three medium ice breakers .

am in correct in saying that ? .

three medium ice breakers .

admiral robert papp , commandant of the coast guard: i agree with the mission analysis and as you look at the requirements for the things that we might do up there , if it is in the nation's interest , it identifies a minimum requirement for three heavy ice breakers and three medium ice breakers and then if you want a persistent presence up there , it would require — and also doing things such as breaking out ( inaudible ) and other responsibilities , then it would take up to a maximum six heavy and four medium .

snowe: right .

do you agree with that ? .

papp: if we were to be charged with carrying out those full responsibilities , yes , ma'am .

those are the numbers that you would need to do it .

snowe: admiral titley , how would you respond to the high latitude study and has the navy conducted its own assessment of its capability ? .

rear admiral david titley , oceanorgrapher and navigator of the navy: ma'am , we are in the process right now of conducting what we call a capabilities based assessment that will be out in the summer of this year .

we are getting ready to finish that — the coast guard has been a key component of the navy's task force on climate change , literally since day one when the chief of naval operations set this up , that morning , we had the coast guard invited as a member of our executive steering committee .

so we have been working very closely with the coast guard , with the department of homeland security , and i think admiral papp — said it best as far as the specific comments on the high latitude study but we have been working very closely with the coast guard .

january 2011 dhs office of inspector general report a january 2011 report on the coast guard's polar icebreakers from the dhs office of the inspector general stated the following: the coast guard does not have the necessary budgetary control over its [polar] icebreakers , nor does it have a sufficient number of icebreakers to accomplish its missions in the polar regions .

currently , the coast guard has only one operational [polar] icebreaker [i.e. , healy ] , making it necessary for the united states to contract with foreign nations to perform scientific , logistical , and supply activities .

without the necessary budgetary control and a sufficient number of icebreaking assets , the coast guard will not have the capability to perform all of its missions , will lose critical icebreaking expertise , and may be beholden to foreign nations to perform its statutory missions .

the coast guard should improve its strategic approach to ensure that it has the long - term icebreaker capabilities needed to support coast guard missions and other national interests in the arctic and antarctic regions .

regarding current polar icebreaking capabilities for performing arctic missions , the report states the following: the coast guard's icebreaking resources are unlikely to meet future demands .

[the table below] outlines the missions that coast guard is unable to meet in the arctic with its current icebreaking resources .

the report also states the following: should the coast guard not obtain funding for new icebreakers or major service life extensions for its existing icebreakers with sufficient lead - time , the united states will have no heavy icebreaking capability beyond 2020 and no polar icebreaking capability of any kind by 2029 .

without the continued use of icebreakers , the united states will lose its ability to maintain a presence in the polar regions , the coast guard's expertise to perform ice operations will continue to diminish , and missions will continue to go unmet .

regarding current polar icebreaking capabilities for performing antarctic missions , the report states the following: the coast guard needs additional icebreakers to accomplish its missions in the antarctic .

the coast guard has performed the mcmurdo station resupply in antarctica for decades , but with increasing difficulty in recent years .

the coast guard's two heavy - duty icebreakers [i.e. , polar star and polar sea ] are at the end of their service lives , and have become less reliable and increasingly costly to keep in service... .

in recent years , the coast guard has found that ice conditions in the antarctic have become more challenging for the resupply of mcmurdo station .

the extreme ice conditions have necessitated the use of foreign vessels to perform the mcmurdo break - in.... as ice conditions continue to change around the antarctic , two icebreakers are needed for the mcmurdo break - in and resupply mission .

typically , one icebreaker performs the break - in and the other remains on standby .

should the first ship become stuck in the ice or should the ice be too thick for one icebreaker to complete the mission , the coast guard deploys the ship on standby .

since the polar sea and polar star are not currently in service , the coast guard has no icebreakers capable of performing this mission .

[the table below] outlines the missions that will not be met without operational heavy - duty icebreakers .

the report's conclusion and recommendations were as follows: conclusion with an aging fleet of three icebreakers , one operational and two beyond their intended 30-year service life , the coast guard is at a critical crossroads in its polar icebreaker maintenance , upgrade , and acquisition program .

it must clarify its mission requirements , and if the current mission requirements remain , the coast guard must determine the best method for meeting these requirements in the short and long term .

recommendations we recommend that the assistant commandant for marine safety , security , and stewardship: recommendation #1: request budgetary authority for the operation , maintenance , and upgrade of its icebreakers .

recommendation #2: in coordination with the department of homeland security , request clarification from congress to determine whether arctic missions should be performed by coast guard assets or contracted vessels .

recommendation #3: in coordination with the department of homeland security , request clarification from congress to determine whether antarctic missions should be performed by coast guard assets or contracted vessels .

recommendation #4: conduct the necessary analysis to determine whether the coast guard should replace or perform service - life extensions on its two existing heavy - duty icebreaking ships .

recommendation #5: request appropriations necessary to meet mission requirements in the arctic and antarctic .

the report states that the coast guard concurred with all five of the recommendations and is initiating corrective actions .

we consider the recommendations open and unresolved .

the coast guard provided information on some of its ongoing projects that will address the program needs identified in the report .

2010 u.s. arctic research commission report a may 2010 report from the u.s. arctic research commission ( usarc ) on goals and objectives for arctic research for 2009-2010 stated the following: to have an effective arctic research program , the united states must invest in human capital , research platforms , and infrastructure , including new polar class icebreakers , and sustained sea , air , land , space , and social observing systems... .

the commission urges the president and congress to commit to replacing the nation's two polar class icebreakers .

2007 national research council report a 2007 national research council ( nrc ) report , polar icebreakers in a changing world: an assessment of u.s .

needs , assessed roles and future needs for coast guard polar icebreakers .

the study was required by report language accompanying the fy2005 dhs appropriations act ( h.r .

4567 / p.l .

108-334 ) .

the study was completed in 2006 and published in 2007 .

some sources refer to the study as the 2006 nrc report .

the report made the following conclusions and recommendations: based on the current and future needs for icebreaking capabilities , the [study] committee concludes that the nation continues to require a polar icebreaking fleet that includes a minimum of three multimission ships [like the coast guard's three current polar icebreakers] and one single - mission [research] ship [like palmer] .

the committee finds that although the demand for icebreaking capability is predicted to increase , a fleet of three multimission and one single - mission icebreakers can meet the nation's future polar icebreaking needs through the application of the latest technology , creative crewing models , wise management of ice conditions , and more efficient use of the icebreaker fleet and other assets .

the nation should immediately begin to program , design , and construct two new polar icebreakers to replace the polar star and polar sea .

building only one new polar icebreaker is insufficient for several reasons .

first , a single ship cannot be in more than one location at a time .

no matter how technologically advanced or efficiently operated , a single polar icebreaker can operate in the polar regions for only a portion of any year .

an icebreaker requires regular maintenance and technical support from shipyards and industrial facilities , must reprovision regularly , and has to effect periodic crew changeouts .

a single icebreaker , therefore , could not meet any reasonable standard of active and influential presence and reliable , at - will access throughout the polar regions .

a second consideration is the potential risk of failure in the harsh conditions of polar operations .

despite their intrinsic robustness , damage and system failure are always a risk and the u.s. fleet must have enough depth to provide backup assistance .

having only a single icebreaker would necessarily require the ship to accept a more conservative operating profile , avoiding more challenging ice conditions because reliable assistance would not be available .

a second capable icebreaker , either operating elsewhere or in homeport , would provide ensured backup assistance and allow for more robust operations by the other ship .

from a strategic , longer - term perspective , two new polar class icebreakers will far better position the nation for the increasing challenges emerging in both polar regions .

a second new ship would allow the u.s. coast guard to reestablish an active patrol presence in u.s. waters north of alaska to meet statutory responsibilities that will inevitably derive from increased human activity , economic development , and environmental change .

it would allow response to emergencies such as search - and - rescue cases , pollution incidents , and assistance to ships threatened with grounding or damage by ice .

moreover , a second new ship will leverage the possibilities for simultaneous operations in widely disparate geographic areas ( eg , concurrent operations in the arctic and antarctic ) , provide more flexibility for conducting antarctic logistics ( as either the primary or the secondary ship for the mcmurdo break - in ) , allow safer multiple - ship operations in the most demanding ice conditions , and increase opportunities for international expeditions .

finally , an up - front decision to build two new polar icebreakers will allow economies in the design and construction process and provide a predictable cost reduction for the second ship... .

the [study] committee finds that both operations and maintenance of the polar icebreaker fleet have been underfunded for many years , and the capabilities of the nation's icebreaking fleet have diminished substantially .

deferred long - term maintenance and failure to execute a plan for replacement or refurbishment of the nation's icebreaking ships have placed national interests in the polar regions at risk .

the nation needs the capability to operate in both polar regions reliably and at will .

specifically , the committee recommends the following: the united states should continue to project an active and influential presence in the arctic to support its interests .

this requires u.s. government polar icebreaking capability to ensure year - round access throughout the region .

the united states should continue to project an active and influential presence in the antarctic to support its interests .

the nation should reliably control sufficient icebreaking capability to break a channel into and ensure the maritime resupply of mcmurdo station .

the united states should maintain leadership in polar research .

this requires icebreaking capability to provide access to the deep arctic and the ice - covered waters of the antarctic .

national interests in the polar regions require that the united states immediately program , budget , design , and construct two new polar icebreakers to be operated by the u.s. coast guard .

to provide continuity of u.s. icebreaking capabilities , the polar sea should remain mission capable and the polar star should remain available for reactivation until the new polar icebreakers enter service .

the u.s. coast guard should be provided sufficient operations and maintenance budget to support an increased , regular , and influential presence in the arctic .

other agencies should reimburse incremental costs associated with directed mission tasking .

polar icebreakers are essential instruments of u.s. national policy in the changing polar regions .

to ensure adequate national icebreaking capability into the future , a presidential decision directive should be issued to clearly align agency responsibilities and budgetary authorities .

the coast guard stated in 2008 that it "generally supports" the nrc report , and that the coast guard "is working closely with interagency partners to determine a way forward with national polar policy that identifies broad u.s. interests and priorities in the arctic and antarctic that will ensure adequate maritime presence to further these interests .

identification and prioritization of u.s. national interests in these regions should drive development of associated uscg [u.s. coast guard] capability and resource requirements. .

the coast guard also stated the following: "until those broad u.s. interests and priorities are identified , the current usg [u.s. government] polar icebreaking fleet should be maintained in an operational status. .

appendix c. psc program funding this appendix presents additional background information on funding for the psc program .

summary of funding in fy2013-fy2020 budget submissions table c - 1 shows requested and projected funding for the psc program in the coast guard's budget submissions from the initiation of the psc program in the fy2013 submission through the fy2020 submission .

the reduction in programmed five - year funding for a new polar icebreaker during the fy2014-fy2016 budget submissions shown in table c - 1 appears to have been related to the substantial reduction in the annual funding levels in the coast guard's acquisition , construction , and improvements ( ac&i ) account in those budget submission that is shown in table c - 2 .

prior to the release of the administration's september 1 , 2015 , fact sheet , the coast guard testified that if annual funding levels in the ac&i account were not increased from the reduced levels in those budget submissions , the icebreaker would be , essentially , an unfunded requirement .

for example , at an april 28 , 2015 , hearing on coast guard resources and priorities before the oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard subcommittee of the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee , admiral paul zukunft , the then - commandant of the coast guard , testified that by reactivating polar star , we have purchased up to 10 years of decision space to recapitalize our ice - breaking fleet .

two of those years have expired .

and while i'm exploring several options to reconstitute our nation's fleet of icebreakers , i will need topline relief [i.e. , an increase] in my acquisition budget to make this requirement a reality .

for additional discussion of the issue of the funding level of the procurement , construction , and improvements ( pc&i ) account , see appendix d .

below are some additional details on each of the budget submissions since the fy2013 submission .

fy2013 submission the administration's fy2013 budget submission initiated a new project for the design and construction of a new polar icebreaker , and included $860 million over five years for the acquisition of the ship ( table c - 1 ) — enough or almost enough to fully fund the acquisition of a new polar icebreaker .

 ( any remaining needed funding might have been projected for fy2018 and perhaps also fy2019 , which were beyond the five - year window of the fy2013 budget submission. ) .

the submission stated that dhs anticipated awarding a construction contract for the ship "within the next five years" ( i.e. , by fy2018 ) and taking delivery on the ship "within a decade" ( i.e. , by 2023 ) .

fy2014 submission the administration's fy2014 budget submission reduced the five - year funding for a new polar icebreaker to $230 million ( table c - 1 ) — a 73% reduction from the figure in the fy2013 budget submission — but still stated that dhs anticipated awarding a construction contract for the ship "within the next four years" ( i.e. , by fy2018 ) .

fy2015 submission the administration's fy2015 budget submission maintained five - year funding for a new polar icebreaker at $230 million ( table c - 1 ) , but did not state when a construction contract for the ship might be awarded , creating uncertainty about the timing of the project .

fy2016 submission the administration's fy2016 budget submission , submitted to congress in february 2015 , reduced five - year funding for a new polar icebreaker further , to $166 million ( table c - 1 ) — an 81% reduction from the figure in the fy2013 budget submission — and again did not state when a construction contract for the ship might be awarded , maintaining the uncertainty about the timing of the project .

on september 1 , 2015 , the white house issued a fact sheet in conjunction with a visit to alaska by president obama indicating that the administration , in its own internal planning , had at some point over the past two years deferred acquisition of a new polar icebreaker to fy2022 , but that this had been changed to fy2020 .

the newly announced construction start date of fy2020 was a two - year acceleration from the previously unpublicized date of fy2022 , and a two - year deferral from the fy2018 date implied in the fy2013 and fy2014 budget submissions .

the fact sheet states that the administration will also "begin planning for construction of additional icebreakers" beyond the one that the obama administration proposed to begin building in fy2020 .

on january 13 , 2016 , the coast guard announced that it intended to hold an industry day for the psc program , followed by one - on - one meetings between the coast guard and prospective shipbuilders and ship designers , as a part of the coast guard's ongoing market research for the program .

the industry day was held on march 18 , 2016 , and the one - on - one meetings between the coast guard and industry officials were scheduled for march 28-31 , with industry feedback to be submitted to the coast guard by april 5 , 2016 .

fy2017 submission the coast guard's proposed fy2017 budget requested $150 million in procurement funding for a new polar icebreaker .

the figure of $150 million included $147.6 million in the polar icebreaker line of the coast guard's acquisition , construction , and improvements ( ac&i ) account , and $2.4 million that was embedded in the personnel and management line in the ac&i account .

the coast guard's fy2017-fy2021 five - year capital investment plan ( cip ) included a total of $780 million in procurement funding for a new polar icebreaker .

as shown in table c - 1 , the $150 million requested for fy2017 was the first major increment of procurement funding requested ( not just projected for a future fiscal year ) for a new polar icebreaker .

fy2018 submission the coast guard's proposed fy2018 budget requested $19 million in procurement funding for a new polar icebreaker and includes a total of $949 million over the five - year period fy2018-fy2022 .

the coast guard states that this request supports activities to complete and release a request for proposal ( rfp ) for detail design and construction in fy 2018 .

specifically , this funding supports program - wide activities including open water and ice tank model testing ; review of industry studies contract deliverables ; integrated program office ( ipo ) and ship design team ( sdt ) support ; logistics and integration development for government furnished information and equipment ; and additional modeling efforts to inform the evaluation and source selection process for the detail design & construction rfp... .

currently , the program is maturing the system specification , developing the rfp for detail design & construction , and completing required documentation to transition to the "obtain" phase - planned for early fy 2018 .

in july 2016 , the coast guard established an integrated program office with the navy to continue efforts to accelerate the construction timeline and leverage the expertise and best practices from shipbuilding programs in both services .

based on this collaboration and lessons learned by the navy , the program was able to significantly mature the acquisition approach with the incorporation of industry studies to identify solutions to minimize cost , schedule , production and technology risks .

industry studies are focusing on leveraging industry perspectives , existing vessel designs , and use of mature technology to inform the iterative development of the heavy polar icebreaker system specification .

future "obtain" phase activities include award of a contract for detail design & construction for the heavy polar icebreaker .

fy2019 submission the coast guard's proposed fy2018 budget requested $750 million in procurement funding for the psc program and included a total of $1,805 million over the five - year period fy2019-fy2023 .

the request for $750 million for the psc program was a late change to the fy2019 budget that is not reflected in coast guard fy2019 budget - justification documents that were printed prior to the change .

in those earlier documents , the amount of funding requested for fy2019 shows as $30 million rather than $750 million , and the total amount of funding requested in the coast guard's pc&i account was correspondingly $720 million less than the figure of $1,886.8 million shown in table c - 2 .

fy2020 submission the coast guard's proposed fy2020 budget requests $35 million in procurement funding for the psc program , which is enough to cover the psc program's fy2020 government program - management costs .

appendix d. funding level in pc&i account this appendix presents additional discussion of the funding level of the coast guard's procurement , construction , and improvements ( pc&i ) account .

overview the coast guard has testified that funding the pc&i account at a level of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year — the approximate average annual funding level programmed in the fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 budget submissions , as shown in table c - 2 — would make it difficult to fund various coast guard acquisition projects , including a new polar icebreaker and improvements to coast guard shore installations .

coast guard plans call for procuring offshore patrol cutters ( opcs ) at an eventual rate of two per year .

if each opc costs roughly $400 million , procuring two opcs per year in an pc&i account of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year would leave about $200 million to $400 million per year for all other pc&i - funded programs .

since 2017 , coast guard officials have been stating more regularly what they stated only infrequently in earlier years: that executing the coast guard's various acquisition programs fully and on a timely basis would require the pc&i account to be funded in coming years at a level of about $2 billion per year .

statements from coast guard officials on this issue in past years have sometimes put this figure as high as about $2.5 billion per year .

using past pc&i funding levels as a guide for future pc&i funding levels in assessing future funding levels for executive branch agencies , a common practice is to assume or predict that the figure in coming years will likely be close to where it has been in previous years .

while this method can be of analytical and planning value , for an agency like the coast guard , which goes through periods with less acquisition of major platforms and periods with more acquisition of major platforms , this approach might not always be the best approach , at least for the pc&i account .

more important , in relation to maintaining congress's status as a co - equal branch of government , including the preservation and use of congressional powers and prerogatives , an analysis that assumes or predicts that future funding levels will resemble past funding levels can encourage an artificially narrow view of congressional options regarding future funding levels , depriving congress of agency in the exercise of its constitutional power to set funding levels and determine the composition of federal spending .

past coast guard statements about required pc&i funding level at an october 4 , 2011 , hearing on the coast guard's major acquisition programs before the coast guard and maritime transportation subcommittee of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , the following exchange occurred: represenative frank lobiondo: can you give us your take on what percentage of value must be invested each year to maintain current levels of effort and to allow the coast guard to fully carry out its missions ? .

admiral robert j. papp , commandant of the coast guard: i think i can , mr. chairman .

actually , in discussions and looking at our budget — and i'll give you rough numbers here , what we do now is we have to live within the constraints that we've been averaging about $1.4 billion in acquisition money each year .

if you look at our complete portfolio , the things that we'd like to do , when you look at the shore infrastructure that needs to be taken care of , when you look at renovating our smaller icebreakers and other ships and aircraft that we have , we've done some rough estimates that it would really take close to about $2.5 billion a year , if we were to do all the things that we would like to do to sustain our capital plant .

so i'm just like any other head of any other agency here , as that the end of the day , we're given a top line and we have to make choices and tradeoffs and basically , my tradeoffs boil down to sustaining frontline operations balancing that , we're trying to recapitalize the coast guard and there's where the break is and where we have to define our spending .

an april 18 , 2012 , blog entry stated the following: if the coast guard capital expenditure budget remains unchanged at less than $1.5 billion annually in the coming years , it will result in a service in possession of only 70 percent of the assets it possesses today , said coast guard rear adm. mark butt .

butt , who spoke april 17 [2012] at [a] panel [discussion] during the navy league sea air space conference in national harbor , md. , echoed coast guard commandant robert papp in stating that the service really needs around $2.5 billion annually for procurement .

at a may 9 , 2012 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2013 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the senate appropriations committee , admiral papp testified , "i've gone on record saying that i think the coast guard needs closer to $2 billion dollars a year [in procurement funding] to recapitalize — [to] do proper recapitalization. .

at a may 14 , 2013 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2014 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the senate appropriations committee , admiral papp stated the following regarding the difference between having about $1.0 billion per year rather than about $1.5 billion per year in the pc&i account: well , madam chairman , $500 million — a half a billion dollars — is real money for the coast guard .

so , clearly , we had $1.5 billion in the [fy]13 budget .

it doesn't get everything i would like , but it — it gave us a good start , and it sustained a number of projects that are very important to us .

when we go down to the $1 billion level this year , it gets my highest priorities in there , but we have to either terminate or reduce to minimum order quantities for all the other projects that we have going .

if we're going to stay with our program of record , things that have been documented that we need for our service , we're going to have to just stretch everything out to the right .

and when we do that , you cannot order in economic order quantities .

it defers the purchase .

ship builders , aircraft companies — they have to figure in their costs , and it inevitably raises the cost when you're ordering them in smaller quantities and pushing it off to the right .

plus , it almost creates a death spiral for the coast guard because we are forced to sustain older assets — older ships and older aircraft — which ultimately cost us more money , so it eats into our operating funds , as well , as we try to sustain these older things .

so , we'll do the best we can within the budget .

and the president and the secretary have addressed my highest priorities , and we'll just continue to go on the — on an annual basis seeing what we can wedge into the budget to keep the other projects going .

at a march 12 , 2014 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2015 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the house appropriations committee , admiral papp stated the following: well , that's what we've been struggling with , as we deal with the five - year plan , the capital investment plan , is showing how we are able to do that .

and it will be a challenge , particularly if it sticks at around $1 billion [per year] .

as i've said publicly , and actually , i said we could probably — i've stated publicly before that we could probably construct comfortably at about 1.5 billion [dollars] a year .

but if we were to take care of all the coast guard's projects that are out there , including shore infrastructure that that fleet that takes care of the yemen [sic: inland] waters is approaching 50 years of age , as well , but i have no replacement plan in sight for them because we simply can't afford it .

plus , we need at some point to build a polar icebreaker .

darn tough to do all that stuff when you're pushing down closer to 1 billion [dollars per year] , instead of 2 billion [dollars per year] .

as i said , we could fit most of that in at about the 1.5 billion [dollars per year] level , but the projections don't call for that .

so we are scrubbing the numbers as best we can .

at a march 24 , 2015 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2016 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the house appropriations committee , admiral paul zukunft , admiral papp's successor as commandant of the coast guard , stated the following: i look back to better years in our acquisition budget when we had a — an acquisition budget of — of $1.5 billion .

that allows me to move these programs along at a much more rapid pace and , the quicker i can build these at full - rate production , the less cost it is in the long run as well .

but there's an urgent need for me to be able to deliver these platforms in a timely and also in an affordable manner .

but to at least have a reliable and a predictable acquisition budget would make our work in the coast guard much easier .

but when we see variances of — of 30 , 40% over a period of three or four years , and not knowing what the budget control act may have in store for us going on , yes , we are treading water now but any further reductions , and now i am — i am beyond asking for help .

we are taking on water .

an april 13 , 2017 , press report states the following ( emphasis added ) : [then - ]coast guard commandant adm. paul zukunft on wednesday [april 12] said that for the coast guard to sustain its recapitalization plans and operations the service needs a $2 billion annual acquisition budget that grows modestly overtime to keep pace with inflation .

the coast guard needs a "predictable , reliable" acquisition budget "and within that we need 5 percent annual growth to our operations and maintenance ( o&m ) accounts," zukunft told reporters at a defense writers group breakfast .

inflation will clip 2 to 3 percent from that , but "at 5 percent or so it puts you on a moderate but positive glide slope so you can execute , so you can build the force," he said .

in an interview published on june 1 , 2017 , zukunft said the following ( emphasis added ) : we cannot be more relevant than we are now .

but what we need is predictable funding .

we have been in over 16 continuing resolutions since 2010 .

i need stable and repeatable funding .

an acquisition budget with a floor of $2 billion .

our operating expenses as i said , they've been funded below the budget control act floor for the past five years .

i need 5 percent annualized growth over the next five years and beyond to start growing some of this capability back .

but more importantly , we [need] more predictable , more reliable funding so we can execute what we need to do to carry out the business of the world's best coast guard .

appendix e. great lakes icebreakers this appendix provides a brief discussion of the coast guard's great lakes icebreakers .

the coast guard's current great lakes icebreaker fleet consists of nine cutters: one heavy icebreaker — mackinaw ( wlbb - 30 ) , a 240-foot ship displacing 3,500 tons ; six 140-foot bay - class icebreaking tugs displacing 662 tons each ; and two 225-foot juniper - class seagoing buoy tenders displacing about 2,000 tons each that have a light icebreaking capability .

although mackinaw is referred to as a heavy icebreaker , the word heavy in this instance is being used in the context of great lakes icebreaking — mackinaw is much larger and has more icebreaking capability than the eight other ships listed above .

mackinaw would not , however , qualify as a heavy polar icebreaker , as it is much smaller and has much less icebreaking capability than a heavy polar icebreaker .

coast guard officials have stated that they do not view the procurement of additional great lakes icebreakers as an urgent near - term acquisition need .

in support of this assessment , they cite the capabilities of the current great lakes icebreaking fleet , the relatively young age of mackinaw ( which entered service in 2006 ) , service life extension work being done on the ice - breaking tugs that is designed to add 15 years to their service lives , and canada's own great lakes icebreaking capabilities .

a 2016 coast guard report to congress on the great lakes icebreaking mission stated the following: the current mix of heavy and medium [great lakes] icebreakers is capable of managing priorities and requests for icebreaking in tier 1 and 2 waterways .

when a severe ice season stresses coast guard asset capabilities , the existing agreement and partnership with canada fills the capability gap and brings in extra heavy - icebreaking resources to manage the ice.... [t]he 2014 and 2015 ice seasons were a 20-year anomaly , consuming almost twice as many cutter resource hours as in any other year since 2005 .

the coast guard cannot reliably predict the economic impact of maintaining a single heavy great lakes icebreaker .

additionally , given the extreme conditions when ice coverage exceeds 90 percent , it is not clear that shipping delays would be significantly mitigated by an increase in icebreaking capability .

delays can be associated with several factors such as slow transit speeds , availability of pilots , and simultaneous and competing demand signals for icebreaking services across the great lakes .

the coast guard's position notwithstanding , some members of congress in recent years have expressed interest in the possibility of bolstering the coast guard's great lakes icebreaking fleet by procuring a second icebreaker with capabilities generally similar to those of mackinaw .

interest in this option was reinforced by the winters of 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 , which featured particularly high levels of ice coverage on the great lakes .

the committee report language requiring the above - quoted coast guard report to congress is one example of this interest .

another example is section 820 of the frank lobiondo coast guard authorization act of 2018 ( s. 140 / p.l .

115-282 of december 4 , 2018 ) , which states the following: sec .

820 .

great lakes icebreaker acquisition .

 ( a ) icebreaking on the great lakes. — for fiscal years 2018 and 2019 , the commandant of the coast guard may use funds made available pursuant to section 4902 of title 14 , united states code , as amended by this act , for the construction of an icebreaker that is at least as capable as the coast guard cutter mackinaw to enhance icebreaking capacity on the great lakes .

 ( b ) acquisition plan. — not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , the commandant shall submit a plan to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation of the senate and the committee on transportation and infrastructure of the house of representatives for acquiring an icebreaker described in subsections ( a ) and ( b ) .

such plan shall include — ( 1 ) the details and schedule of the acquisition activities to be completed ; and ( 2 ) a description of how the funding for coast guard acquisition , construction , and improvements that was appropriated under the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( public law 115 – 31 ) will be allocated to support the acquisition activities referred to in paragraph ( 1 ) .

an examination of procurement costs for mackinaw , the national science foundation's ice - capable research ship sikuliaq , new oceanographic research ships being procured for noaa , and opcs suggests that a new mackinaw - sized heavy great lakes icebreaker built in a u.s. shipyard might have a design and construction cost between $175 million and $300 million , depending on its exact capabilities and the acquisition strategy employed .

the design portion of the ship's cost might be reduced if mackinaw's design or the design of some other existing icebreaker were to be used as the parent design .

depending on the capabilities and other work load of the shipyard selected to build the ship , the construction time for a new heavy great lakes icebreaker might be less than that of a new heavy polar icebreaker .

