the indian gaming regulatory act ( igra ) provides a framework for gaming on "indian lands," according to which indian tribes may conduct gaming that need not conform to state law .

the three classes of gaming authorized by igra progress from class i social gaming , through class ii bingo and non - banking card games , to class iii casino gaming .

one of the requirements for class ii and class iii gaming is that the gaming be "located in a state that permits such gaming for any purpose by any person , organization or entity. .

the federal courts have interpreted this to permit tribes to conduct types of gaming permitted in the state without state limits or conditions .

for example , tribes in states that permit "las vegas" nights for charitable purposes may seek a tribal - state compact for class iii casino gaming .

on the other hand , the fact that state law permits some form of lottery or authorizes a state lottery is not , in itself , sufficient to permit a tribal - state compact allowing all forms of casino gaming .

a key concept of igra is its territorial component .

gaming under igra may only take place on "indian lands. .

that term has two meanings: ( 1 ) "all lands within the limits of any indian reservation" ; and ( 2 ) "any lands title to which is either held in trust by the united states for the benefit of any indian tribe or individual or held by any indian tribe or individual subject to restriction by the united states against alienation and over which an indian tribe exercises governmental power. .

under the first alternative , gaming under igra may take place on any land within an indian reservation , whether or not the tribe or a tribal member owns the land and whether or not the land is held in trust .

determining the applicable boundaries of a reservation is a matter of congressional intent and may entail a detailed analysis of the language of statutes ceding tribal reservation land , and the circumstances surrounding their enactment as well the subsequent jurisdictional history of the land in question .

the second alternative has two prongs: ( a ) the land must be in trust or restricted status , and ( b )  the tribe must exercise governmental authority over it .

determining trust or restricted status involves department of the interior ( doi or department ) records .

determining whether a tribe exercises governmental authority may be a simple factual matter involving , for example , whether the tribe has a governmental organization that performs traditional governmental functions such as imposing taxes .

on the other hand , it could be a matter requiring judicial construction of federal statutes .

congress has the power to determine whether to take tribal land into trust .

there are many statutes that require doi to take land into trust for a tribe or an individual indian .

an array of statutes grant the secretary of the interior ( soi ) the discretion to acquire land in trust for individual indian tribes ; principal among them is the wheeler - howard , or indian reorganization act of 1934 ( ira ) .

although the ira has been held by the supreme court to apply only to tribes "under federal jurisdiction" in 1934 , a recent opinion of the solicitor of the department of the interior provides guidance on how tribes may be able to satisfy that requirement .

procedures for land acquisition are specified in 25 c.f.r. , part 151 .

by this process , indian owners of fee land , that is , land owned outright and unencumbered by liens that impair marketability , may apply to have their fee title conveyed to the soi to be held in trust for their benefit .

among the effects of this process are the removal of the land from state and local tax rolls and the inability of the indian owners to sell the land or have it taken from them by legal process to collect on a debt or for foreclosure of a mortgage .

in determining whether to approve an application to take land into trust under this statute , the soi is required to consider a number of factors and to inform "state and local governments having regulatory jurisdiction over the land to be acquired," giving them "30 days in which to provide written comments as to the acquisition's potential impacts on regulatory jurisdiction , real property taxes and special assessments. .

lands acquired in trust after igra's enactment are generally not eligible for gaming if they are outside of and not contiguous to the boundaries of a tribe's reservation .

there are exceptions to this policy , however , that allow gaming on certain "after acquired" or "newly acquired" land .

one exception , sometimes referred to as a two - part determination , permits gaming on lands newly taken into trust with the consent of the governor of the state in which the land is located after the soi ( 1 ) consults with state and local officials , including officials of other tribes ; ( 2 ) determines "that a gaming establishment on the newly acquired lands would be in the best interest of the indian tribe and its members" ; and ( 3 ) determines that gaming "would not be detrimental to the surrounding community. .

other exceptions permit gaming on after - acquired land and do not require gubernatorial consent , consultation with local officials , or soi determination as to tribal best interest and effect upon local community .

they relate to any of five circumstances: 1 .

any tribe without a reservation on october 17 , 1988 , is allowed to have gaming on newly acquired lands in oklahoma that are either within the boundaries of the tribe's former reservation or contiguous to other land held in trust or restricted status by soi for the tribe .

2 .

if a tribe had no reservation on october 17 , 1988 , and is "presently" located in a state other than oklahoma , it may have gaming on newly acquired lands in that state that are "within the indian tribe's last recognized reservation within the state. .

3 .

a tribe may have gaming on lands taken into trust as a land claim settlement .

4 .

a tribe may have gaming on lands taken into trust as the initial reservation of a tribe newly recognized under the bureau of indian affairs' process for recognizing groups as indian tribes .

5 .

a tribe may have gaming on lands representing "the restoration of lands for an indian tribe that is restored to federal recognition. .

the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) of the department of the interior ( doi ) issued a final rule for gaming on newly acquired trust lands , 25 c.f.r. , part 292 , on may 20 , 2008 .

the rule applies to all requests under 25 u.s.c .

section 2719 on which there has not been final agency action prior to june 19 , 2008 , the effective date of the regulation .

it contains an exception for opinions issued by the doi or the national indian gaming commission ( nigc ) before that date that reserve "full discretion to qualify , withdraw or modify such opinions. .

in addition to specifying procedures for securing determinations as to whether land may qualify for one of igra's exceptions to its prohibition on gaming on newly acquired trust lands , the rule specifies factors that will be considered in making determinations under the statute .

the rule covers both the two - part secretarial determination that gaming would benefit the tribe and not be detrimental to the surrounding community and the other exceptions to igra's ban on gaming on lands acquired after october 17 , 1988: lands contiguous to the reservation boundaries ; lands taken into trust on the basis of land claims settlements ; initial reservations for newly acknowledged tribes ; and lands restored to newly restored tribes .

requests for secretarial determinations must be directed to the soi .

land - into - trust applications or applications requiring a determination of reservation status are to be directed to the bia's office of indian gaming ; requests for opinions on whether a particular parcel meets one of the other exceptions may be directed either to the bia's office of indian gaming or the nigc .

on january 3 , 2008 , less than five months before promulgating the final rule applicable to gaming on newly acquired lands , doi issued departmental "guidance on taking off - reservation land into trust for gaming purposes" ( guidance ) , which it rescinded on june 13 , 2011 .

virtually simultaneously with issuing the guidance and based on the criteria in the guidance , the department sent letters to approximately 22 tribes either rejecting their applications to take off - reservation land into trust for indian gaming or returning them as incomplete .

the obama administration subjected the guidance to scrutiny and withdrew it on june 13 , 2011 , following government - to - government consultations with tribal leaders and a review of bia's land acquisition regulations and those applicable to gaming on lands taken into trust after october 17 , 1988 .

the rescinded guidance was premised on an interpretation of the indian reorganization act of 1934 ( ira ) , which often provides the statutory basis for bia to take land into trust for an indian tribe , as primarily intended to be a means for tribes to consolidate reservation lands that were lost through the earlier allotment policy , which the ira repudiated .

the 2008 guidance , emphasized the criteria set forth in 25 c.f.r .

section 151.11 ( b ) requiring bia to scrutinize anticipated benefits from off - reservation acquisitions .

a key element of the guidance was an assessment of how much negative effect there would be on reservation life if proposed gaming facilities are located farther than "a commutable distance from the reservation," including ( 1 ) how the on - reserva tion unemployment rate will be affected ; ( 2 ) the effect of any exodus of tribal members from the reservation on reservation life ; ( 3 ) if tribal members leave the reservation , the impact on their descendants in terms of tribal membership and identification with the tribe ; and ( 4 ) specific on - reservation benefits of the proposal , including whether jobs will be created .

the guidance presumed that state and local governments at a distance from a reservation would be unfamiliar with indian trust land jurisdictional issues and that distance from the reservation will hamper the efficiency of tribal government operations .

it virtually required intergovernmental cooperative agreements and compatibility with state and local zoning and land use requirements .

doi conducted consultation sessions with tribal leaders throughout the united states focusing on the need for the guidance ; whether any of the provisions of the regulation on qualifying newly acquired land for gaming , 25 c.f.r. , part 292 , subparts a and c , as previously promulgated , should be revised ; and whether compliance with the land acquisition regulation , 25 c.f.r. , part 151 , should come prior to the two - part determination for taking off - reservation land into trust .

the result of the review was a determination that both regulations were fully sufficient and that the guidance should be withdrawn .

the guidance was found to be unnecessary for processing applications to qualify "off - reservation" land for gaming under 25 c.f.r. , part 292 , and potentially confusing with respect to processing applications to take land into trust , under 25 c.f.r. , part 151 , in situations where gaming was contemplated .

there was no change recommended with respect to the question of whether the application for gaming should accompany the application for taking land into trust .

the current rule permits this but does not require it .

the review and consultation process was the result of a june 18 , 2010 , memorandum issued by secretary of the interior , ken salazar , directing the assistant secretary of the interior for indian affairs to review doi's decisionmaking guidance and regulatory standards with respect to handling applications to take land into trust for gaming .

in the memorandum , the secretary required doi , in connection with this process , to "engage in government - to - government consultations … to obtain input from indian tribes. .

the review covered both land - into - trust acquisitions on an off - reservation basis under the two - part determination and "reservation and equal footing exceptions. .

the latter category covers acquisitions on - reservation or under the exceptions for settlement of a land claim , part of an initial reservation , or restoration of lands .

in ordering the consultation , the secretary noted that , as of the date of the memorandum , there were nine applications requiring a two - part determination , and that consultation was likely to mean a delay in processing those application , but that "given the department's discretion in this area , it is appropriate that we take the necessary time to identify and adopt principled and transparent criteria regarding such gaming determinations," and "deliberate government - to - government consultations will lead us to the implementation of a sound policy in this area. .

the secretary noted that , since igra's enactment , only 36 applications have been approved as settlements of land claims , initial reservations , or restoration of lands ; and that , at the time of the memorandum , 24 such applications were pending before the department .

he also stated that decisions on these applications "largely depends upon a legal determination" and recommended that the doi solicitor's office provide a determination on such applications .

doi conducted six government - to - government consultations and elicited the following input on the issue of whether the guidance should be modified , rescinded , or become part of 25 c.f.r. , part 292: many tribes recommended that the department rescind the guidance memorandum because it was not subject to tribal consultation and because it was , in their view , inconsistent with broader federal indian policy .

other tribes contended that the guidance memorandum was unreasonable because it makes inappropriate judgments regarding what is in the 'best interests' of tribes , assumes that a tribe will experience a reduced benefit if its gaming facility is located at a certain distance from its reservation , and equates 'reduced benefit' with a harm to the tribe .

other tribes maintained that the guidance memorandum unfairly prejudices tribes with reservations located at great distances from population centers and ignores historical facts regarding the locations where the federal government created reservations .

some tribal leaders expressed support for the primary objective of the guidance memorandum , which is to limit off - reservation gaming to areas close to existing reservations .

assistant secretary for indian affairs , larry echo hawk , in a june 13 , 2011 , memorandum , set forth the statutory and regulatory requirements which tribes must satisfy in order to gain approval for a gaming facility on land acquired in trust after igra's enactment under the "off - reservation" exception .

he noted that decisions on gaming involve particularized facts varying with each tribe , and that the january 2008 guidance failed to fully provide a means for considering , on a case - by - case basis , the array of factors which should be considered in each decision .

according to his analysis , the guidance established a virtually inflexible approach that assumes that a distant casino will have a deleterious effect on tribal life .

his final conclusion was that the existing regulation governing gaming on after - acquired lands provides "comprehensive and rigorous standards that set forth the department's authority and duties when considering applications for off - reservation gaming.... [and] adequately provide standards for evaluating such acquisitions...." he characterized the regulation as offering "strict and transparent standards for evaluating tribal applications to conduct off - reservation gaming. .

with respect to the general land acquisition regulation under 25 c.f.r. , part 151 , the conclusion was that the guidance was unnecessary and that it might "unnecessarily constrain the department's decision making process. .

under the regulation , according to assistant secretary echo hawk's memorandum , the secretary must weigh the impact of the trust acquisition on specified aspects of state and local jurisdiction in a manner that considers all the factors in the regulation , and , unlike the guidance , the regulation does not mandate disapproval of an application on a single issue .

several bills proposed in the 111 th congress providing federal recognition or authorizing the placement of land into federal trust status contained provisions aimed at precluding gaming .

two of these bills were enacted: section 2601 ( h ) ( 4 ) ( a ) of p.l .

111-11 , 123 stat .

991 , 1115 , transfers certain federal land to the soi to be held in trust for the benefit of the washoe tribe and states that such land "shall not be eligible , or considered to have been taken into trust , for class ii or class iii gaming ( as those terms are defined in section 4 of the indian gaming regulatory act ( 25 u.s.c .

2703 ) ) . .

p.l .

111-323 prohibits gaming on federal land transferred to the hoh tribe .

two bills enacted in the 112 th congress contained gaming prohibitions in connection with land - into - trust acquisitions: p.l .

112-97 , relating to land to be taken into trust for the quileute indian tribe in the state of washington , and p.l .

112-212 , transferring certain federal land in trust for the bridgeport indian colony .

p.l .

113-179 , the gun lake trust land reaffirmation act , ratified the doi's may 15 , 2005 , trust acquisition of the land at issue in match - e - be - nash - she - wish band of - pottawatomi indians v. patchak and required that any federal court action relating to that land should be dismissed .

in addition , two bills enacted in the 113 th congress contained gaming prohibitions in connection with land - into - trust acquisitions: p.l .

113-134 , providing for the trust acquisition of certain federal land for the pascua yaqui tribe of arizona ; and p.l .

113-127 , taking certain bureau of land management land into trust for the benefit of the shingle springs band of miwok indians and prohibiting igra class ii and class iii gaming on that land .

s. 477 , the tribal gaming eligibility act , would have required tribes to satisfy new standards before newly acquired lands could be found to be eligible for igra gaming .

it would have applied to three of the exceptions to igra's general prohibition of gaming on lands acquired after igra's enactment: land claim settlement , initial reservation for a newly acknowledged tribe , or restoration of lands for a newly restored tribe .

under this bill , for a tribe to rely on one of these exceptions for gaming on newly acquired trust land , before the land is taken into trust , the tribe must have "received a written determination from the secretary that the land is eligible for gaming" that included findings that the tribe has "a substantial , direct , modern connection to the land" and "a substantial , direct , aboriginal connection to the land. .

under the bill , for a tribe with a reservation to establish a modern connection to the land , the tribe would be required to show both geographic and temporal connections to the land .

the land would need to be within a 25-mile radius of either the tribal headquarters ( for tribes with a reservation ) or the residence of "a significant number" of tribal members ( for tribes without a reservation ) .

a tribe which has a reservation would have to show both modern and aboriginal connections to the land and wait five years after restoration or recognition to be eligible for one of these exceptions .

a tribe without a reservation would need to show modern and aboriginal connections to the land , and ( 1 ) the land must be part of its first request for newly acquired land after being recognized or restored ; ( 2 ) the application to take the land into trust would need to be received by the secretary within five years of recognition or restoration ; and ( 3 ) the tribe may not be conducting gaming on any other land .

the modern connection to the land requirement means that any tribe seeking one of these exemptions would have to demonstrate "a temporal connection to , or routine presence on , the land" during the period from october 17 , 1988 , to the date of the secretary's determination .

to determine whether a tribe satisfies the requirement for an aboriginal connection to the land , the proposed legislation contains a list of factors which the secretary may consider , including historical presence on the land ; lineal descent or cultural affiliation of members based on 43 c.f.r .

section 10.14 ; whether the land is in an area where the tribe's language has been used ; whether the land is near tribal "culturally significant sites" ; whether the tribe was officially removed from the land ; and other factors showing tribal presence on the land antedating the presence of "nonnative individuals , the federal government , or any other sovereign entity. .

other bills not enacted would have provided for federal recognition of tribal status or taking land into trust for a tribe along with explicit provisions relating to gaming .

among them were the following: s. 416 / h.r .

841 would have treated land acquired in trust for the confederated tribes of the grand ronde community of oregon as on - reservation lands for purposes of considering applications to take the land into trust and specifies that land taken into trust within a specific area after october 17 , 1988 ( the date of enactment of igra ) , would be part of the reservation .

s. 1074 / h.r .

2190 , the thomasina e. jordan indian tribes of virginia recognition act , would have provided federal recognition for six virginia indian tribes: the chickahominy indian tribe ; the chickahominy indian tribe - eastern division ; the upper mattaponi tribe ; the rappahannock tribe , inc. ; the monacan indian nation ; and the nansemond indian tribe .

it included provisions prohibiting each of these tribes from "conducting gaming activities as a matter of claimed inherent authority or under the authority of any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act ( 25 u.s.c .

2701 et seq. ) .

or under any regulations thereunder promulgated by the secretary or the national indian gaming commission. .

s. 1167 / h.r .

2455 , the elko motocross and tribal conveyance act , included a provision transferring approximately 373 acres of bureau of land management land to be held in trust for the te - moak tribe of western shoshone indians of nevada for certain specified purposes .

the legislation would have provided that the land "shall not be eligible , or considered to have been taken into trust , for class ii gaming or class iii gaming ( as those terms are defined in section 4 of the indian gaming regulatory act ( 25 u.s.c .

2703 ) ) . .

h.r .

323 , the muscogee nation of florida federal recognition act , would have recognized and authorized the soi to take land into trust for the muscogee nation of florida .

it contains explicit authority for the soi to take land into trust for the muscogee nation of florida under 25 c.f.r. , part 151 .

s. 402 , an amendment to the siletz tribe indian restoration act , would have authorized the secretary to take land into trust for the siletz indian tribe , subject to specified conditions , provided that the land is within the boundaries of the original 1855 siletz coast reservation , and that the real property taken into trust is not to be "eligible , or used , for any gaming activity carried out under the indian gaming regulatory act.... " s. 1132 / h.r .

1803 , the lumbee recognition act , would have provided for federal recognition of the lumbee tribe of north carolina and authorized the secretary to take land into trust for the tribe .

it includes a provision prohibiting the tribe from conducting "gaming activities as a matter of claimed inherent authority or under the authority of any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act … or under any regulations thereunder promulgated by the secretary of the interior or the national indian gaming commission. .

h.r .

2442 would have provided federal recognition for the duwamish tribe and authorized the soi to take land into trust within an area to be identified , within 10 years , by the soi as the aboriginal homelands of the duwamish tribe .

h.r .

1225 , the samish indian nation homelands act of 2012 , subject to certain conditions , would have required the secretary to take certain land into trust for the samish indian nation and prohibited igra gaming on the land .

h.r .

2455 would have transferred certain bureau of land management land to the secretary in trust for the te - moak tribe of western shoshone indians of nevada and prohibited igra gaming on the land .

the bill would also have transferred land to be held in trust for each of the following tribes: fort mcdermott paiute and shoshone tribe ; the shoshone paiute tribes of the duck valley indian reservation ; the summit lake paiute tribe ; the south fork band council ; the reno - sparks indian colony ; and the pyramid lake paiute tribe .

h.r .

3313 , the santa ynez band of chumash mission indians land transfer act of 2013 , would have authorized the secretary to take certain land into trust for the tribe and prohibited igra gaming on the land .

h.r .

4018 , the blackwater trading post land transfer act , would have required the secretary to take 50.3 acres in pinal county , arizona , into trust for the benefit of the gila river indian community of the gila river indian reservation , and prohibited gaming on the land under igra or inherent tribal authority .

two bills enacted in the 114 th congress contained gaming prohibitions in connection with land - into - trust acquisitions: p.l .

114-69 , the albuquerque indian school land transfer act , requiring the soi to take certain land into trust for 19 pueblos and specifying that "[n]o class i gaming , class ii gaming , or class iii gaming ... shall be carried out on the federal land taken into trust" and p.l .

114-181 , transferring in trust "for nongaming purposes" certain bureau of land management land in california , for the benefit of the susanville rancheria and stating that "[c]lass ii and class iii gaming ... shall not be permitted at any time on the land. .

s. 132 / h.r .

308 , the oregon and california land grant act of 2015 , includes provisions that would transfer certain land to be held in trust for the benefit of the cow creek bank of umpqua tribe of indians and make such land ineligible for gaming under igra .

s. 152 / h.r .

308 , the keep the promise act of 2015 , would prohibit , until january 1 , 2027 , all class ii and class iii igra gaming on land within the phoenix , arizona , metropolitan area , that has been acquired after april 9 , 2013 .

s. 175 / h.r .

387 , the economic development through tribal land exchange act , would require the soi "pursuant to all applicable state and local laws," to take certain land in the city of banning into trust for the morongo band of mission indians .

s. 414 , the california desert conservation and recreation act of 2015 , contains provisions which would require the soi to take certain land into trust as the lone pine paiute shoshone reservation addition and stating that that land is ineligible for igra gaming .

s. 465 / h.r .

872 , the thomasina e. jordan indian tribes of virginia recognition act .

this legislation would provide federal recognition for six virginia indian tribes: the chickahominy indian tribe ; the chickahominy indian tribe - eastern division ; the upper mattaponi tribe ; the rappahannock tribe , inc. ; the monacan indian nation ; and the nansemond indian tribe .

it includes provisions prohibiting each of these tribes from "conducting gaming activities as a matter of claimed inherent authority or under the authority of any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act ( 25 u.s.c .

2701 et seq. ) .

or under any regulations thereunder promulgated by the secretary or the national indian gaming commission. .

s. 814 / h.r .

1438 , the oregon coastal lands act , includes provisions which would transfer certain land to be held in trust for the benefit of the confederated tribes of coos , lower umpqua , and siuslaw indians and make such land ineligible for gaming under igra .

s. 815 / h.r .

1436 , the cow creek umpqua land conveyance act , includes provisions which would transfer certain land to be held in trust for the benefit of the cow creek band of umpqua tribe of indians and declare it ineligible for gaming under igra .

s. 817 / h.r .

3211 would provide for the addition of certain real property to the reservation of the siletz tribe in oregon and would state that the property is not eligible for gaming under igra .

s. 472 / h.r .

925 , the douglas county conservation act of 2015 , would require transfer of 1,016 acres of federal land to the soi to be placed in trust for the benefit of the washoe tribe of nevada and california .

included is a provision stating that the land is not eligible for gaming under igra .

s. 1436 / h.r .

2733 , the nevada native nations land act , would require the soi to convey approximately 71,055 acres from the bureau of land management to five federally recognized tribes in nevada ( fort mcdermitt paiute and shoshone tribe , summit lake paiute tribe , reno - sparks indian colony , pyramid lake paiute tribe , and the duckwater shoshone tribe ) and approximately 82 acres from the forest service to the shoshone paiute tribes of the duck valley indian reservation to be held in trust for the benefit of those tribes .

included is a statement that the land "shall not be eligible , or considered to have been taken into trust , for class ii gaming or class iii gaming. .

s. 1761 / h.r .

2212 would take into trust approximately 301 acres of bureau of land management land for the benefit of the susanville indian rancheria and state that "[c]lass ii gaming and class iii gaming ... shall not be allowed at any time on the land. .

s. 1822 / h.r .

3079 would place in trust certain u.s. forest service land in tuolumne county , california , for the benefit of the tuolumne band of me - wuk indians and state that "[c]lass ii and class iii gaming ... shall not be permitted at any time on the land."s .

1986 , the moapa band of paiutes land conveyance act , would mandate a transfer of certain bureau of land management and bureau of reclamation land to the soi to be held in trust for the moapa band of paiutes and make the land ineligible for gaming under igra .

s. 2285 , the lumbee recognition act .

this legislation would provide for federal recognition of the lumbee tribe of north carolina and authorize the secretary to take land located within robeson county , north carolina , into trust for the tribe .

it includes a provision stating that "[l]and taken into trust under this section shall be eligible , or considered to have been taken into trust , for class ii gaming or class iii gaming. .

h.r .

184 , the lumbee recognition act , would provide for federal recognition of the lumbee tribe of north carolina and authorize the secretary to take land located within robeson county , north carolina , into trust for the tribe .

it includes a provision stating that "[t]he tribe may not conduct gaming activities as a matter of claimed inherent authority or under the authority of any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act ... or under any regulations thereunder promulgated by the secretary or the national indian gaming commission. .

h.r .

496 , the alabama hills national scenic area establishment act , would require the soi to take 132 acres into trust as part of the lone pine paiute - shoshone reservation and provide that gaming under igra would not allowed to be conducted on that land .

h.r .

1157 , the santa ynez band of chumash mission indians land transfer act , would require the soi to take certain land into trust .

it includes a statement that "[t]he tribe may not conduct .... gaming activities [on the land] ... as a matter of claimed inherent authority ... or under any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act ... and regulations promulgated by the secretary of the interior or the national indian gaming commission under that act. .

h.r .

1632 , the samish indian nation land conveyance act of 2015 , would require the soi to take certain land into trust for the benefit of the samish indian tribe .

it includes a statement that "[t]he tribe may not conduct gaming activities on land taken into trust pursuant to this act , either as a matter of claimed inherent authority , under any federal law ... , or under regulations promulgated by the secretary of the interior or the national indian gaming commission. .

h.r .

2009 , the pascua yaqui tribe land conveyance act , would declare that "subject to valid existing rights and payment to the united states of fair market value," certain federal lands are to be held in trust for the pascua yaqui tribe .

it includes a statement that "[t]he tribe may not conduct .... gaming activities [on the land] ... as a matter of claimed inherent authority ... or under any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act ... and regulations promulgated by the secretary of the interior or the national indian gaming commission under that act. .

h.r .

2538 , the lytton rancheria homelands act , states that certain lands owned by the lytton rancheria are "hereby taken into trust" and "shall be part of the tribe's reservation .

it includes a provision that the lands "shall not be eligible for gaming in the indian gaming regulatory act. .

there are also provisions stating that future trust acquisitions in sonoma county for the tribe will not be eligible for gaming until after march 15 , 2036 , and making certain lands in sonoma county permanently ineligible for igra gaming .

h.r .

4688 , the douglas county economic development and conservation act of 2016 , would require transfer of 1,016 acres of federal land to the soi to be placed in trust for the benefit of the washoe tribe of nevada and california and state that this land is not eligible for gaming under igra .

