since 1872 , hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the general mining law , which allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting , staking claims , exploration and development , and extraction without payment of a royalty .

and until annual moratoria were imposed by congress starting in 1994 , claimants on hardrock mineral lands could take title to both the mineral rights and the land , after paying to the u.s. department of interior ( doi ) the required fee or either $2.50 or $5.00 per acre , and after demonstrating diligent development of the mining claim .

proposals to reform the mining law have been made almost from the time it was signed by president grant , and throughout its 135 year history .

many presidents — presidents roosevelt , nixon , carter , and clinton — have endeavored to reform the law , as have many in congress .

one of the contentious issues has been that the law makes no provision for the payment of a royalty on the production of the hardrock minerals from federal lands .

the royalty - free treatment of the hardrock mineral industry is unlike mining arrangements ( leases ) on private and state lands , mining of the leasable energy minerals ( coal , oil , and gas ) on federal lands , and even unlike hardrock minerals on acquired ( as contrasted with public ) federal lands , all of which provide for a royalty payment to the landowner .

in recent years , the congress has repeatedly considered , but not passed , reform of the mining law , including , in part , to require the payment of royalties .

in 1990 , committees held several hearings on proposed mining law reform , eg , on s. 1126 , ( 101 st congress ) which among other things would have imposed an 8% ad - valorem royalty .

in 1993 , president clinton's comprehensive economic proposal , part of the state of the union address , included claims fees and a 12.5% ad - valorem royalty .

several bills were introduced in the 103 rd congress to impose a royalty ( h.r .

322 , h.r .

1708 , s. 257 , s. 375 , and s. 775 ) and hearings were held in 1993 .

s. 775 passed the senate in may 1993 and was incorporated into h.r .

322 which was approved by the house in november 1993 .

h.r .

322 went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly because of opposition from western lawmakers , mainly over the royalty issue .

in 1995 , there was an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate a royalty as part of the fy1996 budget .

in its fy1998 budget proposal , and again in fy2001 , the clinton administration proposed a 5% "net smelter" royalty but , like previous efforts , this failed .

at this writing , the major reform bill in the house — there is currently no senate bill — is h.r .

2262 , which , among other things , would impose an 8% ad - valorem royalty based on the value of the minerals as defined under the gross income definition of the income tax code ( essentially the mining firm's sales revenue ) and use the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites .

the 8% royalty would apply to new production .

production from existing mining operations would pay a 4% royalty .

on october 2 , 2007 , the subcommittee on energy and minerals of the house natural resources committee held a hearing on this bill .

a substitute bill was marked up and approved by the full committee ( the house natural resources committee ) on october 23 .

the house approved this committee bill , with minor amendments , on november 1 by a vote of 244 to 166 .

a summary of the provisions of the house - approved version of h.r .

2262 is described in the appendix to this report .

the comparable bill in the senate is s. 2750 , which also proposes an 8% royalty on new production and a 4% royalty on production from existing leases .

this report analyzes the economic issues underlying proposals to impose a royalty on hardrock ( locatable ) minerals on public domain lands .

it also discusses the federal tax treatment of the hardrock mineral industry .

in particular , the report addresses the following questions: what exactly is a royalty , and how does a royalty differ from other rental payments or , for that matter , taxes ? .

were a royalty imposed , what would be the best way to structure such a royalty ? .

should the royalty be an ad - valorem type ( i.e. , one based on the value or price of the mineral ) , a fixed unit based royalty ( i.e. , one based only on mineral output ) , or a net profits royalty ( i.e. , one based on the net income or profit of the mining company ) ? .

if there is to be an ad - valorem royalty based on price or value , at what stage in the mineral producing process should value ( or price ) be measured ? .

should it be based on gross income ( value of the mineral at the mine ) or net smelter return ( the value at the smelter less certain deductions ) ? .

when does a mining company produce a saleable or marketable product whose value can be measured ? .

what deductions , if any , should be allowed from that price ? .

what should the royalty rate be ? .

and how does congress decide what a fair royalty rate is ? .

how does one balance the various considerations , such as efficiency and administrative considerations in deciding whether to impose a royalty ? .

what would be the economic effects of introducing a system of royalty payments and other rental payments where one did not exist ? .

would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the u.s. hardrock mining industry ? .

finally , what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay , and do they have any bearing on the question of whether to impose , or the magnitude of , a royalty ? .

the first section of this report provides a brief history of the 1872 mining law , including the mineral leasing system and royalty payment requirements for the energy minerals .

the second section discusses the economic rationale for the payment of royalties on hardrock minerals .

it ( 1 ) addresses the question of the appropriate economic basis for payment of royalties to the federal government as landowner , ( 2 ) compares royalties based on market value with alternative criteria such as royalties based on gross income from depletion and net smelter return , ( 3 ) examines the question of an appropriate royalty rate , and ( 4 ) discusses some of the likely economic effects of royalty - free provision of public lands , as well as the effects of introducing a royalty .

the fifth and final section examines the federal tax provisions , including the three tax subsidies that affect the hardrock minerals industry , as well as claims and patent fees that the industry pays .

note that the question of payment of royalties from hardrock mineral production on public lands is part of a much broader debate relating to reform of the mining law of 1872 , which encompasses many other issues — such as whether public domain lands should be patented — which are not addressed in this report .

the general mining law of 1872 ( 17 stat .

91 ) can be traced to 16 th century english and spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs , which , as practiced in colonial america , formed the basis for the granting of the rights to lands including those containing minerals , including a share of the minerals ( a royalty ) .

one of the earliest statutes was the "royal code of 1783. .

this spanish law became the basis for acquiring mineral rights in spanish colonies in the americas , and was used to settle claims disputes .

also , the land charters issued by england to the original thirteen colonies provided generally that 1 / 5 th of the minerals on chartered lands were reserved for the crown .

independence for the american colonies meant that issues of land and mineral ownership between the national government , the states , localities , and even private individuals had to be decided .

several ordinances were enacted — the ordinance of 1785 , the land act of 1796 , and the preemption act of 1841 — but these did not address the question of mineral royalties specifically .

the "california gold rush" of 1849 and the silver strike in nevada of 1860 caused a significant westward population migration for the purposes of prospecting and claiming public domain lands .

during this pre - mining law period , the issue of land ownership and easy and free access to federal lands was very controversial and fiercely debated .

the congress had approved several temporary leasing or land sales acts for gold , silver , lead , and iron — which were administered by the war department — but prospectors disregarded them , trespassed onto federal lands , laid their claims anyway , and paid no royalty to the federal government .

also after the civil war , congressional policy became more openly geared to encouraging westward migration , and the economic development of the west .

these practices and policies became embodied in two statutes that became the precursors to the general mining law of 1872: the lode law of 1866 , which provided free and open access to federal lands with lode deposits for prospecting , claiming , and patenting , and the placer act of 1870 , which applied the same provisions to placer deposits .

the u.s. hardrock minerals industry is subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for - profit businesses , paying federal income , payroll , and other federal taxes .

the federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income , defined generally as gross revenue ( sales ) minus interest , wages , the cost of purchased inputs , and an allowance for depreciation .

reduced tax rates , either 15% , 25% , or 34% , apply to "smaller" corporations , those earning less than $10 million of income .

in addition , corporate stockholders pay individual income taxes on their corporate - source capital gains and dividends .

as business entities , hardrock mining companies benefit from many different types of untargeted tax incentives , provisions that are generally available to non - mining businesses , as well as some tax provisions specifically targeted toward mining .

two untargeted or general tax benefits are the §199 manufacturing deduction and accelerated depreciation .

under irc §199 , "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction , as a business expense , for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid that are allocable to the domestic production during the taxable year .

the deduction was 3% of income for 2006 , is currently 6% , and is scheduled to increase to 9% when fully phased in by 2010 .

for the domestic mining industry ( which includes the oil and gas industry ) , the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured , produced , or extracted in whole or in significant part in the united states. .

note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction , which means that domestic firms in the business of extracting hardrock minerals from underground reservoirs or deposits qualify for the deduction .

effectively , the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate .

for example , at the top marginal corporate tax rate of 35% , which typically applies to large corporations such as hardrock mining companies , the current deduction of 6% is equivalent to a marginal corporate income tax rate of 32.9% ( 35% x 0.94 ) rather than 35% .

another untargeted or general tax provision that is important to the hardrock mineral companies is accelerated depreciation — the rules that determine how much a business may deduct for the depreciation of its capital equipment and structures .

this deduction is intended to provide a business reasonable allowance for the exhaustion and wear and tear ( i.e. , depreciation ) of business property .

it is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit ( as discussed below ) .

the present depreciation treatment is known as the modified accelerated cost recovery system ( irc §168 ) .

generally , under this system , assets are depreciated for regular tax purposes over a specified recovery period , and by applying one of the accelerated depreciation methods prescribed for each class of property , including the 200% declining balance method ( the double declining balance method ) or the 150% declining balance method or formula .

the annual depreciation deductions are determined by applying this formula to the assigned recovery period .

the applicable recovery periods are prescribed for each property class .

mining equipment , assets used in the mining , quarrying , milling , and beneficiating of metallic and nonmetallic minerals , are assigned a seven - year recovery period .

this system also allows producers to use a depreciation method ( as opposed to the recovery period ) that maximizes the value of the deduction over time .

this is more advantageous than the theoretical treatment , which would call for a depreciation schedule based on the actual economic depreciation — a longer recovery period and a less accelerated formula , which increases the tax value of the deduction ( or equivalently , reduces the effective marginal tax rate on the income generated by the equipment ) .

given that hardrock mineral producers are highly capital intensive and that the equipment used ( stripping shovels , drills , bulldozers , drag lines , and haulers ) can cost tens of millions of dollars , the accelerated depreciation provision can be relatively important .

in addition , at the federal level there are three special , or targeted , tax preferences available to the mining industry generally , that are also available to hardrock mining firms .

one important special tax break available to the hardrock mineral industry is expensing of exploration and development expenditures , i.e. , the deduction in the year incurred of costs that are essentially capital in nature ( irc §616 and §617 ) .

before a mine reaches the producing stage , mining companies incur geological and geophysical ( or surveying , and reconnaissance investigation ) costs , costs for ascertaining the existence and location of a mine , and costs for determining the quantity and quality of the deposit .

these include the costs of staking the claim , removal of property line obstructions , limited removal of overburden ( the removal of large amounts of overburden would indicate that a deposit may have already been found and the mine may be in a different stage ) , and limited sluicing .

exploration expenditures include the costs of surveying , test pitting , trenching , drilling , driving of exploration tunnels and adits , and similar types of work .

the costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost .

expenditures for exploratory drilling from within a producing mine to ascertain the existence of what appears ( on the basis of all the facts and circumstances known at the time of the expenditure ) to be a different ore deposit are also considered exploration expenditures .

these types of costs are all deductible rather than capitalized .

expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals in commercially marketable quantities has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures , and these also qualify for expensing treatment .

these are costs associated with bringing the mine to production .

for example , the costs of constructing or sinking a mine shaft , or the costs of driving tunnels and galleries , are development costs , which may be expensed .

activities associated with development are building roads , clearing the land , and other activities to prepare a site for the production stage .

there are several limitations to expensing of mine exploration and development costs .

first , expensing applies only to domestic mines ; exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight - line amortization .

second , corporate mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development ; the remaining 30% must be amortized over five years , i.e. , deducted evenly over 60 months ( irc §291 ( b ) ) .

third , both exploration and development costs must be recaptured ( i.e. , taken back ) once the mine is opened and production commences ( for exploration expenses ) or when the mine is sold ( for development expenses ) .

recapture is accomplished by either including the amount expensed as ordinary income or by subtracting it from the percentage depletion allowance .

this makes it especially important for mining companies to determine when exploration ends and development begins .

once a mine reaches the producing stage , a producer may deduct a certain percentage of the gross income — as specified by law — as an allowance for depletion .

the percentage depletion allowance is a tax deduction against the federal income tax available to a mining firm for the costs of depleting a mineral reserve , which is part of the total production costs deductible to derive net taxable income .

the depletion allowance or deduction is intended to give the mineral producer a deduction for the depletion of the investment in the mine , to account for the loss ( depreciation ) of capital , to reflect the physical and economic depletion of the mineral reserve as the mineral is being extracted ( i.e. , the wasting of the asset ) .

it is analogous to the allowance for depreciation of equipment and structures and other assets that is available to all businesses .

in theory the depletion allowance should be based on the actual investment cost of the mine , and the annual deduction should be based on the actual output of the mine ( its actual rate of depletion ) .

this is called cost depletion .

unlike the annual depreciation deduction , however , which is calculated based on a taxpayer's actual investment cost of the property ( equipment and structures ) , a recovery period corresponding to that property , and an annual rate of deduction over that recovery period , the percentage depletion deduction for a mine is calculated as a percentage of "gross income" ( annual sales revenue ) irrespective of the actual investment in the mineral reserve ( the mine ) .

that is why percentage depletion is a tax subsidy , preference , or tax expenditure .

any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidy or incentive because the present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment .

in other words , the total amounts that can be recovered through percentage depletion generally exceed the total investment cost of the property .

this is true even with the net - income limitation , which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine ( irc §613 ( a ) ) .

using cost depletion , the total cost recovered cannot exceed the actual investment in the property .

table 4 shows percentage depletion rates for most minerals , including hardrock minerals .

as this table shows , the allowance is available to virtually all mineral producers except integrated oil and gas producers , although the highest rates available are for the hardrock minerals .

percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium .

most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22% , and several have either a 15% or 14% rate .

the percentage depletion allowance is also subject to several limitations .

first the amount of deduction is limited to 50% of the net income ( essentially , the net profit ) from the property .

second , for iron ore ( and coal ) mined by corporations ( as opposed to noncorporate firms ) the allowance must be reduced by 20% of the excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion ( irc §291 ) .

this limitation was introduced by the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-248 ) .

in effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22% , depending upon the amount of cost depletion .

as noted above , the imposition of a royalty , where none existed before , would increase a mining firm's operating costs and reduce profitability .

further , due to the deductibility of the royalty ( as an operating cost of doing business ) against the federal income tax , the deduction reduces tax liability and therefore lowers the tax costs — the after - tax cost of the royalty is effectively reduced .

however , there is an important interaction between a royalty and the percentage depletion allowance that limits that effect , i.e. , that increases the after - tax cost of the royalty somewhat .

under irc §613 , royalty payments ( and other rental payments ) are deductible from gross income to determine the percentage depletion allowance .

this means that if a royalty were to be imposed on hardrock mining from federal lands , it would have the effect of simultaneously reducing the amount of the percentage depletion deduction .

thus , while the imposition of a royalty would increase deductible expenses and reduce the mining company's tax liability , the reduced percentage depletion allowance would reduce tax deductions and would raise a mining firm's tax liability .

the net effect on tax liability of these two simultaneous considerations are shown in the following equation , which shows the total increase , after tax burden , for every dollar of royalty paid: the first term in ( 1 ) shows how the burden of a royalty is reduced by its tax deductibility ; and the second term shows how the burden of a royalty is increased by its subtraction from gross income .

for example , an 8% royalty without the gross income offset is effectively a 6% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate ; the same royalty however is effectively a 6.44% royalty with a gross income offset if the percentage depletion allowance is 22% .

similarly , a 4% royalty without the gross income offset is effectively a 3% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate ; the same royalty , however , is effectively a 3.15% royalty with a gross income offset if the percentage depletion allowance is 15% ( say , for gold ) .

equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) are the same as equation ( 1 ) .

expressed as equation ( 3 ) , the effective royalty is shown as a gross royalty , the r term , and the offset term - rt ( d - 1 ) .

so in the previous example when the gross royalty is 4% , the revenue offset is a negative 0.85% [0.04 x 0.25 ( 1 - 0.15 ) = - 0.85] .

this shows that under current tax laws , and given the current percentage depletion rates , the costs of gross income deductibility of the royalty could , in certain cases , offset the benefits from royalty tax deductibility — which , for these cases , is effectively equivalent to not allowing tax deductibility .

the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) included a provision that gives preferential tax treatment to the mining industry in the area of mine closing and land reclamation .

this provision ( irc §468 ) allows mining companies to deduct the costs of mine closing and land reclamation in advance of the actual closing and reclamations , i.e. , before the occurrence of the activity giving rise to the expenses .

this provision is contrary to the general tax rule under both the cash method of accounting and the accrual method of accounting , which state that expenses to be incurred in the future cannot be deducted currently .

under the cash method of accounting , expenses can only be deducted when the payment is actually made .

under the accrual method of accounting , future expenses may be deducted in advance of actual payment but not in advance of the economic activity that gives rise to the expenses — they must be deducted in the year in which the economic activity takes place .

the joint tax committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax preferences or subsidies ( formally called "tax expenditures" ) .

the latest five - year estimates ( from fy2007-2011 ) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs , $1.1 billion for the excess of percentage over cost depletion , and $0.2 billion for mine reclamation reserves deduction .

thus the total revenue loss from these three provisions over five years is $1.8 billion , an average of $360 million / year .

this is the amount by which the industry lowered its tax burden , or conversely , the loss in tax revenues to the federal government .

the bulk of these preferences is claimed by corporations — only a small share is claimed by proprietorships and partnerships .

there is another provision of the current irc that attempts to limit the benefits from the special tax breaks available to the mining industry and other industries: the alternative minimum tax .

this alternative minimum tax is an additional tax on items of tax preference , which are a list of ten tax breaks or subsidies that have been identified as potentially able to reduce a business's or individual's tax liability to little or nothing .

the intent is to assure that all taxpayers — individuals and businesses — pay some tax , which is not assured if taxpayers are able to claim a lot of special tax breaks .

in effect , the alternative minimum tax imposes an additional tax above and beyond the normal or regular income tax on the total amount of these ten items of tax preference .

this is important for the mining industry because two of the ten preference items are tax breaks that are important to the mining industry: the excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion , and the excess of the exploration and development cost deduction over a hypothetical deduction that would have been allowed if the costs had been amortized ratably ( deducted evenly ) over a ten year period .

a third item of tax preference that the mining firm would have to include in its list of tax preference items is the excess of accelerated depreciation over straight line depreciation .

to the extent to which mining companies uses these and other items of tax preference , this could trigger the minimum tax , and thereby reduce the value of the special tax provisions .

these special tax preferences or subsidies , combined with accelerated depreciation ( a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining ) have historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates .

thus , firms that mine hardrock minerals on public domain lands pay no royalty , and benefit from fairly significant tax subsidies .

for example , cbo recently published a study of effective tax rates on different types of assets , and those used in mining ( mining and oil field machinery , and mining structures such as mine shafts ) generally ranked fairly low , relative to assets used in other industries .

finally , mining companies pay a variety of claims fees ( location fees , bureau of land management processing fees , annual maintenance fees ) .

these are charges for specific types of administrative services provided by the blm .

the claims location fee is presently $30 per claim , which is about 20 acres .

this fee is charged for first - time locators to locate and record a claim .

the annual maintenance ( or holding ) fee , necessary to hold a claim on public land , is presently $125 per claim .

this fee applies to claim holders with 11 or more claims ( those with 10 or fewer claims are exempt ) .

both the location fee and the annual maintenance fee are adjusted for inflation .

the blm also assesses a processing fee of $15 .

these fees help the blm cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations .

they cover costs for such actions as processing and recording applications , certain exploration permits , name changes , and corporate mergers , as well as lease consolidations , transfers , and reinstatements .

on november 1 , 2007 , the united states house of representatives approved a substitute version of h.r .

2262 ( with amendments ) , the hardrock mining and reclamation act of 2007 .

this bill would: establish a new regulatory framework for administering permits to develop hardrock minerals ; permanently end the sale or "patenting" of public lands for mining , which has been under moratorium since the early 1990s ; establish royalty payments for hardrock mining operations on federal lands and use 75% of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites ; impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations , and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations ; require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined lands ; create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites ; make the income from hardrock mining fees and royalties available , subject to appropriation , to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state , local , and tribal governments ; under an amendment to the committee - approved bill , 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated ; direct the secretary of the interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety , particularly from water pollution , and for projects that restore wildlife habitat ; under an amendment to the committee bill , watershed areas would be designated as eligible reclamation projects and among the top priorities for receiving cleanup funds ; establish environmental standards specific to the hardrock mining industry .

environmental standards in the substitute version of h.r .

2262 would be less prescriptive and more performance - oriented than those in the original bill ; establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources and give the secretary of the interior broader authority to block mining operations that would cause such harm ; allow native american tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values from mining activities ( similar language has been in place for states and localities ) ; set guidelines for administrative and judicial review of actions authorizing mining on public lands and allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions .

