around 6:30 p.m. ( local time ) on may 2 , 2008 , cyclone nargis , a category 3 cyclone , made landfall in the irrawaddy ( ayeyarwady ) division of burma , and then moved across the country from southwest to northeast , cutting a huge path of destruction 100 miles wide and 200 miles long , and striking burma's largest city , rangoon , with winds of up to 190 kph ( 120 mph ) ( see figure 1 ) .

it caused major damage in the low - lying agricultural delta region , which also suffered the impact of a storm surge .

the disaster struck just a week before the burmese people were to vote on a proposed new constitution and just the day after president bush announced an executive order tightening trade and economic sanctions .

the scale of the disaster requires a major relief effort that has proved to be well beyond the response capacity of the authorities in burma .

several days after the cyclone , the state peace and democracy council ( spdc ) indicated that it would accept offers of assistance from the international community .

despite millions of dollars in aid pledges , many aid agencies and organizations experienced problems in obtaining visas for their relief workers , essentially hampering a full - scale , immediate relief effort .

these factors — a devastating natural disaster and lack of access by the international humanitarian community — combined with a controversy over the recent constitutional referendum and the extension of opposition leader aung san suu kyi's house arrest for the sixth consecutive year , have the potential to foster significant political change within burma .

congress faces several issues with respect to burma in dealing with both the direct impact of cyclone nargis and its potential indirect effects on burmese politics .

in a break with past practices , several days after the cyclone , the spdc indicated that it would accept offers of assistance from the international community , though it was also reported that the spdc did not "officially endorse" international assistance and would prefer bilateral arrangements .

the spdc said it would allocate $5 million for relief activities .

military and police units reportedly began to conduct rescue and recovery operations , deploying helicopters , boats , and trucks , but as the scale of the disaster became more evident , the relief effort required was thought to be well beyond their capacity .

the government coordinated national efforts of the response through an emergency committee , which put into operation a national disaster management plan , with the ministry of social welfare , relief , and resettlement heading up the relief response .

in addition , there reportedly was widespread criticism about how the military junta has managed the disaster .

according to the burma campaign - uk , the spdc did not issue a warning to the people living along the path of cyclone nargis that the storm was approaching .

a back page article that appeared in the junta - run newspaper , the new light of myanmar , the day the cyclone struck reported that a "severe cyclonic storm" was forecast to reach the coast of burma within the next 36 hours , and "under the influence of this storm , rain or thunderstorms will be widespread. .

meteorologists in india say that they gave burma 48 hours warning before cyclone nargis hit the country , including where and when landfall would occur .

however , spdc - run television issued a statement that , "[t]imely weather reports were announced and aired through television and radio in order to keep the people safe and secure nationwide. .

many people in burma reportedly maintain that the state media notices failed to indicate the severity of the approaching storm or provide instructions on how to prepare for the cyclone's arrival .

in the first few days after the cyclone struck , it appeared that the spdc either underappreciated the extent of the damage caused by the cyclone , or was intentionally underplaying the cyclone's impact .

the first edition of the new light of myanmar released after the cyclone struck contained a number of articles that implied that life in rangoon was quickly returning to normal , and that the cyclone's impact in the bago division , the kayin state , and the mon state were minimal .

there were also reports that the spdc focused its relief and rescue efforts to areas where spdc officials and military personnel lived and worked , and offered little or no assistance to the general population .

in addition , there were allegations that local officials stole relief supplies for their own use or to sell on the black market .

there was also criticism of the spdc's failure to prevent disaster profiteering by merchants of essential items , such as food and fuel .

the pro - opposition news magazine , irrawaddy , reported that "many commodity prices — including vegetables and eggs — instantly increased 100 percent following the aftermath of cyclone nargis.... " according to other reports , food prices had reportedly risen three and four times what they were before the cyclone struck by may 6 , 2008 .

the spdc was also being criticized for delaying the entrance of international relief organizations into burma .

according to an article in the irrawaddy , the spdc views international relief agencies as "neocolonialist tools. .

in april 2008 , for instance , the spdc - run newspapers accused the international committee of the red cross of supporting rebel groups in burma's karen state .

burmese political analyst aung naing oo also thinks the military junta did not want large numbers of international aid workers entering burma so close to the vote on the constitutional referendum .

the cyclone struck one week before the people of burma were to vote on a new constitution that potentially is the most significant political development in burma since the military seized power in 1988 .

in the first few days following the natural disaster , the spdc said it would proceed with the vote as scheduled on may 10 , 2008 .

however , on may 6 , 2008 , the spdc announced that the vote on the proposed constitution would proceed as planned in most of burma , but that the vote would be delayed until may 24 , 2008 for most of the townships around rangoon and in seven of the townships in the irrawaddy region .

there are conflicting accounts about the conduct and outcome of the election .

the spdc reported a heavy turnout on both dates , with few voting irregularities .

opposition groups say the turnout was comparatively light , with many reported cases of voting irregularities , such a pre - marked ballots , voter intimidation , and other techniques to influence the outcome of the referendum .

on may 29 , 2008 , the spdc issued announcement no .

7 / 2008 , reporting that 98.12% of the 27,288,827 eligible voters had cast votes , and that 92.48% had voted in favor of the adoption of the constitution .

on the basis of these official results , the spdc declared that the new constitution had been ratified .

two days before cyclone nargis struck burma , president bush issued an executive order expanding u.s. trade and economic sanctions effective may 1 , 2008 .

u.s. foreign policy towards burma in general is currently delineated by the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 [ p.l .

108-61 , extended by p.l .

108-272 , p.l .

109-39 , and p.l .

110-52 ] and a series of executive orders .

these laws and executive orders: prohibit the import into the united states products from burma ; ban the export or re - export of financial services to burma by u.s. persons ; prohibit a u.s. person or company from approving , aiding , or supporting a foreign party's investment in burma ; prohibit u.s. persons from purchasing shares in a third - country company if the company's profits are predominantly derived from the company's development of resources in burma ; authorize the president to impose a freeze on funds or assets in the united states of the burmese government and individuals who hold senior positions in that government ; freeze all property and interests in property held in the united states or that come to the united states of the myanmar gem enterprise , the myanmar timber enterprise , the myanmar pearl enterprise , and any person determined by the secretary of treasury , after consultation with the secretary of state , to be either directly or indirectly owned or controlled by the spdc or supportive of the spdc ; and require u.s. representatives in international financial institutions to vote against the extension of any financial assistance to burma .

under the bush administration , the u.s. policy has been to minimize contact with the spdc and to isolate the military junta .

the u.s. embassy in rangoon has no ambassador .

in addition , as indicated above , the united states actively supports the efforts of international organizations ( such as the un ) to place pressure on the spdc to improve human rights in burma and return the government to civilian rule .

the u.s. state department issued a statement on february 11 , 2008 , that called the proposed constitutional referendum "evidence of its [the spdc's] refusal to pursue a meaningful and time - bound dialogue with burma's democratic and ethnic minority representatives. .

in its 2008 annual human rights report , the state department cited burma for a wide range of human rights abuses including arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of life ; torture and other cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment ; arbitrary arrest or detention ; denial of fair public trial ; the detention of political prisoners ; forced relocations ; restriction of the freedom of speech and press ; restriction of the freedom of peaceful assembly and association ; repression of religion ; and human trafficking .

the concurrence of the tightening of u.s. sanctions on burma and the arrival of cyclone nargis just one week before the nation was to vote on a proposed new constitution has compounded the political pressure on the ruling military junta .

many of the people of burma need humanitarian aid and are dissatisfied with the spdc's initial response to the crisis .

the current situation presents congress with at least four key issues: humanitarian assistance ; the constitutional referendum ; a possible long - term food shortage ; and potential political instability in burma .

humanitarian emergencies usually stem from two overall types of disasters: natural or conflict - related .

u.s. and international humanitarian assistance have an important impact not only on the relief operation itself , but on broader foreign policy issues .

natural disasters ( like the 2004 tsunami in the indian ocean , 2005 earthquake in south asia , and 2007 cyclone in bangladesh ) may affect millions of people each year who require prolonged urgent assistance .

responses are typically multilateral , often have a relief operation end date , and are less likely to be hindered by the politics of the situation .

by contrast , in many conflicts — terrorist attacks , war between states , or where groups within a country are fighting and in the absence of a political solution — the response cannot be separated from broader foreign policy developments and the overall strategy ( including determining an exit point ) may be much less clear .

in the case of burma , the response to the natural disaster is closely linked to political developments both within the country and in its relationships with the international community .

the circumstances and difficulties of mobilizing a relief operation were hampered in part by the politics of the situation .

some are saying that the provision of humanitarian assistance and an increase in the international presence in burma could represent an opportunity to change the authoritarian system in burma .

this may be what the spdc fears , not only with the constitutional referendum at stake , but in the long term as well , with the result that it has not allowed most offers of international humanitarian experts .

humanitarian assistance generally receives strong bipartisan congressional support and the united states is typically a leader and major contributor to relief efforts in humanitarian disasters .

when disasters require immediate emergency relief , the administration may fund pledges by depleting its disaster accounts intended for worldwide use throughout a fiscal year .

in order to respond to future humanitarian crises , however , these resources would need to be replenished or it could curtail u.s. capacity to respond to other emergencies .

these accounts are typically restored through supplemental appropriations .

amid efforts to tackle rising budget deficits by , among other measures , slowing or reducing discretionary spending , finding the resources to sustain u.s. aid pledges may present some challenges , depending upon the resources required and competing aid priorities at hand .

the senate passed s.res .

554 on may 7 , 2008 , calling for congress "to stand ready to appropriate additional funds , beyond existing emergency international disaster assistance resources , if necessary to help address dire humanitarian conditions throughout burma in the aftermath of cyclone nargis and beyond. .

on june 30 , 2008 , president bush signed into law p.l .

110-252 , which provides fy2008 and fy2009 supplemental appropriations for overseas military operations , international affairs , and some domestic programs .

the law provides funding for urgent humanitarian assistance worldwide , including support for critical needs in burma .

it also states , "as the peace and development council ( spdc ) has compounded the humanitarian crisis in burma by failing to respond to the needs of the burmese people in the wake of cyclone nargis and by refusing offers of assistance from the international community , the department of state and usaid should seek to avoid providing assistance to or through the spdc. .

prior to the arrival of cyclone nargis , several members of congress had indicated their opposition to burma's planned constitutional referendum .

after the cyclone struck , on may 6 , 2008 , the house of representatives passed h.con.res .

317 "condemning" the constitutional referendum and calling on the spdc to enter into "meaningful political dialogue" with burma's opposition groups .

since the spdc announced its plan to hold the plebiscite , the senate has not passed any legislation relating directly to the constitutional referendum .

even after the immediate post - cyclone emergency has passed , experts expect the country to face a potentially severe food shortage for up to two years .

the areas struck by cyclone nargis were important sources of rice , seafood , pork , and chicken for burma ; it is unlikely that the rest of the country will be able to step up food production to replace the lost output of the cyclone - devastated regions .

it is also uncertain if burma will be able import enough food to replace its lost domestic output because of damage to its transportation infrastructure and a shortage of foreign exchange .

as a result , burma may require food assistance for many months and possibly years .

in addition , in the first few days after cyclone nargis , food prices in burma reportedly increased by 100% or more .

while this spike in food prices is likely to subside to some extent in the coming weeks , it is also likely that prices will not return to their pre - cyclone levels .

in addition to the challenge of recovering from the destruction caused by the cyclone , the people of burma will probably face higher — and possibly rising — food prices for many months .

given that most households in burma were living in poverty before the arrival of nargis , the higher food prices will place more strain on the burmese people .

it is noteworthy to recall that widespread protests in burma in september 2007 began as a demonstration against an unannounced increase in fuel prices .

burma's potential long - term need for food assistance presents two possible concerns to congress .

first , congress may be asked to appropriate funds to provide long - term food and agricultural assistance to burma .

second , these recent developments may also prompt changes in the current laws governing sanctions on burma .

the possible combined effects of public dissatisfaction with the spdc's response to the cyclone disaster , a potential rejection of the junta's proposed constitution , and widespread food shortages and food price inflation could combine to pose a threat to the political survival of burma's ruling military junta .

in addition , the announced "official results" of the constitutional plebiscite are widely viewed as obviously fraudulent by burma's opposition groups and much of the general population .

these factors have increased the prospects for public demonstrations against the spdc .

political tensions — both domestic and international — were also heightened by the spdc's decision on may 27 , 2008 , to extend the house arrest of aung san suu kyi for a sixth consecutive year , as well as the arrest of several nld members .

the detention decision was announced just a few days after united nation secretary - general ban ki - moon had raised the issue with the leaders of the spdc .

it also came on the same day that nld members rallied at aung san suu kyi's home in remembrance of their election victory in 1990 .

after the announcement of the detention's extension , secretary - general ban expressed his regret about the junta's decision and called for an end to all such "restrictions" of "political figures" in burma .

in an official statement , president bush indicated that he was "deeply troubled" by the decision and called upon the spdc "to release all political prisoners in burma and begin a genuine dialogue with aung san suu kyi , the national league for democracy , and other democratic and ethnic minority groups on a transition to democracy. .

one question congress may move to consider is whether current circumstances warrant a further tightening or easing of political pressure on the spdc .

given burma's current and anticipated future need for humanitarian assistance , as well as the apparent heightened dissatisfaction with the spdc , some are likely to argue that the current situation is an opportune moment to ramp up u.s. sanctions and seek greater action from the united nations and other multilateral organizations .

for example , resolution of the differences between the house and senate versions of h.r .

3890 and subsequently forwarding the legislation to the president would build upon executive order 13464 .

however , new congressional sanctions would possibly eliminate any possibility of the spdc admitting u.s. aid or relief workers in the future and could potentially be used by the military junta to rally support based on patriotic or nationalist appeals to opposition to "outside interference. .

a key factor that will impact the effectiveness of any changes in u.s. sanctions on burma will be the perceived ability of the spdc to weather any political storm .

one critical element in the post - nargis period will be the strength of the spdc's support among rank - and - file soldiers .

burma's military has grown from 180,000 to around 400,000 troops over the last 20 years .

the spdc will also rely on its paramilitary support group , the union solidarity and development association ( usda ) , to remain in power .

formed in 1993 , the usda is ostensibly a social organization that claims nearly 23 million members , but has a reputation for violent acts against opposition groups in burma .

in recent years , the usda has organized "people's militias" that have reportedly been involved in attacks on aung san suu kyi and other opposition leaders in burma .

burma's soldiers have already demonstrated a readiness to open fire on civilian protests and the usda have similarly demonstrated a willingness to be a weapon of oppression for the spdc .

whether of not the soldiers and the usda members will continue to support the military junta during any post - nargis civil unrest remains to be seen .

there are some indications of significant political changes within the spdc since cyclone nargis and the constitutional referendum .

on june 20 , 2008 , the spdc released orders 2 / 2008 and 3 / 2008 reassigning major general saw lwin to become the minister of immigration and population , and making vice admiral soe thien his replacement as minister for industry - 2 .

according to one report , unnamed military sources said that soe thien's replacement as the navy's commander in chief will be major general nyan tun .

another report claims that five top spdc lieutenant generals were asked to retire and several junior officers were promoted as part of a restructuring of the spdc .

there are differing interpretations of the significance of the replacement of ministers and retirement of generals .

some observers speculate that there is a power struggle within the spdc for the successor of than shwe between general shwe mann and lieutenant general myint swe .

while shwe mann is purportedly the "number three man in the armed forces," myint swe supposedly is very loyal to than shwe .

other analysts are interpreting the recent changes in the spdc as the punishing of people who failed to take action after the cyclone and replace them with loyal and trusted officers .

in particular , soe thien was allegedly removed from his position as the head of the navy because of his failure to deploy ships to counter the u.s. and french naval vessels of the coast of burma .

another important issue will be the image of burma's buddhist monks and nuns — and their actions — in the weeks ahead .

various accounts indicate that the monks and nuns have been key figures at the local level in organizing and coordinating disaster relief efforts .

although the spdc has attempted to prevent the monks and nuns from involvement in disaster assistance — and reportedly have tried to take credit for work done by the monks and nuns — burma's "members of religious orders" may have strengthened their popularity since the arrival of cyclone nargis .

having been barred from voting on the constitutional referendum , burma's buddhist monks and nuns may choose to leverage their stronger popular support into renewed political action against the burma's oppressive military junta .

