on november 26 , 2007 , u.s. president george w. bush and iraqi prime minister nouri kamel al - maliki signed a declaration of principles for a long - term relationship of cooperation and friendship between the republic of iraq and the united states of america .

pursuant to this declaration , the parties pledged to "begin as soon as possible , with the aim to achieve , before july 31 , 2008 , agreements between the two governments with respect to the political , cultural , economic , and security spheres. .

among other things , the declaration proclaims the parties' intention to negotiate a security agreement to support the iraqi government in training , equipping , and arming the iraqi security forces so they can provide security and stability to all iraqis ; support the iraqi government in contributing to the international fight against terrorism by confronting terrorists such as al - qaeda , its affiliates , other terrorist groups , as well as all other outlaw groups , such as criminal remnants of the former regime ; and to provide security assurances to the iraqi government to deter any external aggression and to ensure the integrity of iraq's territory .

the new york times reported in january 2008 that the bush administration has crafted a draft proposal for a u.s. - iraq security agreement which would , if agreed upon by the parties , provide the united states with broad authority to conduct military operations in iraq , guarantee u.s. military forces and contractors immunity from iraqi law , and provide the united states with the power to detain iraqi prisoners .

the new york times also reported that the draft proposal does not call for the establishment of permanent u.s. military bases in iraq , authorize future troop levels in the country , or describe the specific security obligations of the united states should iraq come under attack .

during testimony before the senate committee on armed services on february 6 , 2008 , secretary of defense robert m. gates stated that the prospective security agreement would not obligate the united states to militarily defend iraq in the event of a threat to iraqi security .

it is not clear whether the agreement ( s ) discussed in the declaration will take the form of a treaty or some other type of international compact .

however , in a november 26 , 2007 , press briefing regarding the declaration , general douglas lute , assistant to the president for iraq and afghanistan , stated that the administration did not foresee a prospective agreement with iraq having "the status of a formal treaty which would then bring us to formal negotiations or formal inputs from the congress. .

according to a february 5 , 2008 , report by the congressional quarterly , the national security council offered to brief congress on the nature of the prospective u.s. - iraq security agreement .

in a february 13 , 2008 , op - ed piece for the washington post , secretary of defense gates and secretary of state condoleezza rice claimed that the administration "will work closely with the appropriate committees of congress to keep lawmakers informed and to provide complete transparency .

classified briefings have already begun , and we look forward to congressional input. .

on march 4 , 2008 , during a joint hearing before the house foreign affairs subcommittee on the middle east and south asia and the subcommittee on international organizations , human rights and oversight , ambassador david m. satterfield , senior advisor to the secretary and coordinator for iraq , testified that seven background briefings by senior administration officials had been held with members of congress concerning the prospective u.s. - iraq agreement .

presently , the administration intends to negotiate two separate security agreements with iraq .

the first agreement would constitute a legally binding status of forces agreement ( sofa ) to define the legal status of u.s. forces within iraq .

on april 10 , 2008 , ambassador satterfield testified during a hearing before the senate foreign relations committee regarding the similarities and differences between the proposed iraq sofa and the sofas that the united states has entered with other countries: this agreement is similar to the many [sofas]...we have across the world , which address such matters as jurisdiction over u.s. forces ; the movement of vehicles , vessels , and aircraft ; non - taxation of u.s. activities and the ability of u.s. forces to use host - government facilities .

the sofa is also unique in that it also takes into account the particular circumstances and requirements for our forces in iraq , in particular , by providing for consent by the government of iraq to the conduct of military operations .

neither we nor the iraqis intend for this to be a permanent provision of the sofa .

the second agreement , described as a "strategic framework agreement," would broadly address topics outlined in the declaration of principles .

according to ambassador satterfield , the administration does not at this stage contemplate it as a legally binding agreement.... should that change in the course of the discussions , we will , of course , so inform the congress and we'll take appropriate measures in accordance with our constitutional provisions .

regardless of the form any agreement may take , congress has several tools by which to exercise oversight regarding the negotiation , form , conclusion , and implementation of the arrangement by the united states .

this report begins by discussing the current legal framework governing u.s. military operations in iraq .

the report then provides a general background as to the types of international agreements that are binding upon the united states , as well as considerations affecting whether they take the form of a treaty or an executive agreement .

next , the report discusses historical precedents that security agreements have taken , with specific attention paid to past agreements entered with afghanistan , germany , japan , south korea , and the philippines .

the report then discusses the oversight role that congress plays with respect to entering and implementing international agreements involving the united states .

finally , the report describes legislation proposed in the 110 th congress to ensure congressional participation in the conclusion of a security agreement between the united states and iraq .

u.s. military operations in iraq are congressionally authorized pursuant to h.j.res .

114 ( p.l .

107-243 ) , which authorizes the president to use the armed forces of the united states as he determines to be necessary and appropriate in order to - ( 1 ) defend the national security of the united states against the continuing threat posed by iraq ; and ( 2 ) enforce all relevant united nations security council resolutions regarding iraq .

it also requires as a predicate for the exercise of that authority that the president determine that diplomatic efforts and other peaceful means will be inadequate to meet these goals and that the use of force against iraq is consistent with the battle against terrorism .

h.j.res .

114 appears to incorporate any future resolutions concerning the continuing situation in iraq that the security council may adopt , as well as those adopted prior to its enactment .

the authority also appears to extend beyond compelling iraq's disarmament to implementing the full range of concerns expressed in those u.n. resolutions , as well as for the broad purpose of defending "the national security of the united states against the continuing threat posed by iraq. .

the united states and great britain , along with a number of other countries , invaded iraq in march of 2003 , asserting the authority to enforce compliance with earlier security council resolutions that addressed the situation in iraq and kuwait .

other security council members disagreed with this interpretation of the previous resolutions , denying that these resolutions contained a continuing authorization to use force against iraq .

despite the initial lack of consensus regarding the legality of the invasion , the security council adopted subsequent resolutions recognizing the occupation of iraq and generally supporting the coalition's plans for bringing about a democratic government in iraq .

the first of these , resolution 1511 ( october 16 , 2003 ) , recognized the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) and underscored the temporary nature of its obligations and authorities under international law , which it said would cease "when an internationally recognized , representative government established by the people of iraq is sworn in and assumes the responsibilities of the [cpa]. .

 ( para .

1 ) .

in paragraph 13 , resolution 1511 authorized a multinational force under unified command to take all necessary measures to contribute to the maintenance of security and stability in iraq , including for the purpose of ensuring necessary conditions for the implementation of the timetable and programme [for establishing a permanent government in iraq] as well as to contribute to the security of the united nations assistance mission for iraq , the governing council of iraq and other institutions of the iraqi interim administration , and key humanitarian and economic infrastructure .

the security council included in resolution 1511 a commitment to "review the requirements and mission of the multinational force ... not later than one year from the date of this resolution. .

it further established that "in any case the mandate of the force shall expire upon the completion of the [electoral process outlined previously]," at which time the security council would be ready "to consider ... any future need for the continuation of the multinational force , taking into account the views of an internationally recognized , representative government of iraq. .

the security council resolutions do not provide for the immunity of coalition troops from iraqi legal processes .

no status of forces agreement ( sofa ) was deemed possible prior to the recognition of a permanent government in iraq .

immunity for coalition soldiers , contract workers , and other foreign personnel in iraq in connection with security and reconstruction was established by order of the cpa , which relied for its authority on the laws and usages of war ( as consistent with relevant security council resolutions ) .

cpa order 17 , status of the coalition provisional authority , mnf - iraq , certain missions and personnel in iraq , established that all personnel of the multinational force ( mnf ) and the cpa , and all international consultants , are immune from iraqi legal process , which are defined to include "arrest , detention or proceedings in iraqi courts or other iraqi bodies , whether criminal , civil , or administrative. .

such persons are nevertheless expected to respect applicable iraqi laws , but are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of their "sending states. .

states contributing personnel to the multinational force have the right to exercise within iraq any criminal and disciplinary jurisdiction conferred on them by their domestic law over all persons subject to their military law .

in june 2004 , in anticipation of the dissolution of the cpa and handover of sovereignty to the interim government of iraq , the security council adopted resolution 1546 , reaffirming the authorization for the multinational force in resolution 1511 while noting that its presence in iraq "is at the request of the incoming interim government of iraq. .

the terms of the mandate for the mnf are expressed in paragraph 12 , in which the security council decides further that the mandate for the multinational force shall be reviewed at the request of the government of iraq or twelve months from the date of this resolution , and that this mandate shall expire upon the completion of the political process set out ... above , and declares that it will terminate this mandate earlier if requested by the government of iraq .

resolution 1546 incorporated letters from u.s. secretary of state colin powell and prime minister of the interim government of iraq dr. ayad allawi .

secretary powell wrote: in order to continue to contribute to security , the mnf must continue to function under a framework that affords the force and its personnel the status that they need to accomplish their mission , and in which the contributing states have responsibility for exercising jurisdiction over their personnel and which will ensure arrangements for , and use of assets by , the mnf .

the existing framework governing these matters is sufficient for these purposes .

in addition , the forces that make up the mnf are and will remain committed at all times to act consistently with their obligations under the law of armed conflict , including the geneva conventions .

prior to the handover of sovereignty to the interim government , ambassador bremer issued cpa order 100 to revise existing cpa orders , chiefly by substituting the mnf - iraq for the cpa and otherwise reflecting the new political situation .

cpa order 100 stated , as its purpose , to ensure that the iraqi interim government and all subsequent iraqi governments inherit full responsibility for these laws , regulations , orders , memoranda , instructions and directives so that their implementation after the transfer of full governing authority may reflect the expectations of the iraqi people , as determined by a fully empowered and sovereign iraqi government .

under article 26 of the transitional administrative law of iraq ( tal ) , "the laws , regulations , orders , and directives issued by the coalition provisional authority pursuant to its authority under international law shall remain in force until rescinded or amended by legislation duly enacted and having the force of law. .

accordingly , cpa order 17 ( as revised ) survived the transfer of authority to the iraqi interim government , which took no action to amend or rescind it .

iraq's permanent constitution was adopted in 2005 .

article 130 of the permanent constitution continues the validity of existing laws , presumably including cpa orders that were not rescinded by the transitional government .

the u.n. security council extended the mandate for the multinational forces until december 31 , 2006 , and again until december 31 , 2007 , and finally , until december 31 , 2008 .

iraqi prime minister al - maliki requested the security council extend the mnf mandate "one last time" until the end of december , 2008 , "provided that the extension is subject to a commitment by the security council to end the mandate at an earlier date if the government of iraq so requests and that the mandate is subject to periodic review before june 2008. .

by its terms , cpa order 17 remains in force for the duration of the u.n. mandate and terminates only after the departure of the final element of the mnf from iraq , or at such time as it is rescinded or amended by duly enacted legislation having the force of law .

neither it nor cpa order 100 establishes a timetable for the departure of all mnf elements from iraq after the u.n. mandate ends .

order 17 could be interpreted effectively to expire concomitantly with the u.n. mandate , because it defines multinational force with reference to the u.n. resolutions .

however , the order appears to have been designed to stay in force for a time after the expiration of the u.n. mandate , for a long enough period at least to allow the departure of all mnf personnel .

if the u.n. security council or the iraqi government adopts a timetable for the departure of the mnf , it seems logical that cpa order 17 would continue in force until the deadline for departure passes .

on the other hand , if the government of iraq invites the united states or any other coalition government to maintain troops in iraq after the u.n. mandate terminates , it may be expedient for the iraqi government to continue to recognize cpa order 17 until a new agreement establishing the role and status of such troops is reached .

it bears emphasis that the foregoing is subject to the sole interpretation of the iraqi government .

whether the immunity of coalition troops and other personnel will continue in force after the u.n. mandate expires depends on whether the iraqi government deems them to be part of elements of the mnf that have not yet departed or military forces that have overstayed their mandate .

it is not clear which branch of the iraqi government would make that determination .

even more significantly , the iraqi legislature could decide to repeal , amend , or possibly extend the order at any time , even before the u.n. mandate expires .

another question regarding the status and role of u.s. forces in iraq post - u.n. mandate is whether the congressional authorization to use military force will also end .

h.j.res .

114 does not contain explicit time requirements or call for the withdrawal of u.s. troops by any specific date or set of criteria .

presumably , continued force is authorized under the resolution only so long as iraq poses a continuing threat to the united states and the u.s. military presence is not inconsistent with relevant u.n. resolutions .

because the specific threats posed by iraq during saddam hussein's regime that were emphasized in the preamble to h.j.res 114 no longer exist ( with the possible exception of the presence of al qaeda in iraq ) , it may be argued that iraq no longer poses a danger to the security of the united states , at least , not of the same kind that led congress to pass h.j.res 114 in the first place .

once the u.n. mandate for the multinational forces in iraq expires ( and assuming that the u.n. security council does not adopt new language supporting a new u.s. military role in iraq ) , it is arguable that the u.s. use of military force in iraq is not necessary or appropriate to enforce u.n. security council resolutions regarding iraq .

a determination by the u.n. security council that the situation in iraq no longer poses a threat to international peace and security compelling the exercise of its authority under chapter vii of the u.n. charter could also undermine the argument that iraq continues to pose a threat to the united states .

such conclusions do not necessarily support a view that u.s. troops are automatically required to be withdrawn when the u.n. mandate expires , but suggest that new legislation may be necessary to support a new role for u.s. troops under a possible agreement with iraq .

the administration has expressed its view that no new congressional authorization will be necessary to support u.s. combat operations in iraq after the u.n. mandate ends .

under the u.s. system , a legally binding international agreement can be entered into pursuant to either a treaty or an executive agreement .

the constitution allocates primary responsibility for entering such agreements to the executive branch , but congress also plays an essential role .

first , in order for a treaty ( but not an executive agreement ) to become the "law of the land," the senate must provide its advice and consent to treaty ratification by a two - thirds majority .

alternatively , congress may authorize congressional - executive agreements .

many treaties and executive agreements are not "self - executing," meaning that in order for them to take effect domestically , implementing legislation is required to provide u.s. bodies with the authority necessary to enforce and comply with the agreements' provisions .

while some executive agreements do not require congressional approval , adherence to them may nonetheless be dependent upon congress appropriating necessary funds or authorizing the activities to be carried out ( where compliance with the agreement would contravene some statutory provision ) .

the bush administration has characterized the proposed security arrangement with iraq as being of a kind commonly entered by the united states , and has stated that "[t]he u.s. has security relationships with over 100 countries around the world , including recent agreements with nations such as afghanistan and former soviet bloc countries. .

some u.s. security relationships take the form of legally binding treaties or executive agreements , whereas others involve non - binding assurances or pledges .

whereas some security agreements are publicly available , others remain classified .

though the bush administration and maliki government have issued a declaration of principles setting the parameters for a future security arrangement between the united states and iraq , it is not yet clear whether the arrangement will be governed by treaty , executive agreement , non - binding pledges , or some combination of the three .

while it appears that a prospective u.s. - iraqi security arrangement will impose legal obligations upon the parties , it is not yet clear whether the agreement ( s ) will be in the form of a treaty or executive agreement .

nonetheless , congress has several tools at its disposal to exercise oversight regarding the negotiation , conclusion , and implementation of any such agreement .

legislation has been introduced in the 110 th congress to ensure congressional participation in the entering of any agreement emerging from the declaration of principles between the united states and iraq — including an engrossed amendment to h.r .

2642 , the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 , which passed the house on may 15 , 2008 ; s. 2426 , the congressional oversight of iraq agreements act of 2007 , introduced by senate majority leader harry reid on behalf of senator hillary clinton on december 6 , 2007 ; h.r .

4959 , iraq strategic agreement review act of 2008 , introduced by representative rosa delauro on january 15 , 2008 ; h.r .

5128 , introduced by representative barbara lee on january 23 , 2007 , and h.r .

5626 , the protect our troops and our constitution act of 2008 , introduced by representative william delahunt on march 13 , 2008 .

all of these legislative proposals would bar funds from being made available or appropriated to implement certain types of formal agreements emerging from the u.s. - iraq declaration of principles .

s. 2426 would deny funds to implement any u.s. - iraq agreement involving "commitments or risks affecting the nation as a whole," including a sofa agreement , unless the agreement was approved by the senate as a treaty or by congress through legislation .

h.r .

4959 , in contrast , would condition appropriations to implement any agreement emerging from the declaration of principles upon that agreement being approved as a treaty by the senate , while h.r .

5128 would condition appropriations for the implementation of such an agreement upon it being approved by an act of congress .

h.r .

5626 would bar appropriations from being used to implement any security agreement emerging from the declaration of principles , including any agreement giving the united states "authority to fight" other than for self - defense purposes , unless the agreement is approved as a treaty or an act of congress enacted after the date of enactment for h.r .

5626 .

the house - passed engrossed amendment to h.r .

2642 would condition appropriations from being used to negotiate , enter into , or implement any agreement with iraq containing security assurances for mutual defense ( which is defined to include a binding commitment to defend iraq , or specifications regarding the nature or duration of the u.s. mission in iraq or the number of u.s. troops stationed there ) , unless the agreement takes the form of a treaty or is approved by an act of congress .

some of these legislative proposals may raise constitutional questions .

for example , h.r .

5128 includes a provision stating that an agreement between the united states and iraq must be approved by an act of congress in order to have legal effect .

this provision may raise serious legal concerns given the constitution's specification that treaties approved by the senate have status as the "law of the land. .

h.r .

4959 and s. 2426 include provisions expressing the sense of congress that a prospective u.s. - iraq agreement should take a particular form in order to have legal effect , but these provisions appear to raise less significant constitutional concerns given their non - binding nature .

the house - passed engrossed amendment to h.r .

2642 may also raise constitutional concerns to the extent that it would effectively bar the executive from negotiating ( as opposed to implementing ) certain types of international agreements .

with respect to consultation , h.r .

4959 includes a provision requiring that specified members of the executive branch consult with congressional committees and leadership on any potential long - term security , economic , or political agreement between the united states and iraq .

s. 2426 does not include a consultation requirement , but instead requires the legal adviser to the secretary of state to submit a report to congress justifying any decision by the executive not to consult with congress before concluding a security arrangement with iraq in the form of a sole executive agreement .

h.r .

5626 includes a provision stating that it is the sense of congress that the administration should consult fully with congress , the iraqi government , coalition partners , and iraq's neighbors in determining u.s. policy towards iraq .

in a may 22 , 2008 , statement concerning administration policy , the white house claimed that the administration strongly opposes any [legislation] that would attempt to determine the legal effect or content of diplomatic agreements with iraq before they are negotiated .

in that regard , the administration opposes any attempt to change long - standing legal traditions governing whether certain types of agreements may be concluded as executive agreements rather than as ratified treaties .

similarly , the administration opposes any [legislation] that would establish a statutory policy that a status of forces agreement ( sofa ) between the u.s. and iraq must include measures requiring the iraqi government to provide financial or other types of support for u.s. armed forces stationed in iraq .

under the constitution , the president has the discretion to initiate and conduct diplomatic negotiations .

congress cannot by statute establish the policy of the united states with regard to such negotiations in advance .

indeed , in this case , such a policy would threaten the ability of the united states to engage in dynamic talks with the government of iraq and would risk the timely completion of the status of forces agreement prior to the anticipated expiration of united nations security council resolution 1790 .

accordingly , legislation attempting to limit the scope or effect of a u.s. - iraq security agreement could be subject to veto .

