the republic of yemen remains a country of concern to u.s. policy makers .

although yemen itself is a resource - poor nation , it is strategically located next to saudi arabia ( figure 1 ) , one of the world's major oil producers , and the bab al mandab strait , through which commercial oil tankers carry an estimated 3.4 million barrels per day ( 3.5% to 4% of the global oil supply ) .

yemen's 1,184-mile coastline abuts the red sea and the gulf of aden across from the horn of africa , which until recently had been a major area of somalia - based piracy .

for more than a decade , u.s. officials and members of congress have been concerned with the threat of terrorism emanating from yemen and directed against the united states .

yemen is home to al qaeda in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) , an affiliate of al qaeda ( aq ) .

the u.s. department of homeland security considers aqap to be the aq affiliate "most likely to attempt transnational attacks against the united states. .

to date , the terrorist group has unsuccessfully attempted to target the united states at least three times ( in 2009 , 2010 , and 2012 ) using concealed explosive devices designed to destroy commercial aircraft or detonate inside parcel packages .

the intelligence services of saudi arabia helped disrupt two of these plots .

issues such as terrorism and yemen's political stability are tied to broader questions regarding the country's long - term economic and environmental viability .

according to the 2014 united nations human development index , yemen ranks 154 out of 187 countries .

its poverty has been exacerbated by the quadrupling of its population over the last 30 years .

agricultural development has been decimated by water shortages , political strife , and lack of investment , making the country dependent on food imports for up to 90% of basic staples .

in may 2014 , the world food program estimated that 10 million yemenis out of a total population of 25 million could be categorized as either severely food insecure or close to it .

such dire socio - economic prospects , combined with yemen's proximity to both africa and arab gulf states , have made it a global transit and destination point for migrants and refugees .

each year , thousands of asylum - seekers and economic migrants from somalia , ethiopia , and eritrea make what can be a perilous journey to yemen , where they either remain or seek passage to the wealthier gulf monarchies .

at the same time , at least a million yemenis work abroad , and expatriate remittances provide a major boost to the local economy .

particularly for saudi arabia , the number of yemeni laborers working in the kingdom is an apparent source of trepidation .

in recent years , saudi authorities have begun deporting more and more yemeni workers , thus exacerbating bilateral tensions .

hopes for progress and stability arising from yemen's 2011-2012 political transition have been eroding throughout 2014 and early 2015 .

before that , the obama administration and other observers considered yemen to be one of the few relative arab spring "success stories" ; the government had new leadership ( president hadi ) and had managed to bring all the nation's political factions together under the rubric of the national dialogue conference ( ndc ) in an attempt to reach consensus on governance .

however , in yemen no one group , including the central government , has a monopoly on armed force ; various actors can act as "spoilers" to disrupt the system in pursuit of their own interests ( figure 2 ) ; and that dynamic played out throughout 2014 .

when the ndc concluded in early 2014 , yemen's political transition was still several key steps from completion ; a constitution had yet to be drafted , so a referendum on its approval had yet to be held , and subsequent presidential and parliamentary elections were still on hold .

after two years of transition and with the prospect of several more , many observers were concerned that momentum would shift from president hadi to those opposed to the internationally backed transition process — namely former president saleh and his houthi allies who sought to redraw yemen's internal boundaries more to their favor .

within weeks of the national dialogue conference's conclusion , the houthi movement , a zaydi revivalist political and insurgent movement in the north that has been at war with the government on - and - off since 2004 , launched another military offensive against various tribal allies of president hadi .

their campaign has continued , culminating in the summer 2014 takeover of the capital sana'a and other parts of yemen .

their battlefield successes have created a new balance of power , and this evolving political dynamic may challenge outside powers , such as the united states , to reassess how they can exert influence inside yemen in pursuit of their national security interests , such as counterterrorism .

according to u.s. officials , aqap , a u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organization ( designated in 2010 ) operating in yemen , remains the al qaeda affiliate "most likely to attempt transnational attacks against the united states. .

aqap has attempted on several occasions to bomb u.s. commercial aircraft and indoctrinate what the intelligence community refers to as "homegrown violent extremists" or hves .

to date , there is public information on three aqap attempted attacks or disrupted plots against the united states homeland , including: a failed bomb attack against northwest airlines flight 253 on christmas day 2009 ; a failed attempt ( disrupted by saudi intelligence ) to ship explosive parcel packages to jewish sites in chicago in october 2010 ; and a disrupted bomb plot ( disclosed in may 2012 ) , in which aqap provided a concealed explosive device to a saudi double agent who subsequently turned the device over to authorities .

in addition to hatching transnational terrorist plots against the "far enemy" ( the united states ) , aqap is also focused on seizing territory from the yemeni government ( "the near enemy" ) and attacking neighboring saudi arabia .

since 2011 , it has waged an islamist insurgency in the country's remote southern provinces under the banner of a militia known as ansar al sharia ( in english: partisans of sharia , or islamic law ) .

the group was most militarily successful in 2011 , when infighting among elites in the capital distracted the central government from halting aqap advances in the south .

since the government recaptured urban areas formerly under aqap control in 2012 , the group has continued to fight in other provinces , most recently in the province of hadramawt .

overall , political and economic conditions in the provinces that formerly made up south yemen ( particularly the provinces of abyan , shabwa , aden , and hadramawt ) offer fertile ground for aqap's insurgency to grow ( figure 3 ) .

in the south , the central government has a limited presence and disaffection is widespread , due in part to a lack of investment in the area .

politics are complex , with the interests of tribes , southern secessionists , local officials , and aqap militants overlap in some areas and clashing in others .

yemenis who have returned from the battlefields of afghanistan , iraq , and syria are interspersed with the population and seek young recruits in areas where tribal authority may have eroded .

though at times the government has succeeded in turning local actors against aqap , the overall prospects for uprooting the group entirely in the foreseeable future remain slim .

although aqap has not repeated its earlier successes at seizing territory , it is still able to harass government and tribal - allied forces , using tactics such as car bombings , kidnappings , and assassinations .

yemen has formally been unified since 1990 , though functionally much power remains vested in non - state actors .

according to one expert on yemen , "since the rise of islam , if not well before , the idea of yemen as a natural unit has been embedded in literature and local practice .

unified power has not. .

presently , yemen is riven by regional , sectarian , and tribal fissures .

peripheral political and armed movements are constantly challenging the center .

however , whereas in the past , regional strife in yemen may have been of minimal consequence to the united states , today these conflicts threaten to exacerbate the terrorism threat , creating a multitude of armed conflicts that groups such as aqap may exploit .

internal turmoil diverts yemeni government attention and resources , thereby reducing both its will and capacity to counter transnational terrorism .

the united states seeks a stable , unified yemen that is no longer home to transnational terrorist groups targeting western or saudi interests ; however , whether or not the united states and the broader international community have the will or means to achieve this goal is an open question .

a modern , politically unified yemen has only been in existence for 24 years , and in many respects unity has been more aspirational than functional .

the united states government has committed itself to furthering yemen's unity while supporting the devolution of some power from the capital to the provinces .

the convening of the 2013-2014 national dialogue conference , which the united states supported , was an attempt to foster reform through a yemeni - driven process that addressed issues such as federalism , resource sharing , and restructuring of the armed forces .

in september 2014 , a state department spokesperson said: we call on all parties , to participate peacefully in yemen's transition process , which offers a historic opportunity to build an inclusive system of governance that ensures a stable and prosperous future for all yemenis .

the united states remains firmly committed to supporting president hadi and all yemenis in this endeavor and to our enduring partnership with the yemeni government to counter the shared threat from al - qa'ida in the arabian peninsula .

however , as regional revolts have recently jostled the country's political order , u.s. and international efforts to support an orderly transition of power are unraveling .

at a time when the constitutional drafting process remains incomplete following the 2011-2012 political transition , yemen is trending more toward dissolution than unity , a pattern that may raise questions about the overall focus of u.s. policy .

houthi rebels and southern separatists almost certainly do not consider the transition process to serve their interests , but rather those of traditional northern yemeni elites .

the u.s. state department has called on the houthis to "cease efforts to take territory by force," to turn over "all medium and heavy weapons to the state," and to abide by a september 21 , partially u.s. - brokered cease - fire .

however , despite u.s. condemnations of houthi unilateralism , at this juncture , the actions of separatist movements — rather than the international community — appear to be driving the terms of yemen's delicate transition .

on may 16 , 2012 , president obama issued executive order 13611 , which sanctions individuals who threaten the "peace , security , or stability of yemen," and those who threaten to disrupt yemen's political transition .

from may 2012 to november 2014 , the u.s. treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) had not sanctioned any yemeni under e.o .

13611 .

however , on november 10 , 2014 , two days after the issuing of targeted united nations sanctions under unscr 2140 ( see below ) , ofac designated three individuals , including former president saleh and two houthi leaders , as specially designated nationals .

in general , it is uncertain what kind of impact u.s. sanctions will have in deterring individuals from disrupting yemen's transition .

in most cases , possible targets of u.s. sanctions are unlikely to have substantial assets under u.s. jurisdiction .

broader international sanctions , such as those created under unscr 2140 , may have a greater impact .

according to one yemeni journalist discussing the possibility of sanctioning former president saleh , "[sanctions] could affect thousands of people , worth millions of dollars," however , it would be less potent against the houthis , who "don't have bank accounts , and they don't travel , so sanctions on them will have no influence in any way , at least in the next couple of years. .

in annual foreign operations legislation , congress does not typically earmark aid to yemen , but the administration makes country - specific requests for congressional consideration .

after the passage of a foreign operations appropriations bill , federal agencies allocate funds to yemen across multiple aid accounts .

they then submit a country allocation report ( 653a report ) to congress for review .

unlike countries or entities ( such as israel , egypt , jordan , and the palestinians ) that generally receive much larger amounts of u.s. assistance from two or three main accounts , yemen receives u.s. aid in any given fiscal year from as many as 17 different aid programs managed by multiple agencies , including the department of state , usaid , and the department of defense ( table 1 ) .

the state department reports that the united states committed more than $142 million in assistance to yemen in fy2014 , in addition to $256 million in fy2013 and more than $356 million in fy2012 .

crs can account for most but not all of these allocations .

program details are available in congressional aid obligation notification documents provided to the authorizing and appropriating committees of jurisdiction .

yemen receives u.s. economic aid from multiple accounts , the largest of which are typically the economic support fund ( esf ) account , the development assistance ( da ) account , and the global health child survival ( ghcs ) account .

the state department and usaid , in partnership with relevant yemeni government ministries and local ngos , channel funds from these accounts into various democracy assistance , global health , education , economic development , and humanitarian aid programs .

u.s. democracy assistance supports programs to update yemen's national voter registry , reform the judicial system , and empower women to participate in civic life .

u.s. - funded global health programs seek to increase yemenis' access to fresh water , improve nutrition , and expand the delivery of basic healthcare .

education programs are focused on improving school facilities , student attendance , reading skills , and teacher training .

usaid funding for economic development supports micro - finance projects , market access for yemeni agricultural products , and vocational training .

in fy2013 and fy2014 , the united states provided over $180.9 million in humanitarian aid to yemen .

these funds were provided to international aid organizations from usaid's office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) , usaid's food for peace ( ffp ) , and the u.s. department of state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( state / prm ) .

the united states is by far the largest single contributor of humanitarian aid to yemen on record , with its assistance nearly double the amount contributed by the next largest donor ( european commission ) .

u.s. military and other security assistance to yemen comes from both state department - managed accounts ( fmf , nadr , incle , imet ) and department of defense - managed accounts ( section 1206 ) .

the united states provides yemen's conventional armed forces modest amounts of fmf grants mainly to service aging and outdated equipment .

the defense department's 1206 "train and equip" fund has become the major source of overt u.s. military aid to yemen .

section 1206 authority is a department of defense account designed to provide equipment , supplies , or training to foreign national military forces engaged in counterterrorist operations .

in general , 1206 aid aims to boost the capacities of yemen's air force , its special operations units , its border control monitoring , and coast guard forces .

1206 funds have supported the yemeni air force's acquisition of transport and surveillance aircraft .

since fy2006 , yemen has received a total of $401.326 million in section 1206 aid .

the following is a list of existing statutes that could restrict u.s. assistance to yemen under various conditions .

control of armed forces by terrorist organization .

p.l .

113-76 , the fy2014 omnibus appropriations act , states that "none of the funds appropriated by this act for assistance for yemen may be made available for the armed forces of yemen if such forces are controlled by a foreign terrorist organization , as designated pursuant to section 219 of the immigration and nationality act. .

child soldiers .

the child soldiers prevention act of 2008 seeks to restrict certain u.s. military assistance to countries known to recruit or use child soldiers in their armed forces , or that host non - government armed forces that recruit or use child soldiers .

the president may waive aid sanctions in cases where the continuation of aid would promote u.s. national interests superseding anti - trafficking policy goals .

on september 30 , 2013 , president obama issued a full waiver to yemen .

crs report rl34317 , trafficking in persons: u.s. policy and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and liana rosen .

human t rafficking .

pursuant to the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , division a of p.l .

106-386 ) , the united states may restrict non - humanitarian , nontrade - related foreign aid from certain governments that do not show progress in eliminating severe forms of trafficking in persons .

the president may waive this restriction and has done so in the case of yemen , most recently for fy2015 .

budget transparency .

direct government - to - government assistance , including aid to yemen's central government , could be restricted under provisions in recent annual appropriations measures that pertain to the transparency of a recipient nation's national budget ( see section 7031 of p.l .

113-76 ) .

the obama administration has waived these restrictions , stating that continued assistance is in the u.s. national interest .

the continued u.s. incarceration of yemeni prisoners in guantanamo bay , cuba , has long been a source of tension in u.s. - yemeni relations .

the yemeni government has sought to repatriate and rehabilitate yemenis detained at guantanamo ; however , u.s. officials have indicated concern that the yemeni government , due to public pressure from islamists , would be unable to properly detain and / or monitor returnees , some of whom may pose security threats .

the obama administration suspended repatriations to yemen after the december 25 , 2009 , failed airline bomb attack by aqap .

in may 2013 , president obama stated his intention to close the detention facility and lift the moratorium against repatriating yemenis .

amongst the 149 prisoners there , at least 86 are yemeni nationals , of whom 58 have been cleared to return to yemen and are expected to be transferred on a case - by - case basis .

some yemeni prisoners were on hunger strikes to alert the public of their situation , and an estimated 17 yemeni prisoners were reportedly force - fed by prison authorities .

located at the southwestern tip of the arabian peninsula , yemen struggles with the lowest per capita gdp in the arab world ( $2,300 ) for its population of 24.7 million people .

the country's rugged terrain and geographic isolation , strong tribal social structure , and sparsely settled population have historically made it difficult to centrally govern ( or conquer ) .

this has promoted a relatively pluralistic political environment , but also has hampered socioeconomic development .

outside of the capital of sana'a , tribal leaders often exert more control than central and local government authorities .

a series of zaydi islamic dynasties ruled parts of yemen both directly and nominally from 897 until 1962 .

the ottoman empire occupied a small portion of the western yemeni coastline between 1849 and 1918 .

in 1839 , the british empire captured the arabian sea port of aden near the country's southern tip .

the british held aden and some of its surrounding territories until 1967 .

the 20 th century political upheavals in the arab world driven by anti - colonialism and arab nationalism tore yemen apart in the 1960s .

in the north , a civil war pitting royalist forces backed by saudi arabia against a republican movement backed by egypt ultimately led to the dissolution of the yemeni zaydi imamate and the creation of the yemen arab republic ( yar ) .

in the south , a yemeni marxist movement became the primary vehicle for resisting the british occupation of aden .

communist insurgents eventually succeeded in establishing their own socialist state ( people's democratic republic of yemen or pdry ) that over time developed close ties to the soviet union and supported what were then palestinian and marxist terrorist organizations .

throughout the cold war , the two yemeni states frequently clashed , and the united states assisted the yar , with saudi arabian financial support , by periodically providing it with weaponry .

by the mid - 1980s , relations between north and south yemen improved , aided in part by the discovery of modest oil reserves .

the republic of yemen was formed by the merger of the formerly separate states of north yemen and south yemen in 1990 .

ali abdullah saleh , a former yar military officer and ruler of north yemen ( from 1978 to 1990 ) became president of the newly unified state in 1990 .

however , yemen's support for iraq during operation desert storm in 1991 crippled the country economically , as saudi arabia and other gulf states expelled an estimated 850,000 expatriate yemeni workers and the united states cut off ties to the newly unified state .

in 1994 , government forces loyal to then president saleh put down an attempt by southern - based dissidents to secede .

many southerners still resent what they perceive as northern political , economic , and cultural domination of the country .

yemen under saleh and relations with the united states under saleh's rule , political power gradually coalesced around his immediate family , whose members filled key posts in various security services .

corruption was rampant , and the country remained the poorest in the arab world and one of the most destitute nations on earth .

saleh managed to stay in power for over four decades , but the country's long - term structural resource and economic challenges worsened during his rule .

during saleh's presidency , u.s. - yemeni relations were constantly strained by a lack of strong military - to - military ties and commercial relations , general yemeni disapproval of u.s. policy in the middle east , and u.s. distrust of yemen's commitment to fighting terrorism .

since yemen's unification , the united states government has been primarily concerned with combating al qaeda and similar terrorist groups inside yemen .

al qaeda's attack in 2000 against the uss cole , coupled with the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , a year later officially made yemen a place of significant concern in the "war on terror. .

during the early years of the george w. bush administration , bilateral relations improved under the rubric of the war against al qaeda , although yemen's lax policy toward suspected terrorists and u.s. concerns about corruption and governance led to limits on u.s. support .

saudi arabia's forceful campaign against al qaeda in the arabian peninsula drove militants to seek refuge in yemen in the middle of the decade , compounding yemen's struggle with terrorism .

in 2009 , the obama administration initiated a major review of u.s. policy toward yemen .

that review , coupled with the attempted airline bombing over detroit on christmas day 2009 , led to a new u.s. strategy toward yemen , referred to as the national security council's yemen strategic plan .

this strategy is essentially three - fold , focusing on combating aqap in the short term , increasing development assistance to meet long - term challenges , and marshalling support for global efforts to stabilize yemen .

yemen and the "arab spring" as unrest spread across the arab world in 2011 , a youth - led popular demonstration movement challenged president saleh's rule in yemen .

first inspired by tunisia's jasmine revolution and then galvanized by the overthrow of egyptian president hosni mubarak , a student protest movement managed over the course of several months to maintain nation - wide demonstrations and attract broad popular support that called for saleh to step down from power .

seeing an opportunity to displace the president and his family , saleh's rivals from within the political and military elite , such as the powerful al ahmar family and the commander of the first armored division , general ali mohsin ( defected on march 21 , 2011 ) , joined opposition demands for the president's resignation .

what began as a popular revolt against a longtime ruler ultimately evolved into a confrontation between competing elites for executive power .

this confrontation turned violent in mid - 2011 , as street battles erupted in sana'a and other cities between forces loyal to saleh and supporters of his opponents .

as political rivals openly fought in the capital , government forces were recalled from outlying provinces to protect the regime , leaving a security vacuum in areas known to harbor islamist militants and other separatists .

soon , militias associated with al qaeda in the arabian peninsula seized territory in one southern province .

concerned that the political unrest and resulting security vacuum were strengthening terrorist elements , the united states , saudi arabia , and other members of the international community attempted to broker a political compromise .

saleh was able for several months to resist international attempts to broker his managed departure , in spite of a bombing attack that nearly killed him and forced his temporary exile to saudi arabia .

however , a combination of greater international pressure , as exemplified by the passing of united nations security council resolution ( unscr ) 2014 ( which reaffirmed un support for a political settlement as soon as possible ) , defections from his loyalist security forces , and their mounting losses on the ground to rival tribal militias , seem to have led him to conclude that his political position had become untenable .

in early november 2011 , some european union member states had begun to openly threaten sanctions , including asset freezes against the president and his family , if saleh did not adhere to unscr 2014 .

yemen's tenuous transition on november 23 , 2011 , after 11 months of protests and violence that claimed over 2,000 lives , saleh signed on to a u.s. - backed , gulf cooperation council ( gcc ) - brokered transition plan .

as part of the plan and in return for his resignation , saleh and his family were granted immunity from prosecution and the former president was able to retain his role as head of the general people's congress ( gpc ) , the former ruling party .

after a 90-day transition period , yemen held a presidential "election" in february 2012 with one consensus candidate on the ballot — former vice president abed rabbo mansour al hadi .

al hadi received 6.6 million votes and , on february 25 , 2012 , was inaugurated as president .

after the election , attention shifted toward the next phases of the gcc plan: the convening of a national dialogue ; the redrafting of the constitution ; the holding of a constitutional referendum ; the development of an electoral law ; and the holding of parliamentary and / or presidential elections .

in january 2014 , after ten months of talks , yemen's national dialogue conference , a forum that was backed by the united nations for the purpose of reaching broad national consensus on a new political order , officially concluded without agreement between northern and southern politicians on how to organize a new federal system of democratic governance .

the conference brought 565 representatives from yemen's various political groups together to reach agreement on thorny political issues , such as power sharing between northern and southern regions , among other things .

tensions , including some linked to the previous existence of two separate yemeni states from the 1960s to 1990 , appear to linger as a result of a number of political and identity - based differences .

the conference , which was supposed to end four months earlier according to the official transition timeline , concluded with president hadi forming a committee ( which he will lead ) to determine whether yemen should be divided into two or six federal regions .

southern yemenis favor a two - region system , believing it will put them on more equal footing with the traditionally more politically dominant north while securing their access to a larger share of yemen's oil resources , which are located in the south .

yemen's entire political transition was to end in february 2014 , but at the conclusion of the national dialogue , participants supported a presidential decree extending president hadi's term by another year , presumably at least until february 2015 .

according to jamal benomar , the united nations special adviser on yemen , "the old regime is still very deep and some elements feel that they have been induced to give up a lot....they have a lot of resources and believe they can turn back the clock .

the gains achieved in this transition could easily evaporate. .

yemeni legislators and other politicians have yet to write a new constitution , hold a public referendum on its approval , write a new electoral law , and hold presidential and parliamentary elections .

in sum , yemen's transition could take several additional years .

