the block grant of temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) is best known as a funding source for cash welfare for low - income families with children .

however , the block grant also funds a wide range of benefits and services for economically disadvantaged families .

it also funds activities to help achieve the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and raising children in two - parent families .

tanf was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , with the funding originally slated to expire at the end of fiscal year ( fy ) 2002 .

congress debated reauthorization of the block grant during the 107 th through the 109 th congresses .

comprehensive legislation to reauthorize and revise tanf did not pass during this period , and the program operated on the basis of a series of temporary extensions .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) included a slimmed down version of welfare reauthorization that extended tanf funding through fy2010 , though tanf " supplemental grants " ( discussed below ) were extended only through fy2008 ; revised the work requirements that apply to welfare recipients ; and established new funding for competitive grants to demonstrate initiatives to promote healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood .

a decision on whether and how to extend tanf supplemental grants , which go to 17 states in the south and west on the basis of low historic levels of welfare funding and high population growth , beyond september 30 , 2008 , is the only "must - do" task related to tanf in the 110 th congress .

however , congress might examine the impact of dra's provisions related to tanf work participation standards for welfare recipients .

additionally , in light of renewed interest in issues related to poverty and disadvantaged families with children , interest might be raised in the flexibility states have to use tanf funds for a wide range of "non - welfare" activities .

tanf is the block grant created in the 1996 welfare reform law that replaced the new deal program of aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) .

afdc provided monthly cash welfare benefits to needy families with children , with most of these families headed by single mothers .

concerns that afdc helped create disadvantage by discouraging work and breaking up families dominated welfare reform debates from 1970 onward , culminating in the 1996 welfare reform law .

some of the most visible policies of the 1996 welfare reform law are tanf work requirements for welfare recipients , time limits on the receipt of welfare , and the end of a federal entitlement to welfare for needy families with children .

the monthly tanf cash welfare benefit , like the monthly afdc benefit before it , is determined by the states , and benefit amounts vary widely among the states .

in january 2005 , the monthly cash benefit in california was $723 for a family of three .

the california benefit amount is high relative to many other states , though even that benefit is only a fraction ( 54% ) of poverty - level income .

in alabama , a family of three received $215 per month ( 16% of poverty - level income ) .

table 1 shows selected economic and social indicators for 1995 , 2000 , and 2006 .

as shown , the cash welfare caseload plummeted from nearly 5 million to 1.9 million families over this period .

most of that caseload decline occurred from 1995 to 2000 , though recently the cash welfare caseload has fallen again .

the number of children in families receiving cash welfare fell from 9.1 million to 3.5 million from 1995 to 2006 .

work among single mothers ( who head most welfare families ) increased from 1995 to 2000 , with some slippage in the 2000-2006 period .

however , despite the decline in receipt of cash welfare and increase in work among single mothers , improvements in other social and economic indicators have been less dramatic .

the child poverty rate did fall from 1995 to 2000 , but the 2006 rate of 17.4% is higher than in 2000 .

there remained 12.8 million children living in families with incomes below the poverty threshold in 2006 .

further , the percentage of babies born out - of - wedlock in 2006 was 38.9% — an all - time high .

cash welfare reaches far fewer disadvantaged children than it did prior to welfare reform .

the ratio of the average monthly number of children in families receiving cash welfare to the total number of children in poverty declined from about six out of ten in 1995 to less than three out of ten in 2006 .

tanf is not just a welfare program .

the 1996 law granted states permission to use funds for a wide range of benefits , services , and activities to address some of the social and economic ills afflicting disadvantaged families with children .

states may use their funds in any manner "reasonably calculated" to further tanf's purpose , which is to provide states with the flexibility to achieve four goals set in statute: ( 1 ) provide assistance to needy families so that children may live in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; ( 2 ) end dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting work , job preparation , and marriage ; ( 3 ) reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and ( 4 ) promote the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

given the fixed funding of the tanf block grant , states are able to use the savings from the welfare caseload decline to fund other "nonwelfare" benefits , services , and activities .

total funding in the tanf "system" comprises both the federal block grant to states and a state's own funds spent to meet a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement .

figure 1 shows the uses of tanf and moe funds in fy2006 .

it shows that the categories typically associated with a traditional cash welfare program — cash benefits , administrative costs , and work activities — accounted for only a little more than half of total tanf funds .

thus , tanf has the potential to make an impact on disadvantaged families with children through both its "nonwelfare" benefits , services , and activities , as well as its "welfare" component .

enactment of the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) ended more than four years of congressional debate on "reauthorizing" the tanf block grant .

over the 2002 to 2005 period , congress passed twelve temporary extensions of the program while more comprehensive reauthorization bills remained pending .

the dra included a slimmed down version of reauthorization , extending tanf funding and making some limited policy changes .

many of the policy changes proposed in the reauthorization bills considered from 2002 to 2005 were not included in the dra , and some of those changes may be revived for legislation in the 110 th congress .

additionally , dra's changes to the tanf work participation standards have met with some criticism that also might spur proposals in this congress .

this section provides a brief summary of the dra provisions affecting tanf .

for more detail , please see crs report rs22369 , tanf , child care , marriage promotion , and responsible fatherhood provisions in the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

the dra extended the bulk of federal tanf and moe funding through fy2010 .

however , dra continued supplemental grants only through fy2008 , making a decision on their extension beyond then the business of the 110 th congress .

unless congress acts to extend supplemental grants , the fy2009 tanf grant awards , beginning october 1 , 2008 , would be reduced for the 17 states that receive supplemental grants .

in light of the potential for an economic slump , 110 th congress might also review tanf's contingency provisions for financing unanticipated spending increases because of a recession .

though "welfare" now accounts for only a little more than half of all tanf and moe funding , most issues the 110 th congress might consider , other than financing issues , relate to families receiving welfare .

specifically , these issues relate to the law's requirement that a specified percentage of cash welfare families in each state participate in work or related activities .

dra's changes to the caseload reduction credit require states to either: ( 1 ) raise the share of families on the welfare roles working or engaged in job preparation activities or ( 2 ) reduce the cash welfare caseload .

although much attention has been paid to the required increase in participation standards and the impact of dra - required regulations specifying the operational details of state work programs , the cash welfare caseload has been declining at an accelerating rate .

over the most recent 12-month period for which data are available , the tanf / moe cash welfare caseload declined by 10% .

the savings to government budgets from the cash welfare caseload decline remain within the tanf system for states to use in any manner reasonably calculated to achieve the broad purposes of the block grant .

in fy2006 , almost half of all tanf and moe funding — totaling $14 billion — was available to states for benefits , services , and activities other than those associated with traditional cash welfare programs .

tanf funds are used for a wide range of activities often discussed in the debate about ways to combat poverty: providing early childhood programs , supporting post - secondary education , job retention and advancement programs , and helping noncustodial parents .

thus , while tanf cash welfare reaches less than three in ten poor children , tanf's nonwelfare benefits and services can have a much broader reach into the population of disadvantaged children and their families .

the "nonwelfare" component of tanf is much less debated than its traditional cash welfare programs and activities for a number of reasons .

first , the information tanf requires of states to describe the "nonwelfare" component of tanf precludes a comprehensive and systematic examination of these activities .

a 2006 gao report found that "reporting and oversight mechanisms have not kept pace with the evolving role in tanf budgets , leaving information gaps at the national level related to the numbers served and how states use funds to meet welfare reform goals...." second , on the basis of what is known , a great deal of tanf's "nonwelfare" spending goes to two other federal - state program areas: child care and child welfare .

 ( child welfare means foster care , adoption assistance , and other benefits and services for children who either have been , or are at risk of , abuse and neglect. ) .

both of these areas have their own dedicated funding streams , which are supplemented with considerable dollars by tanf .

both of these areas also have their own policy debates which , while related to tanf , are sometimes conducted independently of tanf debates .

the welfare reauthorization proposals considered by congress during 2002 through 2005 included two relatively "technical" issues ( use of carry - over funds and whether certain services are classified as "welfare" ) that were not in the final dra agreement .

these two issues and two others relating to "nonwelfare" uses of tanf and moe funds are discussed below .

the 110 th congress might consider a range of tanf issues .

a number of them stem from policy changes made by congress in the dra .

these issues also touch on some that have been long - debated , such as the role of education and training in helping recipients move from welfare to work and achieving self - sufficiency .

even absent a scheduled reauthorization of tanf , this may be an opportune time to reconsider tanf issues and the role the block grant can play to help disadvantaged families with children .

the context that tanf operates in has changed considerably from the time of the welfare reform debates in the early and mid - 1990s .

the cash welfare caseload has declined substantially and incentives are in place for states to seek further caseload declines .

non - welfare support for the working poor has increased , both with tanf - funded benefits and services ( eg , child care ) and from other programs ( eg , earned income tax credit and state childrens' health insurance program ) .

the "nonwelfare" part of tanf has the potential to help disadvantaged families with children through new and innovative ways .

whether that is happening is an open question given the information gap on these activities .

illuminating tanf's "nonwelfare" side might recast future discussions about tanf to reflect the changing context in which the block grant operates .

