in the 110 th congress , the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) was enacted to amend , extend , and establish new programs under the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) .

in most cases , funding authorization for programs extended or newly established under the heoa is provided through fy2014 .

the heoa also makes amendments to and extends funding authorization within a number of other laws .

the hea authorizes a broad array of federal student aid programs that assist students and their families with paying for or financing the costs of obtaining a postsecondary education , as well as programs that provide aid to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

the hea , as amended by the heoa , is organized into eight titles .

title i specifies general provisions and definitions for most of the programs authorized under the hea .

most of the federal student aid programs are authorized under title iv , student assistance .

title iv also authorizes programs that make available services and support to less - advantaged students .

in addition , programs that make available assistance to students pursuing international education and certain graduate and professional degrees are authorized under title vi , international education programs and title vii , graduate and postsecondary improvement programs .

programs that make available aid and support to institutions are authorized under title ii , teacher quality enhancement , title iii , strengthening institutions , and title v , developing institutions .

finally , the heoa added a new title , title viii , additional programs , to the hea .

hea programs are administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

the higher education act of 1965 was enacted as p.l .

89-329 , on november 8 , 1965 .

since then , the hea and its component programs have been amended and extended numerous times .

on several occasions , the hea has been comprehensively amended and reauthorized .

prior to the enactment of the heoa , the last comprehensive reauthorization of the hea occurred in 1998 , under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) , which authorized funding for most hea programs through fy2003 .

during the period leading up to the enactment of the heoa , authorization for hea programs had been extended for one additional fiscal year under the general education provisions act ( gepa ) , and then incrementally through a series of higher education extension acts .

major amendments to selected hea programs — particularly those that receive mandatory funding — have also been made as part of recent budget reconciliation measures .

in the 109 th congress , the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program and the william d. ford federal direct loan ( dl ) program were amended and extended under the higher education reconciliation act ( hera , part of p.l .

109-171 ) .

in the 110 th congress , the college cost reduction and access act ( ccraa ; p.l .

110-84 ) made significant changes to ffel and dl programs , the federal pell grant program , and the federal need analysis formula .

additionally , in spring 2008 , emergency changes to the federal student loan programs were made under the ensuring continuing access to student loans act of 2008 ( ecasla ; p.l .

110-227 ) .

in the first session of 110 th congress , the senate passed s. 1642 , the higher education amendments of 2007 ( s.rept .

110-231 ) , to amend and extend the hea .

in the second session of the 110 th congress , the house passed an hea reauthorization bill , h.r .

4137 , the college opportunity and affordability act of 2008 ( h.rept .

110-500 ) .

the two bills contained a number of similar provisions , as well as many that were unique to each bill .

many of the provisions contained in either or both the senate and house bills were agreed to by house and senate conferees in approving the conference report to h.r .

4137 ( h.rept .

110-803 ) .

both the house and the senate passed h.r .

4137 , renamed as the higher education opportunity act , on july 31 , 2008 ; and it was signed into law by the president on august 14 , 2008 ( p.l .

110-315 ) .

the heoa is composed of eleven titles , as identified below .

title i: general provisions title ii: teacher quality enhancement title iii: institutional aid title iv: student assistance title v: developing institutions title vi: international education programs title vii: graduate and postsecondary improvement programs title viii: additional programs title ix: amendments to other laws title x: private student loan improvement title xi: studies and reports in general , titles i through vii of the heoa amend , extend , and authorize new programs under the corresponding titles of the hea .

title viii of the heoa adds a new title viii to the hea , which establishes a series of new programs .

together , the eight titles of the hea specify program requirements and authorize a wide array of programs that assist students and their families with paying for or financing the costs of obtaining a postsecondary education ; and also programs that provide aid to institutions .

titles ix and x of the heoa primarily make amendments to other laws ; and title xi establishes requirements for a series of studies and reports .

in general , amendments made under the heoa to the hea are effective the date of enactment ( august 14 , 2008 ) .

however , certain amendments are effective either prospectively or retroactively .

unless otherwise noted , the amendments discussed below are effective the date of enactment .

also , unless otherwise noted , authorizations for the appropriation of funds for discretionary grant programs are provided for fy2009 through fy2014 .

see appendix for a complete list of authorizations of appropriations in the hea , as amended by the heoa .

the remainder of this report is divided into two parts .

the first part is organized in a manner that corresponds with the organization of the hea and identifies and describes amendments the heoa makes to the hea .

the second part describes changes the heoa makes to other laws and the studies and reports it requires .

three additional titles of the heoa do not amend the hea .

title ix amends and reauthorizes appropriations to several other higher education - related laws .

title x amends other laws in relation to private student loans .

finally , title xi mandates studies and reports to be conducted by various entities and submitted to congress .

the heoa amends several laws related to higher education , but separate from the hea .

the heoa also reauthorizes laws related to education of the deaf , indian education , and programs established under previous hea amendments .

the heoa names the center for elementary and secondary education programs at gallaudet university the laurent clerc national deaf education center and establishes education and assessment requirements for the center .

it establishes a new cultural experiences grants program , authorizing the secretary to award competitive grants or contracts to provide students with cultural , educational , and social experiences .

the act also amends international student provisions for the national technical institute for the deaf and expands previous provisions requiring the secretary to conduct a study on education of the deaf to now require the establishment of a commission on the education of the deaf .

it also includes other technical amendments to the education of the deaf act , and extends its authorization through fy2014 .

the heoa makes technical amendments and extends authorization through fy2014 .

the heoa repeals from previous higher education amendments several programs and provisions , including prior studies , community scholarship mobilization ; improving united states understanding of science , engineering , and technology in east asia ; web - based education commission ; and a sense of congress statement regarding good character .

it also makes significant amendments to the grants to states for workplace and community transition training for incarcerated individuals program and the underground railroad educational and cultural program , and extends their authorizations through fy2014 .

the heoa extends the authorization for olympic scholarships through fy2014 .

the heoa amends the department of education organization act to establish within the office of postsecondary education the position of deputy assistant secretary for international and foreign language education .

the heoa reauthorizes the tribally controlled colleges or universities assistance act of 1978 through fy2014 , and makes amendments to definitions , continuing education , accreditation , and other provisions .

for grants to tccus , the act increases the per student allotment from $6,000 to $8,000 , to be adjusted in the future for inflation .

it also adds a new title v , tribally controlled postsecondary career and technical institutions , which provide grants to the united tribes technical college and the navajo technical college .

the heoa also makes technical amendments to the navajo community college act and extends its authorization through fy2014 .

the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 is amended to establish a loan repayment program , under which the attorney general may assume the obligation to repay up to $10,000 per year , and a maximum of $60,000 , on federal student loans made under ffel , dl and perkins loan programs ( other than plus loans borrowed on behalf of a dependent student ) for borrowers who enter into agreements to serve as prosecutors or public defenders for at least three years .

the program is authorized to be funded at $25 million for fy2009 ; and such sums as may be necessary for fy2010-fy2014 .

this provision of the heoa specifies that , notwithstanding any other provision of law , ihes are authorized to provide financial assistance to current and former students who are officers or employees of the united states government , or of the district of columbia , for the purpose of repaying a student loan or providing forbearance .

such assistance must be provided in accordance with a published written policy of the institution addressing loan repayment or forbearance for current and former students who perform public service .

note that this provision does not amend any law .

the heoa establishes the minority serving institution digital and wireless technology opportunity program , authorizing the secretary to award grants or contracts to ihes to acquire and build capacity for using digital and wireless networking technologies .

title iii and title v msis and minority institutions ( ihes enrolling more than 50% of any minority group ) are eligible to apply for these grants .

title x amends the truth in lending act ( tila ) , the community reinvestment act of 1977 ( cra ) , and title i , part e of the hea ( discussed above ) , with respect to education loans .

it also establishes new requirements for the financial literacy and education commission .

the heoa amends the tila with respect to private education loans .

these amendments are described below .

the heoa amends the tila to make it applicable to all private education loans ( i.e. , loans not made , insured , or guaranteed under title iv of the hea ; and that are issued expressly for expenses included as part of a student's coa ) , regardless of the amount of such loans .

lenders of private education loans are prohibited from directly or indirectly offering or providing gifts to an ihe or its employees in exchange for any advantage related to the business of making private education loans ; from engaging in revenue sharing with an ihe ; and from co - branding with an ihe in the marketing of private education loans .

employees of the financial aid office of an ihe , or who otherwise have responsibilities with respect to private educational loans , and who serve on an advisory board , commission , or group established by a lender of private education loans are prohibited from receiving anything of value from the lender , except for the reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred as a result of such service .

lenders of private education loans are also prohibited from imposing pre - payment penalties on borrowers .

the heoa amends the tila to require lenders of private education loans to disclose to borrowers detailed information about the terms and conditions of loans , and the right to cancel within three days of consummation , in applications and solicitations , at the time of loan approval , and at the time of consummation .

borrowers of private education loans must be provided 30 days to accept the terms and conditions of the loan and to consummate the transaction , with no changes ( other than adjustments to interest rates based on an index ) .

lenders are also prohibited from consummating private education loans without first obtaining private education loan self - certification forms ( specified under hea title i , part e ) from borrowers .

the heoa amends the truth in lending act to subject lenders of private educational loans to civil liability for the failure to disclose required information about the terms and conditions of private education loans , including the right to cancel .

borrowers of private educational loans may sue for damages regarding violations of the terms of disclosure until one year following the date on which the first payment of principal is due .

the heoa amends the cra as follows .

the cra is amended to require federal financial supervisory agencies to consider low - cost education loans made to low - income borrowers as a factor in assessing the record of a financial institution in meeting the credit needs of its entire community ( including low - and moderate - income neighborhoods , consistent with the safe and sound operation of such institution ) .

the heoa requires the financial literacy and education commission to identify programs that promote or enhance financial literacy for college students , evaluate the effectiveness of those programs , promote those that are most effective , and encourage ihes to implement effective financial education programs .

the commission is also required to report to congress on the state of financial literacy at ihes .

in addition to performance reporting requirements and formal evaluations mandated for the various programs of the hea , the heoa authorizes 24 studies and reports to be conducted by the following designated entities .

study on foreign graduate medical schools employment of postsecondary education graduates study on ipeds report on proprietary ihes endowment report study on regional sensitivity in the needs analysis formula study on the financial and compliance audits of the federal student loan program study and report on nonindividual information feasibility study for student loan clearinghouse study on department of education oversight of incentive compensation ba .

analysis of federal regulations on ihes independent evaluation of distance education programs review of costs and benefits of environmental , health , and safety standards study on bias in standardized tests study on teaching students with reading disabilities nursing school capacit .

report and study on articulation agreements study of minority male academic achievement study of correctional postsecondary education , in consultation with the secretary of labor and the attorney general study of aid to less - than - half - time students study of the impact of student loan debt on public service , in consultation with the office of management and budget and coordination with the national academy of public administrators or the american society for public administration report on income contingent repayment through the income tax withholding system , with the secretary of the treasury developing additional measures of degree completion summit on sustainability , in consultation with the administrator of the environmental protection agenc .

as discussed throughout this report , the heoa amended the hea to extend funding authorization for previously established hea programs and to authorize the appropriation of funds for newly established programs .

table a - 1 presents information on the authorization of appropriations for hea programs and activities , as amended by the heoa .

it also presents information on higher education programs that are not part of the hea , but that are established under related acts: the heoa , the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) , and the higher education amendments of 1992 ( p.l .

102-325 ) .

table a - 1 lists , by title and part , programs for which funds are authorized to be appropriated under the hea or related acts .

for each program , the table identifies the section of the act under which the appropriation of funds is authorized for the program ; whether the program is a continuing program ( c ) that had been authorized under the hea or a related act prior to reauthorization , or is newly established ( n ) by the heoa ; and whether appropriations for the program are discretionary ( d ) or mandatory ( m ) .

for continuing programs , the table also shows the amount of funding that was provided for fy2008 ; notations of "n / a" for new programs mean that fy2008 amounts are not applicable .

for all programs , the table shows the amount of funding authorized to be appropriated for fy2009 through fy2017 , as applicable .

appropriations figures are shown in thousands of dollars ; the phrase "such sums" indicates that the amount authorized to be appropriated for a particular fiscal year is such sums as may be necessary .

in general , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program in the hea , the authorization of appropriations would be extended for one additional fiscal year under § 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa , p.l .

90-247 ) .

therefore , although most hea program authorizations will expire in fy2014 , gepa will automatically extend these authorizations to fy2015 .

 ( the table , however , does not reflect this extension. ) .

note that for programs with both discretionary and mandatory components , the discretionary authorization is in addition to mandatory amounts .

mandatory funds may flow under the authority of a particular program , but the funding provision may limit uses of funds .

for example , hsi funds are available to hsi - eligible institutions ( as defined by title v , part a ) , but for limited purposes of promoting science programs and articulation agreements ( described under title iii , part f , § 371 ) .

mandatory appropriations made under title iii , part f ( § 371 ) ; title iv , part a ( § 401 ) ; and title vii , part e ( § 781 ) were added by the ccraa and were amended by the heoa .

mandatory appropriations made under title viii , part aa ( § 898 ) were added by the heoa .

