t his report summarizes the federal civil remedies and criminal penalties that may be available for violations of the rights granted by the federal intellectual property laws: the copyright act of 1976 , the patent act of 1952 , the trademark act of 1946 ( conventionally known as the lanham act ) , and the economic espionage act of 1996 .

intellectual property ( ip ) law has four major branches , applicable to different types of subject matter: copyright ( original artistic and literary works of authorship ) , patent ( inventions of processes , machines , manufactures , and compositions of matter that are useful , new , and nonobvious ) , trademark ( commercial symbols ) , and trade secret ( confidential , commercially valuable business information ) .

the source of federal copyright and patent law originates with the copyright and patent clause of the u.s. constitution , which authorizes congress "to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries. .

by contrast , the commerce clause provides the constitutional basis for federal trademark law and trade secret law .

the copyright act , patent act , and lanham act provide legal protection for intellectual property against unauthorized use , theft , and other violations of the rights granted by those statutes to the ip owner .

the copyright act provides copyright owners with the exclusive right to control reproduction , distribution , public performance , and display of their copyrighted works .

the patent act grants patent holders the right to exclude others from making , using , offering for sale , or selling their patented invention throughout the united states , or importing the invention into the united states .

the lanham act allows sellers and producers of goods and services to prevent a competitor from ( 1 ) using any counterfeit , copy , or imitation of their trademarks ( that have been registered with the u.s. patent and trademark office ) , in connection with the sale of any goods or services in a way that is likely to cause confusion , mistake , or deception , or ( 2 ) using in commercial advertising any word , term , name , symbol , or device , or any false or misleading designation of origin or false or misleading description or representation of fact , which: ( a ) is likely to cause confusion , mistake , or deception as to affiliation , connection , or association , or as to origin , sponsorship , or approval , of his or her goods , services , or commercial activities by another person , or ( b ) misrepresents the nature , characteristics , qualities , or geographic origin of his or her or another person's goods , services , or commercial activities .

in addition , the lanham act grants to owners of "famous" trademarks the right to seek injunctive relief against another person's use in commerce of a mark or trade name if such use causes dilution by blurring or tarnishment of the distinctive quality of the famous trademark .

an alternative to patent law protection may be found in trade secret law , which grants inventors proprietary rights to particular technologies , processes , designs , or formula that may not be able to satisfy the rigorous statutory standards for patentability .

until 1996 , trade secret protection was primarily governed by state law .

congress enacted the federal economic espionage act of 1996 to provide criminal penalties ( and authorize the attorney general to seek injunctive relief ) for the theft of trade secrets by domestic and foreign entities , in certain circumstances .

the defend trade secrets act of 2016 amended the economic espionage act to provide private parties with a federal civil remedy for trade secret misappropriation .

enforcement of ip rights may be accomplished by the ip owner bringing a lawsuit against an alleged infringer .

the u.s. department of justice may also criminally prosecute particularly egregious violators of the ip laws in order to impose greater punishment and possibly deter other would - be violators .

in certain circumstances , a variety of federal agencies may become involved in ip rights enforcement: for example , the u.s. customs and border protection agency has the power to seize counterfeit goods upon their attempted importation in the united states ; the international trade commission may investigate and adjudicate allegations of unfair trade practices due to the importing of goods that were produced as a result of trade secret theft or that infringe u.s. patents , trademarks , or copyrights ; and the u.s. trade representative , the u.s. department of commerce's international trade administration , and the u.s. state department are all involved in promoting and seeking ip rights enforcement by trading partners and other foreign countries .

in copyright cases , the statute of limitations for initiating a civil action is within three years after the claim accrued , while a criminal proceeding must be commenced within five years after the cause of action arose .

although there is no express federal statute of limitations for civil trademark infringement claims , federal courts generally follow the limitations period for the most analogous state - law cause of action from the state in which the claim is heard ; courts have also applied the equitable doctrine of laches ( unreasonable , prejudicial delay in commencing a lawsuit ) to determine whether a trademark infringement claim is untimely .

one federal appellate court has determined that criminal trademark infringement prosecutions are governed by the general five - year statute of limitations for non - capital offenses under title 18 of the u.s. code .

although there is no statute of limitations in patent infringement actions , the patent act specifies a time limit on monetary relief for patent infringement claims: damages are available only for infringement that occurs within the six years prior to the filing of the complaint or counterclaim for patent infringement .

finally , federal law provides a three - year statute of limitations period for a civil action involving the misappropriation of a trade secret .

the lanham act , copyright act , and economic espionage act have criminal and civil provisions for violations of their respective provisions , while the patent act only provides civil remedies in the event of patent infringement .

federal courts determine the civil remedies in an action for infringement brought by the ip owner .

if the federal government chooses to prosecute individuals or organizations for ip violations , the imprisonment terms are set forth in the substantive statutes describing the particular ip crime , while the criminal fine amount for violations of the trademark and copyright laws is determined in conjunction with 18 u.s.c .

section 3571 ( which specifies the amount of the fine under title 18 of the u.s. code ) .

in comparison , the criminal fine amount for economic espionage or trade secret theft is specified in the economic espionage act itself .

information regarding the civil remedies and criminal penalties for violations of the copyright , trademark , patent , and trade secret laws is presented on the following pages in table - format .

these penalties may be imposed upon conviction of the defendant in the case of a criminal prosecution , and the civil remedies follow a judgment of infringement reached by a federal judge or jury in a civil action .

 ( certain injunctive relief may be available prior to final judgment , such as temporary injunctions or impounding of infringing articles. ) .

for any offense that provides forfeiture penalties , criminal forfeiture is available upon the conviction of the owner of the offending property ; civil forfeiture is available if the government establishes that the infringing goods are subject to confiscation by a preponderance of the evidence .

restitution is available when the defendant is convicted of a criminal property offense .

 .

