congressional hearings and press coverage critical of the medical care received by noncitizens in the custody of the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) have increased congressional interest in the subject , including the introduction of legislation related to detainee health care .

an overarching debate on this issue concerns the appropriate standard of health care that should be provided to foreign nationals in immigration detention .

the medical care required to be provided to detainees is outlined in ice's national detention standards , and the division of immigrant health services ( dihs ) , which is detailed from the u.s. public health service to ice is ultimately responsible for the health care of noncitizens detained by ice .

however , the florida immigrant advocacy center has reported that problems with access to medical care is one of the chief complaints of aliens in detention .

similarly , the national immigrant justice center states that complaints about access to medical care are a constant theme in conversations with detained aliens .

in addition , the u.s. government recently admitted negligence in the death of francisco castaneda , a former ice detainee .

thus , although standards exist , one of the questions raised is are the standards being followed ? .

this report begins with an overview of noncitizen detention and then examines the procedures and policies related to the provision of health care to detainees .

the report concludes with a discussion of the issues surrounding detainee health care .

the report does not investigate the veracity of claims of substandard medical care made in the press or ice's rebuttals .

the law provides broad authority to detain aliens while awaiting a determination of whether they should be removed from the united states , and mandates that certain categories of aliens are subject to mandatory detention ( i.e. , the aliens must be detained ) by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

aliens not subjected to mandatory detention can be paroled , released on bond , or continue to be detained .

any alien can be detained while dhs determines whether the alien should be removed from the united states .

although some detainees are criminal aliens , others are asylum seekers who have not committed a crime , and others are aliens who are present without status ( illegal aliens ) who , while in violation of their immigration status and immigration law , have not committed a criminal offense .

in addition , some of the criminal alien detainees are legal permanent residents who have resided in the united states for many years .

other detained aliens include those who arrive at a port - of - entry without proper documentation ( eg , fraudulent or invalid visas , or no documentation ) , but most of these aliens are quickly returned to their country of origin through a process known as expedited removal .

the majority of aliens arriving without proper documentation who claim asylum are held until their "credible fear hearing" and then released ; however , some asylum seekers are held until their asylum claims have been adjudicated .

although noncitizens in immigration detention are in the custody of ice , only a minority are detained at facilities owned or fully contracted by ice .

in october 2007 , 65% of noncitizen detainees were detained at state and local prisons , 19% at contract facilities , 14% at service processing centers ( spcs ) owned and operated by ice , and 2% at bureau of prisons ( bop ) facilities .

notably , all facilities housing immigration detainees must comply with ice's national detention standards ( discussed below ) .

the us immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , office of detention and removal operations ( dro ) is responsible for ensuring safe and humane conditions of confinement for detained aliens in federal custody , including the provision of reliable , consistent , appropriate and cost - effective health services .

 — immigration and customs enforcemen .

the following section synthesizes the finding in three u.s. government reports that examined selected detention facilities' compliance with all or some of the national detention standards .

all three reports examined compliance with the medical care standard .

the reports are as follows: u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , office of detention and removal ( dro ) , semiannual report on compliance with ice national detention standards: january — june 2007 , may 9 , 2008 .

government accountability office ( gao ) , alien detention standards: telephone access problems were pervasive at detention facilities ; other deficiencies did not show a pattern of noncompliance , gao - 07-875 , july 2007 .

department of homeland security , office of the inspector general ( dhs oig ) , treatment of immigration detainees housed at immigration and customs enforcement facilities , oig - 07-01 , december 2006 .

table 1 presents the time period of the reviews , the number of facilities reviewed , and the total number of standards evaluated for the studies discussed .

reports of inadequate care being provided to detainees raise several policy issues pertaining to the health care provided to the detained noncitizen population .

first , the detention population , both in funded bed space and in the total detention population , increased between fy2003 and fy2007 raising interest in spending on detainee medical care , and concerns that spending has not increased in the same proportion as the detained population .

in addition , ice has the authority to release aliens due to medical and psychological problems , elevating interest in the existing guidelines and practices for medical release , and their adequacy .

similarly , due to the likely special needs of asylum seekers in detention , another policy issue focuses on whether proper care is and can be provided to this population within a detention setting .

while every death is regrettable , preventable deaths of aliens in detention who are reliant on the government for medical care heighten concerns about the quality of health care .

doubts about the propriety of the number of deaths in detention as a reliable measure of standard of care , lead to the policy question of which measures would provide insight into the adequacy and quality of care .

finally , an overarching debate on this issue concerns the appropriate standard of health care that should be provided to foreign nationals in immigration detention .

this debate is especially emotional because of the balancing act between basic human rights and the cost of health care when u.s. citizens also face barriers in accessing health care .

concerns about the adequacy of health care for detained aliens has increased interest in funding for detainee medical care .

as shown in table 2 , from fy2003 to fy2007 , the total amount spent on detainee medical care increased by 83% , from $50 million to $92 million .

during that same time period , the total amount of funded bed space increased by 41% .

the total amount of funds spent on ice detainee health care increased between fy2003 and fy2004 .

between fy2004 and fy2006 , the total expenditures on detainee health care fluctuated but remained between $70 and $74 million .

between fy2006 and fy2007 , the total expenditures increased from $74 million to $92 million .

most of the increase in total spending on detainee health care was from increases in program operations , not in medical claims , which are for services rendered by an off - site health care provider to detainees .

the total amount of money spent on detainee health care program operations doubled between fy2003 and fy2007 .

however , the funds expended for medical claims increased between fy2003 and fy2004 , then decreased between fy2004 and fy2005 .

between fy2005 and fy2007 , expenditures on medical claims remained almost constant .

during the same time , the funded amount of bed space increased by 49% .

ice has the authority to release aliens due to medical and psychological problems ; however , how often this authority is exercised and whether it is used effectively is unknown .

ice has prosecutorial discretion in determining custody for aliens with humanitarian ( including medical ) concerns .

the alien may be released into an alternatives to detention program , released on an order of supervision , or released on his or her own recognizance .

these decisions are made on a case - by - case basis , "whenever a medical or psychiatric evaluation makes the alien's detention problematic and / or removal [from the united states] unlikely. .

ice does not keep track of how often this discretion is exercised .

while there is general debate about the merits of detaining asylum seekers , asylum seekers often have medical and psychological issues and it is not clear how well - equipped the detention health care system is to deal with the specific physical and psychological needs of asylum seekers .

as discussed , aliens in expedited removal must be detained , and thus aliens in expedited removal who claim asylum are detained while their "credible fear" cases are pending , and they may then be detained while their case is decided .

in fy2006 , 5,761 asylum seekers were detained , and 1,559 ( 27% ) were detained for more than 180 days .

notably , some claim that the practice of detaining asylum seekers has helped reduced the number of fraudulent asylum claims .

however , the position of the united nations high commission on refugees is that detaining asylum seekers is "inherently undesirable. .

it argues that detention may be psychologically damaging to an already fragile population such as those who are escaping from imprisonment and torture in their countries .

often , the asylum seeker does not understand why he or she is being detained , which can increase psychological stress .

in addition , asylum seekers may have unusual medical conditions resulting from the imprisonment and torture suffered in their home countries .

nonetheless , ice reports that it routinely provides medical care for life - threatening conditions , such as cardiac arrest , kidney disease , hiv / aids , hypertension , and diabetes .

as discussed earlier in the report , according to ice detainees receive dental care , physical exams , sick call visits , prescription drugs , and mental health services .

ice states that staff are trained to spot detainees who may be at risk of suicide , and to use prevention and intervention techniques to assist such detainees .

between may 2007 and may 2008 , psychologists and social workers have managed a daily population of over 1,350 seriously mentally ill detainees without a single suicide .

thus , current ice procedures may adequately address the health care needs of detained asylum seekers .

two policy issues become highlighted when a detainee dies in custody .

the first issue concerns the quality of oversight when a death occurs and whether there is enough oversight to identify possible cases of inadequate care .

secondly , while a detainee's death may heighten concerns about the quality of health care , there are doubts about the propriety of using deaths in detention as a reliable measure of standard of care .

what follows is a discussion of these two issues .

although there is a system to report the death of a detainee , some question whether there is effective oversight when a death occurs in detention .

current ice procedure dictates that when a detainee dies while in the custody of ice's detention and removal office ( dro ) , the death is to be reported to ice headquarters via a system known as the significant event notification ( sen ) system .

under its proceedures , dro is also supposed to report detainee deaths to the ice office of professional responsibility ( opr ) and to the dhs office of the inspector general ( oig ) so that they can conduct independent reviews of the incident .

in addition , deaths are referred to the local medical examiner's office , which decides whether to perform an autopsy .

the oig is also notified of the death by the joint intake center ( jic ) , which is notified by the sen system and sends all records regarding the death ( including those from the local medical examiner ) to the oig .

the oig may accept the case for investigation or may decline and refer the case back to the jic for referral to the office of professional responsibility .

ice has reported a decline in the number of deaths of aliens in detention between 2004 and 2008 .

some , however , question whether mortality rates should be used in appraising health care in a transitional population , and truly reflect the quality of care provided to detainees .

in may 2008 , ice published a fact sheet reporting that there were 71 deaths in immigration detention facilities from calendar year 2004 ( inclusive ) through may 2 , 2008 ( see table 3 ) .

ice reported a decline in the number of detainee deaths between 2004 and 2008 , a period when the detainee population increased .

ice also asserted that the mortality rate in its facilities is lower than in u.s. prisons and jails and the general u.s. population .

a critical analysis of the death rates was published by physicians at the new york university school of medicine , who commented that ice's comparisons were not valid because , among other things , the respective mortality rates had not been adjusted for age or for length of detention .

these doctors stated that mortality is an imprecise method for appraising health care in a transitional population , and that morbidity which refers to sickness or having a disease would be a better measure of ice healthcare .

they also stated that , in their calculations , the length - adjusted mortality rate for detainees increased between 2006 and 2007 .

in addition , critics of the reported death rates stated that those who die outside the facilities but whose deaths were precipitated by their time in detention are not included in the mortality rates .

there is debate about the appropriate standard of care that should be provided to aliens in detention .

many u.s. citizens lack health insurance and face barriers in accessing health care , and there are issues of patient safety in many medical settings , not just in correctional facilities .

in addition , a proportion of aliens are in detention who are not authorized to be in the country .

the cost of care for aliens in detention is paid by the american taxpayer .

reportedly , the health care provided to detained aliens tends to be similar to that provided to those in criminal incarceration .

according to a press report , ice has argued that some aliens are getting better health care in detention than they would in their home countries and that they had received earlier in their lives .

assistant secretary of ice , julie myers testified that in fy2007 , 34% of detainees screened were diagnosed with and treated for preexisting chronic conditions ( eg , hypertension , diabetes ) , and many of these detainees would not have known of their medical condition or received treatment if it were not for the comprehensive health screening they obtained when entering the detention system .

in addition , some health care decisions need to be made with the consideration that the alien is going to be removed to a country where he or she may not be able to get any follow - up care .

some contend that despite ice's acknowledgment of the substantial burden of chronic diseases among the detained population , the ice health plan focuses on an acute care model , and is not crafted for a population with significant chronic medical or mental health needs .

some aliens in detention , especially long - term residents , do have health insurance but are unable to use it .

some further allege that officers frequently view ice detainees as criminals , even when they do not have a criminal record , and as such are sometimes quick to assume that the detainees are faking their illnesses , and sometimes slow to get the aliens care .

appendix a .

detention statistics on an average day , up to 33,000 immigration detainees are in ice's custody in more than 300 facilities nationwide .

the average stay is 37.5 days .

in fy2007 , a total of 311,213 aliens were detained by ice .

as of april 30 , 2007 , ice reported that , cumulatively , 25% of all detained aliens were removed within four days , 50% within 18 days , 75% within 44 days , 90% within 85 days , 95% within 126 days , and 98% within 210 days ( see table a - 1 ) .

for fy2006 , approximately 48% of the aliens in detention were criminal aliens .

as figure a - 1 shows , the average daily detained population increased between fy2003 and fy2004 and then decreased between fy2004 and fy2006 .

the daily average detained population increased significantly between fy2006 and fy2007 , from 20,594 to 30,295 detainees .

as of december 31 , 2007 , the average daily detention population for fy2008 was larger than the fy2007 average daily population .

for fy2008 , as of december 31 , 2007 , the average daily detained population was 31,244 .

as illustrated in figure a - 1 , the total number of aliens detained by ice during the fiscal year was fairly consistent between fy2003 and fy2005 , and then increased in both fy2006 and fy2007 .

in fy2007 , ice detained 79,713 ( 34% ) more noncitizens than in fy2003 .

some of the increase in the total annual detention population was due to the expansion of expedited removal .

aliens in expedited removal are mandatorily detained but tend to be in detention for shorter periods of time than other aliens because they are not entitled to the same judicial review as aliens who are not subject to expedited removal ( i.e. , who are in removal proceedings under ina §241 ) .

appendix b .

legislation in the 110 th congres .

the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110 - 329 ) appropriated $2 million for the office of professional responsibility to undertake an immediate comprehensive review of the medical care provided to ice detainees .

the act also directed ice to immediately implement the government accountability office's recommendation to improve medical services .

the detainee basic medical care act of 2008 , h.r .

5950 , was introduced by representative zoe lofgren on may 1 , 2008 .

the companion bill , s. 3005 , was introduced by senator robert menendez on may 12 , 2008 .

the bills would have required the secretary of homeland security ( dhs ) to establish procedures for the timely and effective delivery of medical and mental health care to immigration detainees , designed to ensure continuity of care throughout the alien's detention .

the procedures would have been required to address all health needs , including but not limited to primary care , emergency care , prenatal care , dental care , eye care , and mental health care .

the procedures would have to have been designed to ensure that each detainee received a comprehensive medical and mental health screening upon intake ; each detainee received a comprehensive medical and mental health examination and assessment within 14 days after arrival at the detention facility ; each detainee taking prescribed medications was allowed to continue taking such medications on schedule and without interruption ; and each detainee with a serious medical or mental condition , subject to immigration laws , been given priority consideration for release on parole , bond , or an alternative to detention program .

the procedures would also have been required to ensure that medical records are accessible by the detainee or his or her designate , and were transferred if the detainee was moved to another detention facility .

also , h.r .

5950 / s. 3005 would have required the procedures to include "discharge planning" for aliens with serious medical or mental health conditions to ensure continuity of care , for a reasonable period of time , upon removal or release from detention .

the bills would also have required the secretary of dhs to establish an administrative appeals process for denials of medical or mental health care .

the process would have included the opportunity to appeal the denial of services to an impartial board .

h.r .

5950 / s. 3005 would have required that the secretary report to the inspector generals of the departments of homeland security and justice information regarding a detainee's death no later than 48 hours after the death of the detainee .

the bills would have also require an annual report to congress detailing any detainee deaths during the previous fiscal year .

