over the past 13 years , the price of crude oil has generally been increasing and volatile .

high crude oil prices , which have led to high gasoline prices , have contributed to a weakening of the u.s. economy .

further , high gasoline prices put increased pressure on household budgets , during a time when households continue to struggle with persistently high levels of unemployment and a flagging housing market .

while much of the american economy has suffered as a result of high oil prices , those prices generated record profit levels for the oil industry .

five companies — exxonmobil , royal dutch shell , bp , chevron , and conocophillips — earned a predominant share of those profits .

record oil and gas industry profits have raised the concern of many public policy experts and federal policymakers , including many in congress , who have questioned whether these profits were justified , or whether they constituted a "windfall" to the industry: an excessive , unearned , and unfair gain .

important factors in considering this issue might include the ultimate source , or reason , for the price increases , and what the industry's role was in generating them , i.e. , whether it was through the direct result of the industry's efforts , in terms of employing its resources , decision - making , or risk - taking , or whether it was the result of fortuitous factors and events .

also important to the public policy question might be the actual size of the profits and what the industry did with them .

if an industry invests profits into increased production capacity , the increased supply may ultimately cause prices to fall and the profits to dissipate .

as the analysis in this report shows , the experience between 2003 and the first quarter of 2011 suggests that investments in oil exploration and development have not managed to keep company oil output from declining from the peak attained in 2006 .

numerous bills have been introduced in the congress over this period to tax the oil and gas industry's record profits .

broadly , there are two ways that tax policy can be used to increase taxes on oil and gas profits .

first , congress could scale back or eliminate various tax incentives and preferences currently available to the industry .

second , congress could directly increase taxes on the industry , through some form of an excess profits tax or windfall profits tax .

during the 1 st session of the 112 th congress , the senate considered a measure that would have eliminated various tax preferences for major integrated oil companies .

a motion to proceed to consideration of the close big oil tax loopholes act ( s. 940 ) was rejected in may 2011 .

s. 940 sought to eliminate industry - specific incentives , such as the ability to partially expense intangible drilling costs ( idcs ) .

further , the legislation would have prevented major integrated oil companies from taking advantage of tax incentives available to firms operating in other industries , such as the domestic production activity deduction ( the § 199 deduction ) .

high crude oil prices and the associated profits may lead policymakers to look at the tax burden on the oil and gas industry broadly , shifting the focus beyond the major integrated oil companies .

since the inception of the federal income tax system in the early 20 th century , the oil and gas industry has accrued sizable benefits ( in excess of $190 billion , according to one estimate ) .

while some of the traditional tax incentives , notably percentage depletion for integrated producers , have been significantly pared back over the years , some have argued that no tax incentives should be available to the industry at a time of high profits .

as was noted above , a second option for increasing taxes on oil and gas industry profits is to take a more direct approach .

congress could choose to impose a windfall or "excess" profits tax - a supplemental or additional tax on the oil industry - one based on windfall or excess profits in addition to other income or other taxes that the industry might pay .

while some might envision this as a totally new type of tax on windfall gains , an alternative would be to model it after the windfall profits tax on oil that existed from 1980 to 1988 .

a windfall profit tax would be in addition to the current tax on corporate and business income that applies to the oil and gas industry , whose profits are taxed at rates as high as 35% .

this report contains information useful in evaluating the windfall profits tax policy option .

the first section analyzes the major oil companies profit performance , particularly from 2003 to 2010 , both in terms of earnings and how those earnings have been used .

the second section is a brief legislative history of windfall profit tax proposals and legislation in the 109 th through 112 th congresses .

the third section analyzes the concept of a windfall profits tax , including experiences with the tax of the 1980s , its viability , and potential role in the tax system and economy .

during the 2000s , oil prices have been volatile , and generally rising .

rising oil prices have been associated with increased revenues and net incomes amongst major integrated oil producers .

while prices , revenues , and incomes have risen , production levels have remained relatively constant .

the following sections review trends in oil prices as well as the revenues , income , and production levels of major integrated oil companies .

this information , combined with information on the use of profits , is helpful when evaluating whether the industry has benefitted from windfall profits in the face of high oil prices .

as crude oil prices rose in the mid - 2000s , congress began to explore the option of imposing a windfall profits tax on the oil and gas companies .

the rising price of crude oil and petroleum products led many in congress to become concerned over the level of oil industry profits .

various legislative proposals that would have raised taxes on the oil and gas industry were considered during the 109 th , 110 th , and 111 th congresses .

early in the 112 th congress , the spot market price of west texas intermediate ( wti ) crude oil surpassed the $100 / barrel mark .

should high crude oil prices be associated with increased industry profits , congress may once again choose to consider windfall profits tax proposals .

a windfall profits tax can be viewed as a way to allow the government to share in financial gains , particularly when the financial gains are not the direct result of industry activities .

some proposals have suggested that the additional tax revenues be used to fund subsidies for low - income persons to offset the burden of high petroleum prices .

additional revenues could also be used for energy conservation programs , alternative and renewable fuels , or deficit reduction .

additional revenues generated through a windfall profits tax need not be dedicated to a specific purpose .

the concept of a windfall profits tax is not new ; a tax on windfall , or excess , business profits has been one the instruments of fiscal policy , used by both state and federal governments , whenever business profits either rise too fast or rise to levels that are considered too high — above "normal" or fair rates of return .

at the federal level , however , such taxes have been used sparingly — being viewed as extraordinary measures , their use limited to wartime or other periods characterized by economic emergencies and instabilities such as hyper - inflations .

such was the case with the surtax on business profits imposed as a temporary measure to control large profits earned during world wars i and ii , and the korean war .

a windfall profits tax on health insurers was also discussed , though ultimately not adopted , during the healthcare reform debate in 2009 .

a type of windfall profits tax on domestic crude oil production was in effect from april 1980 to august 1988 .

this tax , which was actually an excise tax , not a profits or income tax , was part of a compromise between the carter administration and the congress over the decontrol of crude oil prices .

 , some have proposed reinstating this tax , although it should be underscored that the current situation giving rise to possible windfall profits — the current reasons for the high price of petroleum products and record profits — is different from the conditions and rationale which existed at the time that tax was imposed .

reinstating the oil windfall profits tax was also discussed during the 1990s , when crude oil prices doubled in just two months due to the crisis in the middle east ( iraq invaded kuwait on august 2 , 1990 ) .

high crude oil and petroleum product prices are one factor that may contribute to oil industry profits .

not all profits , even with high oil prices , are windfall profits or unearned income .

oil industry income and profits also reflect a return on investment from capital stock or a return on the firm's decision - making and risk - taking .

governments share in the profits of companies through tax collections .

table 5 presents income taxes reported on the financial statements of major integrated oil companies between 2005 and 2010 .

these include income taxes paid to the u.s. federal government , as well as income tax payments to state and local governments and foreign governments .

tax payments by these five companies increased 32% between 2005 and 2007 , before decreasing in recent years .

total tax payments by the major integrated oil companies in 2009 and 2010 were substantially lower than tax payments during the previous four years .

any windfall profits tax that might be adopted would add to these tax revenues .

while tax payments of the major integrated oil companies did increase during the 2005 through 2007 period , the presence of or change in tax payments does not directly indicate whether oil and gas companies have experienced windfall gains or unearned income .

a well - designed wpt would tax only the true windfall component of oil industry incomes .

moreover , such a tax would be simple to administer and easy to comply with , and would avoid or minimize any adverse economic and energy market effects .

as the discussion below suggests , while in theory the concept of a windfall profit seems simple and intuitive , in practice it can be difficult to accurately measure .

the actual implementation of a wpt involves a compromise over differing fiscal policy objectives: ( 1 ) administerability — collecting the excess revenues ( or windfall gains ) in the least costly manner in terms of tax administration and compliance , and ( 2 ) economic efficiency — devising and structuring the tax in a way that minimizes economic distortions , including adverse output and price effects , and adverse impacts on petroleum imports , energy independence , and energy security .

the remaining sections of this report discuss some of the more important economic issues surrounding proposed legislation , and draw relevant policy implications .

the final section discusses alternative policy options .

high crude oil prices of the late 2000s have raised concerns that oil companies may be earning windfall profits , or profits that were excessive , unearned , or unfairly gained .

as oil prices increased in the period leading to their 2008 peak , revenues and net income of the major integrated oil companies were also relatively high .

when oil prices rose again in 2010 , so did revenues and net incomes .

during this period of high oil prices and price volatility , oil production by the major integrated oil companies remained relatively constant .

the fact that revenues and income have risen without a corresponding increase in production has led to the observation that some of the gains enjoyed by the industry may be windfall profits .

profit rates for major integrated oil companies , however , are in - line with profit rates in the broader manufacturing sector .

further , returns in the oil and gas sector are highly volatile .

over some periods , returns may exceed those earned in manufacturing broadly .

over other periods , profits earned by oil and gas producers may fall short of profits earned in other sectors .

from this perspective , short periods of high profitability may represent volatility in the industry , rather than potentially sustained windfall profits .

should a wpt — or other type of additional tax — be imposed on the oil and gas industry it is important to note that the potential economic consequences of different types of taxes differ .

an excise tax type of wpt could lead to a reduction in domestic oil production , but would not likely lead to an increase in the price of petroleum for consumers .

an income tax type wpt would be less likely to distort domestic production in the short - run .

however , as resources are reallocated over time , and income tax type wpt could affect domestic production .

in the short - run , an income tax type wpt would be unlikely to have much effect on prices .

over time , however , it is possible that an income tax type wpt could lead to price increases .

another option for increasing taxes on the oil and gas industry , one that has been considered in the 112 th congress , is scaling back existing tax benefits .

rescinding the § 199 domestic production deduction for oil and gas companies is another option for increasing taxes on the industry .

this option , however , does not target windfall profits , but would instead effectively increase the marginal corporate tax rate for domestic oil and gas producers .

repeal of the § 199 deduction would be unlikely to reduce output or increase prices in the short - run .

further , any long - run market impacts on production and prices would likely be small .

