adults may go missing due to personal choice ; an abduction or foul play ; a physical or developmental disability ; natural catastrophes that displace individuals , such as a hurricane ; or certain high - risk behaviors , including gang involvement or drug use , among other circumstances .

state and local laws govern how criminal justice entities respond to missing adult cases .

this response is complicated by a number of factors .

unlike children , adults have the legal right to go missing in most cases and may do so to seek protection from a domestic abuser and other related reasons .

further , law enforcement agencies may be hesitant to devote resources to missing adult cases , given competing priorities .

law enforcement agencies within and across states also respond differently to missing adult cases .

some states require at least a 24-hour waiting period after the person is believed to be missing before a police report may be filed , while others take reports without a waiting period .

the federal government has played a role in both ( 1 ) seeking to prevent certain types of missing adult incidents and ( 2 ) recovering adults who go missing , including those who are deceased and for whom only remains provide clues to their identity and circumstances surrounding their disappearance .

congress authorized the missing alzheimer's disease patient alert program under the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) to assist in locating missing individuals with alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia through a patient identification program , as well as outreach and education efforts .

this program was funded through fy2015 .

in 2000 , congress authorized the department of justice ( doj ) , through kristen's act ( p.l .

106-468 ) , to make grants to establish a national clearinghouse for missing adults and provide technical assistance to law enforcement agencies in locating missing adults .

this grant was funded from fy2002 through fy2006 .

the federal government has also supported efforts to establish databases to track and identify missing adults , their relatives , and unidentified human remains .

the first section of this report discusses demographics and record keeping of missing adults and unidentified remains , as well as some of the factors that may contribute to the disappearance of adults .

this section also discusses federally funded databases that are used to track data on missing adults and unidentified individuals .

the second section of the report describes the federal programs and initiatives to assist in locating missing adults , including funding data where applicable .

finally , the third section discusses issues about the federal role in missing adult cases .

certain circumstances can make adults vulnerable to going missing .

adults may go missing because of an abduction or foul play .

a physical or developmental disability or cognitive disorder , such as alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia , may also contribute to a missing episode .

adults with dementia have been identified as high - risk for going missing by advocates for older adults .

according to the alzheimer's association , a nonprofit organization that provides research on alzheimer's disease , 5.5 million people in the united states suffer from alzheimer's disease and related dementia , and about 60% of those will wander away from their homes or health care facilities .

further , a natural catastrophe can displace individuals and make their whereabouts unknown to others .

finally , other adults vulnerable to missing incidents may include those with high - risk lifestyles , such as individuals who abuse drugs or are gang involved , and those that have a history of victimization , including domestic violence .

there is no definitive estimate of the number of adults who go missing , because some adults are not known to be missing or are not reported to databases that compile data on missing persons .

however , three federally supported data sources provide some insight into this number: the missing person file at the fbi's national crime information center ( ncic ) ; the fbi's national dna index system ( ndis ) , which stores information on offenders and arrestees , forensic evidence , as well as individuals believed to be missing , their relatives , and unidentified human remains ; and the national missing and unidentified persons system ( namus ) , administered by doj's national institute of justice ( nij ) .

profiles of missing individuals entered into one database do not necessarily populate other databases , although some missing individuals may be reported to more than one of the databases .

therefore , numbers of missing persons should not be added across any of the databases .

the ncic unidentified person file , namus , and ndis contain information about unidentified decedents , or remains .

however , the true number of unidentified missing adult cases is unknown because remains can go undiscovered , or if they are recovered , they may not be reported to the databases or retained .

in a census conducted by doj in 2004 , medical examiners and coroners reported a total of 13,486 unidentified human remains on record , though about 51% of medical examiner and coroners' offices lacked policies for retaining records such as x - rays , dna , or fingerprints that could identify missing individuals .

 ( the report also found that 90% of offices serving large jurisdictions did retain such records. ) .

further , medical examiners and coroners estimated that about 4,400 unidentified human decedents were reported in an average year , with approximately 1,000 ( 23.0% ) remaining unidentified after one year .

another doj study estimated , using death records reported to the centers for disease control and prevention from 1980 through 2004 , that as many as 10,300 of these records were for unidentified decedents .

this number is an approximation , as states do not uniformly specify on the death certificate when a person's identity is not known .

in addition , the criteria used by doj to search the death records may have included individuals whose identities were known , as well as unidentified individuals who were later identified .

the discussion in the next section will show that the databases range in the number of profiles they contain , as well as the type of information they collect , such as basic demographic profiles , dna profiles , etc .

 ( note that only the data on missing persons and unidentified decedents , as reported in ncic , are regularly updated in this report . ) .

in recent years , the federal government has played a role both in preventing certain types of missing adult incidents and in working to recover adults who go missing , including those who are deceased and for whom only remains provide clues to the circumstances surrounding their disappearance .

in addition to funding or operating databases that track information about missing adults and unidentified remains , the federal government has undertaken other related efforts , including some that are no longer funded .

these efforts are ( 1 ) the dna initiative , created under president george w. bush , which focused on identifying the remains of unidentified deceased individuals ; ( 2 ) national missing persons task force , with its emphasis on achieving greater cooperation among the various federal databases ; ( 3 ) the missing alzheimer's disease patient alert program to prevent missing episodes and locate missing individuals with alzheimer's disease and related dementia ; ( 4 ) activities funded under kristen's act to locate missing adults ; and ( 5 ) the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) , which works to recover missing children and adults ages 18 to 21 who are reported to the agency as missing by law enforcement officials .

the missing alzheimer's disease patient alert program and activities funded under kristen's act have specifically received congressional appropriations for missing adult activities .

the other activities have been funded under appropriations for initiatives or programs that encompass activities other than just those for missing adults .

federal and state policymakers and other stakeholders have increasingly focused on three issues related to adults who go missing: ( 1 ) coordinating databases on missing persons ; and ( 2 ) assisting states with building the capacity to develop both alert systems to inform the public about missing older adults and technology to recover these individuals .

the first section of this report discussed the various federally funded databases that store information on missing persons and unidentified decedents .

these databases do not currently populate one another , although some of the databases indicate whether information about a particular individual is available in another database .

this limitation raises the question about whether the federal government can and should develop technology to enable the databases to coordinate , although concerns about privacy and funding would likely need to be addressed .

alert systems , known as silver or senior alerts , have been established in multiple states .

these alert systems were created out of concern for the safety of seniors and other at - risk adult populations who are prone to wandering due to a physical or cognitive disability or medical condition such as alzheimer's or other forms of dementia .

some missing adult alert programs are modeled after the states' amber alert system for abducted children .

issuing alerts to law enforcement agencies and the public for missing vulnerable adults in some the states appears to be at the discretion of the law enforcement agency — local or state or both — and is not required of the agency .

in addition , state alert systems vary in terms of the target population for issuing an alert ( i.e. , older adults with dementia versus any adult with a disability ) .

most law enforcement agencies have the ability to disseminate the alert to law enforcement agencies and media in the local area , region , statewide , and other states .

for example , the texas division of emergency management disseminates information within the alert advisory area to local , state , and federal law enforcement agencies ; primary media outlets ; the texas department of transportation ; the texas lottery commission ; and the independent bankers association of texas .

some stakeholders have raised concerns that alert systems may not be useful for some adults who go missing .

for example , the media repeatedly reporting missing adult cases could desensitize the public to the issue of wandering .

in addition , missing persons may not be found in a place that is well - trafficked .

among missing persons with alzheimer's disease , about three - quarters leave on foot ; and of those found alive , about half are found 1 to 5 miles from where they originated .

for these reasons , policymakers may wish to consider silver alerts in combination with a combination of other policy approaches .

further , some stakeholders have raised concerns that broadcasting information about missing adults can infringe on their rights to privacy .

unlike incidents involving the amber alert program , which was established to alert law enforcement and the public when a child is missing and criminal activity may be involved , it is not a crime for an adult to wander from home or purposely go missing .

the stakeholders assert that states should have criteria for activating an alert that limits disclosure of information to the public only when it is absolutely necessary to preserve the missing person's life .

they also assert that disclosure of this information should be reserved to the most limited geographic area possible .

further , concerns have been raised that having only selected criteria for the alert may be short - sighted .

for example , some have argued that making age the primary factor for issuing an alert overlooks the possibility that age alone does not necessarily signal whether a person is endangered .

another consideration is the extent to which information about a missing person's health background can be broadcast to the public .

the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) health privacy rule — the federal rule that regulates the use or disclosure of protected health information — limits disclosure of health information by health care providers .

in 2011 , doj published a guide to assist states and communities in developing or enhancing what doj calls an endangered missing advisory ( ema ) , or an advisory for individuals who do not meet the amber alert criteria established by doj .

the guide suggests that emas can be issued for missing adults , or for children while law enforcement determines whether a case meets the amber alert criteria .

the guide outlines the steps states and communities can take in developing an ema plan , including creating a task force — comprised of key amber alert stakeholders , broadcasters and other representatives from the media , and law enforcement , among others — that can establish criteria and procedures for the ema and oversee its operation and effectiveness .

the guide suggests that adults may benefit from a different type of alert system than amber alert , and that task forces should determine which elements of the amber alert plan should be used to activate an ema .

still , some states with alert systems could have difficulty coordinating with another state that lacks a similar system .

states could also have challenges coordinating with states that have alert systems with different criteria for activating an alert .

although state and local governments have taken the lead in implementing alert systems , the federal government could play a role in coordinating efforts when a missing individual is believed to have crossed state lines as well as assist in the development of formal agreements or protocols for the use of interstate alerts .

the federal government could model any policies to coordinate across state lines on the amber alert program , which provides training and technical assistance to states on a number of issues related to abducted children .

this training addresses how jurisdictions , including those in different states , can work together to recover children who are abducted , among other topics .

through conference and training exercises , state amber alert coordinators , state and local law enforcement agencies , and other stakeholders have opportunities to meet and exchange ideas , which may further facilitate coordination .

electronic monitoring services for individuals who are susceptible to going missing are being implemented .

one such electronic monitoring program is used by some state and local law enforcement agencies with technology developed by project lifesaver international , a nonprofit organization that administers the project lifesaver program and has received funding under the missing alzheimer's disease patient alert program .

project lifesaver uses a personalized wristband that emits a signal to track individuals prone to going missing .

the wristband is worn by the clients continuously , and each month , a law enforcement officer or trained volunteer visits with the clients to replace the wristband batteries and provide referrals to clients and their caregivers in need of social services .

when family members or caregivers report to the designated project lifesaver agency — typically a local law enforcement or first responder agency — that the client is missing , a search and rescue team responds to the wanderer's area to search using a mobile locator tracking system .

project lifesaver grew out of local law enforcement experience with search and rescue efforts for missing persons with alzheimer's and other forms of dementia .

the target population of the program has expanded to include children with special needs such as autism and down's syndrome and to anyone else that may be at risk of wandering for a medical reason .

in addition to providing the technology , the program trains the designated agency to communicate with persons with alzheimer's disease and other disorders .

project lifesaver international reports that the tracking technology is used by hundreds of law enforcement agencies in nearly all states and the district of columbia .

according to project lifesaver international , the benefits from the program include saving law enforcement and search and rescue response time and resources in locating missing persons due to wandering .

the alzheimer's association also has a program , known as comfort zone , that uses tracking technology .

the program is a web application that includes a location - based mapping service .

the enrolled individual carries a tracking device with global positioning system ( gps ) technology .

caretakers can track the individual's whereabouts via a secure online website through the alzheimer's association .

the website includes a map with addresses of the vicinity in which the person is located .

caretakers can also receive alerts and notifications of the individual's whereabouts , such as when the individual leaves a specified radius ( eg , beyond their house or some other location ) .

tracking technology raises questions about the rights to privacy and autonomy of individuals who are enrolled .

these organizations appear to have taken steps to ensure that enrolled participants meet the eligibility criteria and to secure the consent of the enrolled individual , where possible .

for individuals who participate in project lifesaver , consent usually comes from a caregiver having legal responsibility for the individual .

in rare cases , the individual gives consent .

individuals enrolled in comfort zone give consent to be enrolled , and in some cases the caregiver with legal responsibility gives consent .

according to the alzheimer's association , the program is ideally for individuals with early stages of dementia .

