rules of origin ( roo ) , the methodology used to prove country of origin , are central components of u.s. trade policy .

such rules can be very straightforward when all of the parts of a product are manufactured and assembled primarily in one country .

however , when component parts of a finished product originate in many countries — as is often the case in global industries such as autos and electronics — determining origin can be a complex , sometimes subjective , and time - consuming process .

determining a product's country of origin can have significant implications for an imported product's treatment with respect to u.s. trade programs and other government policies .

for example , the united states restricts imports from certain countries , including cuba , iran , and north korea , as part of larger foreign policy considerations .

u.s. trade policy also seeks to promote economic growth in developing countries by offering trade preference programs , including the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , and the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) .

such policies require that officials make accurate country of origin determinations so that the benefits of the preferential tariff treatment are received and program goals are met .

certain key characteristics of contemporary globalized manufacturing may also prove challenging to the roo process and implementation .

these characteristics include the growing complexity of global value chains and , consequently , the increasing demand for fast and efficient movement of intermediate goods across borders to assure competitive prices and profitability .

some observers assert the combined effects of these characteristics have created a globalized manufacturing environment that is sufficiently intricate and flexible to make the application of roo more complex and , at times , potentially misleading .

this report first provides a general overview of the implementation of the u.s. roo system .

it then discusses the advantages and disadvantages of u.s. - implemented roo schemes .

the report concludes with some policy options for congress that proponents assert could improve the roo process .

the country of origin of an imported product is defined in u.s. trade laws and customs regulations as the country of manufacture , production , or growth of any article of foreign origin entering the customs territory of the united states .

there are two types of rules of origin ( roo ) : non - preferential roo are used to determine the origin of goods imported from countries with which the united states has most - favored - nation ( mfn ) status , and are the principal regulatory tools for accurate assessment of tariffs on imports , addressing country of origin labeling issues , qualifying goods for government procurement , and enforcing trade remedy actions and trade sanctions .

preferential roo are used to determine the eligibility of imported goods from u.s. free trade agreement ( fta ) partners and certain developing countries to receive duty - free benefits under u.s. trade preference programs ( eg , the generalized system of preferences and the african growth and opportunity act ) , and other special import programs ( eg , goods entering from u.s. territories ) .

preferential roo schemes vary from agreement to agreement and preference to preference .

u.s. laws and regulations on rules of origin conform to the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on rules of origin , in which wto members agreed not to use roo to pursue trade policy objectives in a manner that would disrupt trade , and to apply them in a consistent , uniform , impartial , and reasonable manner .

no specific u.s. trade law provides an overall definition of "rules of origin" or "country of origin. .

instead , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) — the agency primarily responsible for determining country of origin ( as it is for enforcing tariffs and other laws that apply to imported products ) — relies on a body of court decisions , cbp regulations , and agency interpretations to confer origin on an imported product if the matter is in doubt .

although cbp is the primary enforcement agency for u.s. trade laws , the customs modernization act ( title vi of p.l .

103-182 ) actually shifted much of the responsibility for complying with customs laws and regulations from cbp to the importer of record .

this means that the importer must understand customs procedures ( including , for example , the applicability of a preferential roo scheme to his or her product and country of origin ) , and apply "reasonable care" to enter , properly classify , and determine the value of merchandise so cbp can properly assess duties , collect accurate statistics , and determine whether all other applicable legal requirements have been met .

in cases where the country of origin is unclear , importers may seek advance roo rulings from cbp in an effort to accelerate the import process .

due to their obscure and technical nature , rules of origin frameworks are generally not in the forefront of the continuing debates on trade liberalization or globalization .

nevertheless , the role of roos ( both preferential and non - preferential ) is central to the international trading system and trade negotiations .

preferential rules of origin are arguably essential to ensure that the benefits of an fta are provided to those countries that have negotiated and entered into the agreement .

without preferential roo , it would be possible for imports from non - fta countries to enter the fta partner with the lowest external tariff , and then sell the good throughout the region under the fta rate .

this could force a convergence of external tariffs and possibly a competitive devaluation of external tariffs in the region .

for similar reasons , roo are also important when providing unilateral trade preferences to ensure that only goods from eligible countries receive the benefits .

some policy observers , however , assert that the worldwide proliferation of trade agreements creates inefficiencies in the trading system because there are so many complex roo frameworks .

others express concern that current u.s. systems for determining country of origin may run counter to overall u.s. trade policy .

still other observers say that negotiation of specific roo allows countries to shield import - sensitive segments of industries by instituting roo that either do not include a particular product , or make the roo so difficult that the product does not qualify .

some observers assert that roo interpretation is complex and subjective .

other experts maintain that , in a global manufacturing environment , there should be other means of determining country of origin .

finally , some experts wonder if roo definitions could produce results that could be counter to certain policy objectives .

rules of origin are central components of trade policy .

preferential rules of origin are especially important for ensuring that only goods qualified to receive benefits under an fta or preference receive those benefits .

roo may also be constructed to ensure that import - competing u.s. producers are not adversely affected by an fta , thus possibly assuring a degree of public support for the measure .

non - preferential rules are essential for making sure that goods coming from countries that enjoy mfn status with the united states are assessed the proper tariffs , and are also key to supporting other u.s. trade laws , such as country of origin labeling .

at present , cbp makes non - preferential country of origin determinations primarily based on an established body of regulatory and legal precedents .

for many imports , determining origin is relatively straightforward .

however , if the matter is in doubt , the origin question is decided on a case - by - case basis with input , records , and samples provided by the importer of record .

although origin rulings are fact - specific , there is sometimes uncertainty over what will be deemed as substantial transformation .

businesses sometimes criticize cbp and the current process as lacking clarity , consistency , and predictability .

additionally , given the expanding use of preferential roo as the united states potentially enters into additional ftas , determining country of origin ( or waiting for rulings from cbp ) may prove to be a significant burden on importers , especially on smaller firms .

with regard to non - preferential rules , the united states has agreed to an ongoing harmonization work program ( hwp ) under the auspices of the wto committee on rules of origin and the world customs organization .

according to the ustr , however , reaching agreements on the technical aspects of the hwp are more complex than initially envisioned , and negotiations are expected to continue .

congress could , through legislation or other means , encourage the administration to exercise leadership in this area with a view toward reaching a resolution to these negotiations .

in fact , one of the principal negotiating objectives set forth in the trade act of 2002 was the conclusion of an agreement on rules of origin .

some observers assert that preferential roo are inefficient and lack transparency .

however , negotiators sometimes make incremental changes .

for example , since october 2009 , nafta partners have implemented four sets of changes to the nafta rules of origin .

the fourth set of changes , agreed in january 2011 , covered products whose annual trilateral trade exceeds $90 million .

therefore , it is possible for preferential roo to be simplified through mutual agreement of the parties even after an fta is implemented .

if congress desires to provide greater preferential access to the u.s. market ( and gain reciprocal access to the markets of trading partners ) , it could urge u.s. negotiators to liberalize roo , and to examine the costs and benefits of applying a uniform set of preferential roo with respect to future fta negotiations .

since the processes of globalization are likely to continue making origin determinations more complex , congress might also consider providing cbp with additional legislative guidance , especially in the area of non - preferential rules .

however , such efforts may adversely affect importers and manufactures that benefit from the current system .

in addition , even though the determination process may be complex and lengthy , cbp has the flexibility to examine the complete manufacturing process , including design , sources of intermediate components , labor costs , and assembly processes in order to make its country of origin determination .

some trade policy analysts have called for the liberalization or revision of industry - specific preferential rules of origin .

others advocate the abolition of rules of origin entirely , because they inject a large amount of inefficiency in the world trading system , and because they can effectively serve as a form of protection for import - competing industries .

some trade policy analysts argue for the multilateral elimination of tariffs , which , they say , would eliminate the need for roo entirely .

however , the end of tariffs would automatically lead to the end of all preference programs for developing countries , as well as the tariff preference benefits of ftas .

in addition , eliminating roo entirely could pose issues for other trade policy objectives such as collecting trade statistics , country of origin labeling , implementing trade sanctions , enforcing trade remedies , and other trade policy objectives .

