because of its low savings rate , the united states borrows to finance the federal budget deficit and its private capital needs .

it therefore depends on countries with high savings rates , such as china , to invest some of their capital in the united states .

such investments help to keep u.s. interest rates relatively low and enable the united states to consume more than it produces .

according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , in 2012 , the united states was the world's largest importer of foreign capital ( at 37.4% of global total ) , while china was the largest exporter of capital ( at 13.3% ) .

from 2002 to 2012 , the amount of u.s. public debt that is privately held grew from $3.0 trillion to $9.9 trillion ; as a share of gdp , this level rose from 28.4% to 63.2% .

of the u.s. public debt that is privately held , more than half is held by foreigners .

many analysts argue that heavy u.s. reliance on foreign savings is not sustainable and may undermine u.s. economic interests over time .

china's central bank is a major purchaser of u.s. financial assets , largely because of its exchange rate policy .

in order to limit the appreciation of china's currency , the renminbi ( rmb ) , against the dollar , china must purchase u.s. dollars .

this has led china to amass a huge level of foreign exchange ( fx ) reserves , which totaled $3.5 trillion at the end of june 2013 .

rather than hold dollars ( and other foreign currencies ) , which earn no interest , the chinese central government has converted some level of its foreign exchange reserve holdings into u.s. financial securities , including u.s. treasury securities , u.s. agency debt , u.s. corporate debt , and u.s. equities .

china's holdings of u.s. public and private securities were estimated by the federal government to total nearly $1.6 trillion as of june 2012 .

u.s. treasury securities , which are used to finance the federal budget deficit , constitute the largest category of u.s. securities held by china .

as of june 2013 , these totaled $1.28 trillion .

some u.s. policymakers have expressed concern that china's large holdings of u.s. securities could pose a risk to the u.s. economy , especially if china attempted to divest itself of a large share of its holdings .

others argue that china's large and growing holdings of u.s. securities give it leverage over the united states on economic and noneconomic issues .

on the other hand , many analysts contend that , given the current state of the global economy , china has few options for investing its fx holdings , other than to buy u.s. securities .

they further argue that any attempt by china to sell off a large share of its current holdings would diminish the value of its remaining holdings and could further destabilize the global economy , which would likely negatively impact china's economy .

hence , it is argued , china's large holdings of u.s. securities give it very little leverage over u.s. policy .

this report examines the importance to the u.s. economy of china's investment in u.s. securities , as well as the policy implications of its holdings for both the united states and china .

for the united states , the issue of china's large holdings of u.s. securities is part of a broader question that has been raised by many economists: what are the implications of the heavy u.s. reliance on foreign investment in u.s. securities finance capital investment by firms , household borrowing , and the government budget deficit ? .

u.s. borrowing from abroad fell by $681 billion in 2009 over the previous year , but then rose by $1,050 billion in 2010 , $1,749 billion in 2011 , and $821 billion in 2012 .

according to the u.s. bureau of economic affairs ( bea ) , u.s. net private savings rose by 108% between 2008 and 2012 , although net federal dissaving ( i.e. , the budget deficit ) increased by 75% .

thus , economic imbalances in the united states have become less of an issue of inadequate private saving and more of an issue of high government borrowing since the financial crisis began .

it remains to be seen whether the rise in private savings was a permanent shift or a temporary response to the recession , however .

the broader issue for china is whether its current unbalanced economic policies , especially those that have contributed to its large savings rate , over - reliance on exports for its economic growth , and accumulation of huge fx reserves , are sustainable in the long run , especially given economic slowdowns in europe and the united states .

some have argued that these factors may induce china to accelerate efforts to boost consumer demand and improve domestic living standards , which could include further appreciation of the rmb against the dollar .

such policies could lessen china's need to buy u.s. securities in the future .

china's economic policies , including those that induce high levels of domestic savings and promote export - related activities as the main engine of china's economic growth , have contributed to a surge in china's fx reserves over the past decade , as indicated in table 1 .

china's exchange rate policies attempt to slow ( and sometimes halt ) the appreciation of the rmb against the dollar .

this makes chinese exports less expensive and foreign imports into china more expensive than would occur if china maintained a floating currency .

the main purpose of this policy is to promote china's export industries and encourage foreign investment .

to that end , the chinese central bank must intervene heavily in currency markets by buying up as many dollars as necessary to meet the government's targeted rmb - dollar exchange rate .

chinese policies that induce high savings rates dampen domestic consumption and demand for imports , while shifting financial resources ( i.e. , low - cost bank credit ) largely to export - oriented industries .

as a result , china consumes much less than it produces .

such policies have contributed to china's large annual trade surpluses .

the combination of china's large merchandise trade surpluses , inflows of foreign direct investment into china , and inflows of "hot money" into china have been the main components of china's rapid accumulation of fx reserves .

according to chinese government figures , its fx reserves rose from $212 billion in 2001 to $3,341 billion in 2012 , a $3.1 trillion increase and an average annual growth rate of 28.7% .

however , from 2011 to 2012 , its fx reserves increased by only 4.1% .

china's fx reserves as a percent of nominal gdp was 41% in 2012 — an unusually high level for a large economy .

china's fx reserves as percent of its merchandise imports are significant as well , totaling 184% in 2012 .

a listing of the world's top holders of fx reserves at 2012 yearend is shown in figure 1 .

not only was china by far the world's largest holder of fx reserves , its reserves were greater than the combined reserves of japan , saudi arabia , switzerland , russia , and taiwan .

 ( besides japan , these countries had much smaller economies than china. ) .

although the chinese government does not make public the dollar composition of its fx holdings , some analysts estimate this level to be around 70% .

u.s. assets have generally been favored by china for its investment needs for a number of reasons .

first , in order to maintain the exchange rate effects that lay behind the acquisition of u.s. dollars , those dollars must be invested in dollar - denominated securities .

second , the united states is the world's largest economy and has the biggest capital market .

in 2011 ( the most recent year available ) , the combined value of u.s. private and public debt securities was $33.7 trillion ( compared with $15.4 trillion for japan and $5.3 trillion for germany ) and accounted for 34.2% of global debt securities .

many analysts contend that the u.s. debt securities market is the only global market that is big enough to absorb a big part of china's large and growing fx holdings .

u.s. securities have also been favored by china because , historically , they have been considered to be safe and liquid ( i.e. , easily sold ) relative to other types of investments .

finally , u.s. treasury securities are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government , which guarantees that interest and principal payments will be paid on time .

the global economic slowdown and the european sovereign debt crisis may have also boosted the attractiveness of u.s. securities for china .

according to china's state administration of foreign exchange ( safe ) , its main principles for administrating china's fx reserves are "security , liquidity , and increases in value , among which security is the primary principle. .

in recent years , china has sought to use some of its fx reserves to acquire overseas assets ( such as foreign companies ) .

from 2006 to 2012 , china's annual outflows of foreign direct investment rose from $26.5 billion to $84.2 billion .

u.s. financial securities consist of a mix of securities issued by the u.s. government and private sector entities and include long - term ( lt ) u.s. treasury securities ( which are discussed in more detail in the next section ) , lt u.s. government agency securities , lt corporate securities ( some of which are asset - backed ) , equities ( such as stocks ) , and short - term debt .

lt securities are those with no stated maturity date ( such as equities ) or with an original term to maturity date of more than one year .

short - term debt includes u.s. treasury securities , agency securities , and corporate securities with a maturity date of less than one year .

the department of the treasury issues an annual survey of foreign portfolio holdings of u.s. securities by country and reports data for the previous year as of the end of june .

the latest treasury survey of portfolio holdings of u.s. securities was issued on april 30 , 2013 .

from june 2002 to june 2011 , china's purchases of u.s. treasury securities increased more rapidly than that any other country , rising from $181 billion to $1.73 trillion .

in june 2009 , china overtook japan as the largest holder of u.s. securities , and china remained the largest holder through june 2011 .

as indicated in figure 2 , as china's fx reserves have risen , so have its holdings of u.s. securities .

however , china's holdings of u.s. securities decreased by $143 billion from june 2011 to june 2012 – the only time in the last ten years that its holdings dropped .

as a result , china's ranking as a holder dropped to second after japan a decrease in china's holdings of u.s. treasury securities ( discussed below ) was the main cause of the drop in china's overall holdings of u.s. securities .

table 2 lists the top three holders of u.s. securities as of june 2012 , broken down by the type of securities held , and figure 3 provides a breakdown of china's holdings of u.s. securities by category .

these data indicate that as of june 2012: china accounted for 12.0% of total foreign - held u.s. securities ( compared with 4.1% in 2002 ) .

however , this was down from 13.9% in june 2011 .

lt treasury securities constituted the bulk of china's holdings of u.s. securities ( at 71.5% of total ) , followed by equities ( 13.9% ) and lt agency debt ( 12.7% ) .

china was the largest foreign holder of lt treasury debt at 24.4% of total ( down from 32.2% in june 2011 ) .

china was the second - largest holder of u.s. agency debt ( 20.4% of total ) after japan .

china was the ninth - largest holder of u.s. equities at $221 billion , which was 5.2% of total foreign holdings .

the growing u.s. dependency on china to purchase u.s. treasury securities to help fund the u.s. budget deficit has become a major concern to many u.s. policymakers .

some have raised concerns that china's large holdings may give it leverage over the united states on economic as well as noneconomic issues .

others have expressed concern that china might lose faith in the ability of the united states to meet its debt obligations , and , thus , might seek to liquidate such assets or significantly cut back on purchases of new securities , a move some contend could damage the u.s. economy .

still others contend that china's purchases of u.s. securities were a major contributing factor to the u.s. sub - prime mortgage crisis and subsequent global economic slowdown because such purchases helped to keep real u.s. interest rates very low and increased global imbalances .

some warn that similar bubbles could occur in the future if imbalances between the united states and china are not addressed .

chinese officials , on the other hand , have expressed concerns over the safety of their large holdings of u.s. debt , and some have argued that china should either diversify away from u.s. treasury securities or implement policies that slow the accumulation of fx reserves , which would lessen the need to buy u.s. assets .

as the previous data illustrate , china has accumulated large holdings of u.s. assets in recent years .

these accumulations are the result of u.s. borrowing to finance its large trade deficit with china ( the gap between u.s. exports and chinese imports ) .

all else equal , chinese government purchases of u.s. assets increases the demand for u.s. assets , which reduces u.s. interest rates .

what might happen if china no longer purchased u.s. securities and / or tried to sell a significant share of its dollar holdings ? .

if china stopped buying u.s. securities , the united states would need other investors ( foreign and domestic ) to fill in the gap .

such investors would presumably require higher interest rates than those prevailing today to be enticed to buy them .

one economist in 2007 estimated that a chinese move away from long - term u.s. securities could raise u.s. interest rates by as much as 50 basis points .

higher interest rates would cause a decline in investment spending and other interest - sensitive spending .

all else equal , the reduction in chinese treasury holdings would cause the overall foreign demand for u.s. assets to fall , and this would cause the dollar to depreciate .

if the value of the dollar depreciated , the trade deficit would decline , as the price of u.s. exports fell abroad and the price of imports rose in the united states .

the magnitude of these effects would depend on how many u.s. securities china sold ; modest reductions would have negligible effects on the economy given the large size of u.s. financial markets .

since china held about $1.6 trillion of u.s. private and public securities ( largely u.s. treasury securities ) as of june 2012 , any reduction in its u.s. holdings could potentially be large .

if there were a large reduction in its holdings , the effect on the u.s. economy would still depend on whether the reduction was gradual or sudden .

it should be emphasized that economic theory suggests that a slow decline in the trade deficit and dollar would not be troublesome for the overall economy .

in fact , a slow decline could even have an expansionary effect on the economy , if the decrease in the trade deficit had a more stimulative effect on aggregate demand in the short run than the decrease in investment and other interest - sensitive spending resulting from higher interest rates .

historical experience seems to bear this out — the dollar declined by about 40% in real terms and the trade deficit declined continually in the late 1980s , from 2.8% of gdp in 1986 to nearly zero during the early 1990s .

yet economic growth was strong throughout the late 1980s .

a potentially serious short - term problem would emerge if china decided to suddenly reduce their liquid u.s. financial assets significantly .

the effect could be compounded if this action triggered a more general financial reaction ( or panic ) , in which all foreigners responded by reducing their holdings of u.s. assets .

the initial effect could be a sudden and large depreciation in the value of the dollar , as the supply of dollars on the foreign exchange market increased , and a sudden and large increase in u.s. interest rates , as an important funding source for investment and the budget deficit was withdrawn from the financial markets .

the dollar depreciation by itself would not cause a recession since it would ultimately lead to a trade surplus ( or smaller deficit ) , which expands aggregate demand .

 ( empirical evidence suggests that the full effects of a change in the exchange rate on traded goods take time , so the dollar may have to "overshoot" its eventual depreciation level in order to achieve a significant adjustment in trade flows in the short run. ) .

however , a sudden increase in interest rates could swamp the trade effects and cause ( or worsen ) a recession .

large increases in interest rates could cause problems for the u.s. economy , as these increases reduce the market value of debt securities , causing prices on the stock market to fall , undermining efficient financial intermediation , and jeopardizing the solvency of various debtors and creditors .

resources may not be able to shift quickly enough from interest - sensitive sectors to export sectors to make this transition fluid .

the federal reserve could mitigate the interest rate spike by reducing short - term interest rates , although this reduction would influence long - term rates only indirectly , and could worsen the dollar depreciation and increase inflation .

in march 2007 , federal reserve chairman ben bernanke reportedly stated in a letter to senator shelby that "because foreign holdings of u.s. treasury securities represent only a small part of total u.s. credit market debt outstanding , u.s. credit markets should be able to absorb without great difficulty any shift of foreign allocations. .

u.s. financial markets experienced exceptional turmoil beginning in august 2007 .

over the following year , the dollar declined by almost 8% in inflation - adjusted terms — a decline that was not , in itself , disruptive .

but as the turmoil deepened and spread to the rest of the world in 2008 , the value of the dollar began rising .

interest rates on u.s. treasuries fell close to zero , implying excessive investor demand .

other interest rates also remained low , although access to credit was limited for some .

although comprehensive data will not be available for some time , a "sudden stop" in capital inflows does not appear to have been a feature of the downturn .

problems experienced in u.s. financial markets over the past few years have been widely viewed as "once in a lifetime" events .

if these events failed to cause a sudden flight from u.s. assets and an unwinding of the current account deficit by china or other countries , it is hard to imagine what would .

many economists argue that concerns over china's holdings of u.s. securities represent part of a broader problem related to "global imbalances" – the concept that large differences in saving and investment between countries have manifested itself in large trade imbalances .

for the u.s. economy , this issue is manifested namely in its low savings rate and thus its dependence on foreign saving to finance its investment needs and federal budget deficits .

the large u.s. current account deficit ( the manifestation of the high u.s. saving / investment gap ) cannot be sustained indefinitely because the u.s. net foreign debt cannot rise faster than gdp indefinitely .

the u.s. current account deficit as a percent of gdp fell from a peak of 6.0% in 2006 to 2.7% in 2009 ( largely due to the effects of the global economic slowdown ) .

it rose to 3.0% in 2010 and has remained around that level through 2012 .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) projects that this figure will fall to 2.9% in 2013 , but then will rise over the next five years , reaching 3.5% by 2018 ( still significantly below its historical peak ) .

in that light , a move by china to a more flexible currency and capital control policy would reduce the chinese government's need to purchase u.s. securities ( notably , treasury securities ) , but could result in greater private chinese investment in u.s. securities ( notably , private securities ) .

some economists warn that at some point foreign investors may view the growing level of u.s. foreign debt as unsustainable or more risky , or they may no longer view u.s. securities as offering the best return on their investment , and shift investment funds away from u.s. assets , thus forcing u.s. interest rates to rise to attract needed foreign capital .

this could result in higher interest rates and lower investment rates , all else equal , which could reduce long - term growth .

a reliance on foreign governments such as china , to finance the u.s. current account deficit ( which includes the u.s. merchandise trade deficit ) by increasing their foreign exchange reserves may prolong the necessary adjustment process .

thus , it is argued , the united states must boost its level of savings in the long run in order to reduce its vulnerability to a potential shift away from u.s. assets by foreign investors .

it remains to be seen whether this adjustment process began in the united states in 2008 , or whether the rise in private saving and decline in the current account deficit was only a temporary response to the recession .

some economists contend that , although the low u.s. savings rate is a problem , the u.s. current account deficit and high levels of foreign capital flows to the united states are also reflections of the strength of the u.s. economy and its attractiveness as a destination for foreign investment , and therefore discount the likelihood that foreign investors will suddenly shift their capital elsewhere .

some economists view china's purchases of u.s. securities as a type of subsidy that is transferred from chinese savers to u.s. consumers and borrowers in the form of lower - cost chinese products and lower u.s. interest rates .

that subsidy helps to boost u.s. consumption of chinese products , which supports china's export industries .

however , the subsidy is at the expense of chinese consumers and non - export industries , largely because china's undervalued rmb makes imports more expensive than they would be if the rmb were a floating currency .

the lack of a social safety net forces chinese workers to save a significant part of their income .

that savings is indirectly used to finance the chinese government's purchases of u.s. securities .

chinese purchases and holdings of u.s. securities have reportedly been controversial in china , according to some media reports , many of which cite complaints among some chinese internet bloggers over low returns on chinese investment of its fx reserves .

many analysts ( including some in china ) have questioned the wisdom of china's policy of investing a large level of fx reserves in u.s. government securities , which offer a relatively low rate of return , when china has such huge development needs at home .

one chinese blogger reportedly wrote: "chinese people are working so hard , day in and day out , the economic environment is so good , but people's livelihoods are not so great — turns out it is because the government is tightening people's waist belts to lend money to the united states. .

some chinese analysts have argued that the debt problems in europe and the united states will decrease their demand for chinese products , and that a depreciating dollar will lower the value of chinese dollar assets .

thus , they argue , china will need to accelerate its economic reforms in order to boost domestic consumption ( including increased imports ) , lower its dependency on exporting for economic growth , and slow or reduce china's fx reserves and holdings of u.s. securities .

china's contribution to global imbalances comes through its high saving rate and current account surplus .

if china consumed more and saved less , it would have less capital to invest overseas , including in the united states .

thus , if the united states did not reduce its dependence on foreign savings for its investment needs , and china reduced its u.s. investments , the united states would need to obtain investment from other countries , and u.s. interest rates would be expected to rise .

