from april 20 to 24 , 2009 , united nations ( u.n. ) member states will meet in geneva , switzerland , for the u.n. durban review conference against racism ( review conference ) .

some members of congress are concerned that the review conference will repeat the perceived mistakes of the u.n. world conference against racism , racial discrimination , xenophobia and related intolerance ( wcar ) , which was held in durban , south africa , from august 31 to september 7 , 2001 .

at wcar , participating governments , including the united states , sought to acknowledge and recommend ways for the international community to address racism and related intolerance .

the conference attracted a significant amount of national and international attention because of what many viewed as participating governments' disproportionate focus on israel as a perpetrator of racism and intolerance in the middle east .

the united states withdrew from wcar when , in its view , it became clear that governments , particularly members of the organization of the islamic conference ( oic ) , would continue to target israel while contemporary forms of racism remained unaddressed .

in december 2006 , the u.n. general assembly adopted a resolution calling for a durban review conference to assess the implementation of wcar's main outcome documents — the durban declaration and program of action .

the bush administration opposed the review conference and did not participated in the preparatory process or voted for u.n. resolutions supporting or funding it .

in february 2009 , the barack obama administration decided to participate in review conference consultations to observe the current status of negotiations related to the review conference outcome document .

after attending the consultations and reviewing the draft outcome document , it determined that it would not participate in future negotiations because of the draft document's focus on israel .

the administration stated that it remained open to re - engaging in negotiations if a draft document appeared to take a "constructive approach" to addressing racism and discrimination .

other countries , including canada , israel , and italy have announced that they will boycott the conference , and some governments stated they will not participate unless it is clear that the conference will not target israel .

in the coming weeks , participating countries will continue to negotiate the review conference draft outcome document .

members of congress have demonstrated continued interest in the durban review conference .

some members , for example , are concerned that the united states would fund a u.n. conference that serves as a forum for anti - semitism .

they have proposed legislation that would withhold a proportionate share of u.s. assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget , which funds the review conference .

limiting u.s. contributions to the review conference in this manner would have no impact on the review conference because assessed contributions finance the u.n. regular budget in its entirety and not specific or separate parts of it .

other members of congress have emphasized the importance of combating racism internationally , and have proposed and passed resolutions urging president obama to engage in diplomatic efforts to ensure that the review conference does not further discredit u.n. efforts to address racism by disproportionately focusing on israel .

members of the 111 th congress will likely consider a number of issues when conducting oversight of the review conference and determining appropriate levels of u.s. participation and financial contributions .

some suggest , for example , that ongoing review conference preparations indicate that certain u.n. member states will continue to target israel .

others are concerned about the potential diplomatic or political impact of u.s. participation , or lack thereof .

some , for instance , maintain that the question of u.s. participation in the review conference is inherently linked to the larger issue of u.s. participation in international organizations .

they are concerned that a selective approach to u.s. engagement in the united nations may damage the reputation and negotiating influence of the united states both within and outside of the u.n. system .

opponents , however , contend that u.s. participation in the review conference contradicts the objectives of the conference and would provide legitimacy to u.n. mechanisms that allow member states to criticize israel in the context of racism .

this report provides background information on previous u.n. efforts to address racism and the 2001 world conference against racism .

the report also discusses the objectives of the durban review conference , including u.s. policy and responses from other governments .

it examines charges of bias against israel in the preparatory process for the review conference , potential implications for u.s. participation or non - participation , and the impact of withholding a proportionate share of u.s. contributions to the conference from the u.n. regular budget .

the 2001 world conference against racism and the upcoming durban review conference are part of broader u.n. efforts to address racism and racial discrimination .

the world conference against racism , racial discrimination , xenophobia and related intolerance ( wcar or the conference ) was held in durban , south africa , from august 31 to september 7 , 2001 .

conference objectives included ( 1 ) reviewing progress made in the fight against racism , xenophobia , and intolerance ; ( 2 ) increasing the level of awareness about racism ; and ( 3 ) recommending ways to increase u.n. effectiveness through programs that combat racism and related intolerance .

conference participants also aimed to recommend ways to improve regional , national , and international measures to combat racism , and ensure that the united nations had the resources to combat racism .

unlike previous world conferences that focused primarily on racism and racial discrimination , wcar also addressed issues related to xenophobia and related intolerance .

the u.n. general assembly designated the u.n. commission on human rights ( now the human rights council ) as the conference preparatory committee , and directed that the conference secretariat operate out of the office of the u.n. high commissioner for human rights ( ohchr ) .

participation was open to representatives from all u.n. member states , u.n. bodies and programs , regional organizations and commissions , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and intergovernmental organizations .

approximately 2,300 representatives from 163 countries attended wcar , and nearly 4,000 ngo representatives were accredited .

the conference was funded through the u.n. regular budget and voluntary contributions from u.n. member states .

to prepare for wcar , participating governments held a number of regional and organizational meetings where they made decisions related to the scope and agenda of the conference .

at the regional sessions , for example , governments drafted declarations and programs of action for their regions .

at the second session of the preparatory committee , held in may 2001 , governments established a working group of 21 states ( group of 21 ) , which included the united states .

the group synthesized the outcome documents from regional meetings into the draft declaration and program of action ( hereafter "outcome documents" ) that was considered at the conference .

though the outcome documents were non - binding , many countries considered them crucial to the success of wcar because they provided international guidance and credibility for governments and organizations aiming to combat racism .

since wcar , u.n. member states increasingly explored the possibility of holding a follow - up conference to review progress made on the implementation of the durban declaration and program of action .

on december 19 , 2006 , the u.n. general assembly adopted a resolution deciding to convene the durban review conference .

the conference will be held in geneva , switzerland , from april 20 to 24 , 2009 .

members of the 111 th congress may wish to consider a number of issues when conducting oversight and considering u.s. funding for the durban review conference and possible follow - up activities .

the obama administration and some members of congress have suggested that the united states should participate in the durban review conference only if it is proven that the conference will not: ( 1 ) become a vehicle for anti - semitism , ( 2 ) reaffirm the 2001 durban declaration and program of action , or ( 3 ) focus on defamation of religion .

consequently , members of the 111 th congress may wish to consider u.n. member state actions during the review conference preparatory process .

during the preparatory process , participating governments aimed to determine the scope and agenda of the conference .

countries such as australia , canada , and israel , and members of the european union , maintain that the conference should focus primarily on member state and u.n. system implementation of the durban declaration and program of action instead of reopening controversial issues agreed to at wcar .

some hope that by concentrating on the implementation of wcar outcomes , participants can achieve a broad consensus and avoid repeating the perceived mistakes of the previous conference .

other countries , particularly members of the organization of the islamic conference ( oic ) , contend that the review conference should focus not only on implementation of wcar outcomes but also on "the contemporary scourge of racism," including the plight and suffering of the palestinian people and the defamation of religions , particularly islam .

on august 27 , 2007 , the review conference preparatory committee elected a bureau of 21 members ( group of 21 ) to determine conference modalities and objectives .

a number of conference observers and participants have expressed concern about the composition of the group , which includes countries that expressed anti - israel sentiments at wcar , including iran , indonesia , and senegal .

some are particularly concerned that libya and cuba — states that many view as anti - israeli and anti - democratic — are bureau chair and vice - chairperson rapporteur .

to prepare for the review conference , participating governments have attended several organizational meetings to consider the scope and agenda of the review conference .

some governments also have participated in meetings of the intersessional open - ended intergovernmental working group of the preparatory committee , which is tasked with reviewing recommendations submitted by countries and other stakeholders for possible inclusion in the review conference outcome document .

some expressed concern with drafts proposed by the working group .

in may 2008 , for example , the working group circulated a list of issues that might be included in the conference outcome document .

the list specifically referred to the "plight of the palestinian people" and stated that the situation in the occupied palestinian territories violates a range of civil and political rights .

during the past year , u.n .

member states have been formally and informally negotiating the draft outcome document that will be considered at the review conference .

on march 17 , 2009 , the office of the high commissioner for human rights published a draft outcome document "rolling text" based on ongoing member state negotiations .

the 17-page document eliminates many controversial aspects of previous drafts , including specific mentions of israel , palestine , and "defamation of religion. .

critics , however , contend that while the march 8 text might be seen as an improvement over previous drafts it does not meet the conditions for u.s. participation .

specifically , opponents point to paragraph 1 which reaffirms the durban declaration and program of action ( ddpa ) .

the ddpa had expressed concern about the "plight of the palestinian people under foreign occupation" and recognized "the inalienable right of the palestinian people to self - determination and to the establishment of an independent state. .

critics hold that by reaffirming the ddpa , the review conference draft outcome is singling out israel as a perpetrator of racism .

supporters of u.s. participation argue that the shortened march 8 text is an encouraging development and that the united states should participate in the review conference to influence its outcome .

a representative from the u.n. office of the high commissioner for human rights reportedly stated , "we believe this shortened text represents a solid and meaningful basis for negotiations by member states toward a positive outcome for the conference. .

when advocating u.s. participation , a number of supporters emphasize the difference between early wcar drafts in 2001 that equated zionism with racism and the final ddpa that contained , in the view of many , relatively moderate language by comparison .

bush administration officials indicated that the united states would not fund the review conference or its preparatory process unless it was proven that the conference would not become a platform for anti - semitic behavior .

the final decision regarding u.s. funding of the conference , however , will be made by the obama administration or members of the 111 th congress .

if congress does not enact legislation prohibiting u.s. funding for the review conference , the obama administration may decide on its own to withhold the u.s. proportionate share of u.s. contributions prior to the conference .

if such a scenario occurred , it would raise the question as to whether the administration would release funding after the conference if the outcome was acceptable to the united states .

specifically , some members of the 110 th and 111 th congresses proposed that the united states withhold a proportionate share of its u.n. assessed contributions , approximately 22% , from the u.n. regular budget , which is used to fund the conference .

withholding funds in this manner would not affect the conference because assessed contributions finance the u.n. regular budget in its entirety and not specific parts of it .

the u.s. decision to withhold a proportionate share of funding from the u.n. human rights council for fy2008 would not affect funding for the durban review conference or its preparatory process because funding for both mechanisms falls under separate parts of the budget of the u.n. office of the high commissioner for human rights .

as of november 17 , 2008 , the secretary - general estimates that the cost of the review conference and its preparatory process will be $3,754,800 .

however , the secretary - general will seek only $570,400 in additional funding because he anticipates that the balance of $3,184,400 will be absorbed by other related parts of the u.n. regular budget .

some suggest that the united states should participate in and provide funding for the durban review conference in part because the final text that addresses the situation in israel and palestine in the durban declaration and program of action was significantly toned down from drafts that led to the u.s. withdrawal .

some argue that the u.s. and israeli withdrawals from wcar were a turning point in negotiations and sent a powerful diplomatic message to conference participants .

they contend that the withdrawals pressured other governments to adopt more moderate language on the middle east in the final outcome documents .

conversely , some contend that the language in the declaration and program of action remains unacceptable to the united states .

to support this view , opponents point to the bush administration's policy of consistently voting against resolutions supporting the review conference in u.n. fora .

they maintain that the declaration and program of action unfairly single out one regional conflict and refer to the plight of only one party — the palestinians — with no mention of israel .

for some , the question of u.s. participation or non - participation in the durban review conference touches on the broader issue of u.s. engagement in the u.n. system .

supporters contend that u.s. participation in u.n. efforts such as the review conference is important to the success and credibility of the united nations as a whole .

they argue that instead of withdrawing from u.n. conferences that have processes or outcomes it opposes , the united states should fully participate and work from within to build member state coalitions in support of u.s. policies .

if the united states does not fully participate in u.n. fora , some argue , u.n. member state actions might be determined by groups of member states advocating agendas that are contrary to u.s. interests .

they maintain that u.s. absence from such u.n. efforts could create a vacuum in which views opposed by the united states hold supreme .

supporters contend that a piecemeal and selective approach to participation in the united nations damages the u.s. negotiating position and its influence both within and outside of the u.n. system .

moreover , some argue that u.s. engagement in u.n. human rights efforts such as the review conference provides a valuable international tool for groups and individuals battling racism in countries where human rights is not a priority .

opponents of u.s. participation in the review conference maintain that u.s. engagement would give undeserved legitimacy to u.n. mechanisms that provide a platform for member states to target israel .

they also argue that it would imply that the united states supports the anti - semitism demonstrated at wcar as well as what many perceive as unbalanced language in the durban declaration and program of action .

according to some , u.s. non - participation in the review conference sends a clear message to u.n. member states that repeatedly targeting one country and regional conflict in u.n. fora is unacceptable to the united states .

they contend that the long - term political impact of such a message outweighs the short - term diplomatic impact of u.s. non - participation or withdrawal .

these opponents therefore agree with the bush administration's decision not to participate in the preparatory process until , as u.s. officials say , it is proven that the review conference will not become a platform for anti - semitism .

they argue that holding out the possibility of u.s. participation — as well as the participation of other like - minded governments who have made similar statements — may persuade u.n. member states to take a more balanced approach when drafting and negotiating review conference outcome documents in preparation for the april 2009 conference .

