illegal drugs refer to narcotic , psychotropic , and related substances whose production , sale , and use are restricted by domestic law and international drug control agreements .

common illegal drugs trafficked internationally include cocaine and heroin , as well as psychotropic substances , such as methamphetamine and ecstasy .

cannabis , or marijuana , is also internationally proscribed .

the illegal trade in these drugs represents a lucrative and what at times seems to be an intractable transnational criminal enterprise .

according to the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) , the united states is particularly affected by this criminal activity .

describing the illicit narcotics trade as a "challenging , dynamic threat to the united states," doj concluded in 2011 that the drug threat to the united states "will not abate in the near term and may increase. .

drug trafficking has been an issue of international policy concern for more than a century and a subject of long - standing u.s. and multilateral policy commitment .

yet , tensions continue to appear at times between u.s. foreign drug policy and approaches advocated by independent observers and the international community .

many u.s. policymakers have argued that the confluence of political and security threats surrounding international drug trafficking necessitates a policy posture that emphasizes the disruption and dismantlement of the criminal actors and organizations involved in all aspects of the drug trade .

in addition to counternarcotics responses that address public security , other dimensions to international drug control policy emphasize programs that address health consequences of drug abuse ; drug demand reduction through treatment , rehabilitation , and social reintegration for drug users ; and sustainable and comprehensive alternative livelihood options for impoverished drug crop farmers .

existing approaches to international drug control , however , have long been criticized as ineffective .

in 1998 , for example , the united nations committed to "eliminating or reducing significantly" the supply of illicit drugs by 2008 .

in 2009 , when that goal had not been accomplished , u.n .

member states agreed to recommit to achieve this goal in another decade , by 2019 .

in 2010 , the obama administration's director of the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) acknowledged to the press that contemporary counternarcotics strategy "has not been successful. .

he reportedly continued: "forty years later , the concern about drugs and drug problems is , if anything , magnified , intensified. .

moreover , domestic initiatives on marijuana have fueled the debate and increased both domestic and international pressure to reconsider the contours of the current drug control regime .

in recent years , some international advocates have called for a fundamental shift of current international drug policies , which are viewed by such observers as encouraging a prohibitionist approach to counternarcotics .

in 2009 , the latin american commission on drugs and democracy , co - led by three ex - presidents from colombia , mexico , and brazil , released a report that challenged the international community to reevaluate drug control policies .

in 2011 , the global commission on drug policy released a report that expanded the latin american commission's drug policy debate .

several sitting presidents have also expressed interest in exploring alternatives to the existing international drug control regime , who raised the topic at the sixth summit of the americas in april 2012 as well as at the annual opening of the u.n. general assembly in september 2012 .

in january 2013 , the government of bolivia succeeded in carving out an exception for coca leaf , an internationally regulated substance pursuant to current u.n. drug conventions .

after denouncing and withdrawing from the u.n .

single convention on narcotic drugs , as amended , on june 29 , 2011 , bolivia successfully rejoined the u.n. drug control regime in january 2013 , this time with a specific reservation clause that obviates its requirement to criminalize the domestic personal use , consumption , possession , purchase , or cultivation of coca leaf .

some have criticized the action as contrary to the international convention's spirit , and some are concerned that it may risk the integrity of the global drug control system .

others praise bolivia's approach as a viable tactic to adapt the u.n. drug control regime , which some have criticized as antiquated .

recognizing the ongoing challenges posed by the global drug problem , many have questioned whether the current international drug control system requires partial or wholesale revisions .

to this end , the u.n. general assembly plans on hosting a special session ( ungass ) on the world drug problem in 2016 .

experts view the upcoming ungass on drugs as an opportunity for the international community to potentially reaffirm the current policy approach to drug control or set the stage for a different path forward .

it remains unclear whether such policy debates may translate into lasting improvements to reduce the production , trafficking , use , and consequences of illegal drug trade .

however , changes could affect a range of foreign policy considerations for the united states , including foreign aid reform , counterinsurgency strategy ( particularly in afghanistan ) , the distribution of domestic and international drug control funding , and the relative balance of civilian , law enforcement , and military roles in anti - drug efforts .

reflecting historically broad consensus , international efforts to combat drug trafficking are based on a long - standing and robust set of multilateral commitments .

one of the first multilateral efforts to combat drugs began with the international opium commission of 1909 .

since then , the international community has broadened and deepened the scope of international drug control through several international treaties and monitoring mechanisms .

today , international drug control efforts are grounded on the policy foundations laid by three united nations treaties: the 1961 single convention on narcotic drugs , as amended ; the 1971 convention on psychotropic substances ; and the 1988 convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances .

more than 95% of u.n .

member states , including the united states , are parties to all international drug control treaties .

in combination , these u.n. treaties limit the international production and trade of a defined set of narcotic drugs , psychotropic substances , and the precursor chemicals used to make these substances for primarily medical and scientific purposes .

the treaties also establish international mechanisms to monitor treaty adherence — through the international narcotics control board ( incb ) — and for the collection of data related to the illicit cultivation , production , and manufacture of proscribed drugs .

u.n. policymaking on drug - related matters takes place through the u.n. commission on narcotic drugs , which is a functional commission of the u.n. economic and social council .

the u.n. commission on narcotic drugs monitors global drug trends , develops strategies for international drug control , and recommends measures to combat the world drug problem .

to support u.n .

member states in combating drugs , unodc conducts field - based technical assistance projects internationally and conducts research and analysis on current drug market trends .

regional counterdrug - related organizations also supplement multilateral efforts globally .

such efforts include the inter - american drug abuse control commission ( cicad ) , which is the drug control arm of the organization of american states ( oas ) and the drug advisory programme ( dap ) of the colombo plan .

cicad serves as the regional policy forum for all aspects of western hemisphere illegal drug issues .

dap supports drug demand reduction , treatment , and rehabilitation in the asia and pacific regions .

other international counternarcotics initiatives include the u.s. - russia counternarcotics working group , which began in 2011 ; the group of eight roma - lyon group meeting , which addresses a variety of counterterrorism and anti - crime issues , including counternarcotics cooperation ; and the u.s. - sino joint liaison group on law enforcement cooperation , a subset of which includes a justice department - led counternarcotics working group .

related international efforts also reinforce counternarcotics policies through their cross - cutting focus on such transnational phenomena as money laundering , drug trafficking - financed terrorism , corruption , organized crime , and global health .

the united states has been involved in international drug control since at least the beginning of the 20 th century .

contemporary u.s. counternarcotics efforts were brought to the forefront of u.s. policy debates in the late 1960s .

in 1971 , president richard nixon declared that illicit drugs were america's "public enemy number one. .

president ronald reagan followed with a directive in 1986 that identified narcotics trafficking a threat to u.s. national security .

successive administrations have continued to feature combating the international drug trade prominently among u.s. foreign policy priorities .

since at least the late 1960s , congress has also been active on drug policy issues , enacting key provisions in u.s. law that define u.s. policies and authorities relating to international narcotics control , exercising oversight responsibilities on u.s. counternarcotics policy , and appropriating funds for international counternarcotics programs .

in 1988 , congress established the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) to coordinate all u.s. counterdrug policy , both domestically and internationally .

ondcp's director is the primary advisor to the president on drug policy issues .

the state department is statutorily designated as the lead u.s. agency responsible for international counterdrug foreign assistance , and the defense department is the lead in the detection and monitoring of foreign drug flows destined for the united states .

the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) is the lead on drug - related law enforcement .

multiple other u.s. agencies are also responsible for various aspects of the u.s. counterdrug response .

the following sections describe several of the key u.s. government strategies and initiatives for combating drugs internationally and in specific regions around the world .

several u.s. agencies are involved in implementing u.s. international counternarcotics activities in support of the administration's national drug control strategy .

these agencies include the following: office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) .

located within the executive office of the president , ondcp establishes u.s. counterdrug policies and goals , and coordinates the federal budget to combat drugs both domestically and internationally .

every year , ondcp's director , sometimes referred to as the u.s. drug czar , produces the national drug control strategy and the federal counterdrug budget summary .

department of state .

the secretary of state is responsible for coordinating all international counterdrug programs implemented by the u.s. government , including foreign counternarcotics assistance .

the state department identifies fighting the production , transportation , and sale of illegal narcotics among its primary goals .

every march , the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) produces the international narcotics strategy report ( incsr ) , which describes the efforts of key countries to attack all aspects of the international drug trade , including anti - money laundering during the previous calendar year .

u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

usaid provides assistance for long - term economic and social development .

the usaid administrator serves concurrently as the state department's director of u.s. foreign assistance , with a rank equivalent to deputy secretary of state .

usaid plays a role in counternarcotics development assistance , especially regarding alternative livelihood programs , which are designed to offer alternatives to farmers that will enable and encourage them to discontinue planting poppy and other illicit crops .

department of defense ( dod ) .

dod maintains the lead role in detecting and monitoring aerial and maritime transit of illegal drugs into the united states and plays a key role in collecting , analyzing , and sharing intelligence on illegal drugs with u.s. law enforcement and international security counterparts .

notable entities under dod that focus on international drug control include the office for counternarcotics and global threats , within the office of the under secretary of defense ; the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) ; and various regional combatant commands and joint interagency task forces .

in addition , dod provides counternarcotics foreign assistance to train , equip , and improve the counternarcotics capacity and capabilities of relevant agencies of foreign governments with its counternarcotics central transfer account appropriations .

department of justice ( doj ) .

the attorney general is responsible for federal law enforcement and to ensure public safety against foreign and domestic threats , including illegal drug trafficking .

this translates into an array of responsibilities that include law enforcement operations , drug - related intelligence analysis , and prosecution and criminal justice activities , as well as police and justice sector training .

primary agencies under doj that focus on international drug control include the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the organized crime drug enforcement task force ( ocdetf ) , and the el paso intelligence center ( epic ) .

department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the secretary of homeland security is responsible for u.s. policies related to interdiction of illegal drugs entering the united states from abroad .

the strategic plan for dhs identifies securing the u.s. border against illegal drugs as one of its primary objectives .

key offices within dhs that participate in counterdrug activities include the customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. coast guard , and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

department of the treasury .

the treasury department participates in counterdrug efforts as they pertain to targeting the illicit financial proceeds that result from drug trafficking .

key offices that participate in combating drug - related money laundering include the office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) and the financial crime enforcement network ( fincen ) .

central intelligence agency ( cia ) .

the cia's crime and narcotics center ( cnc ) collects intelligence information and develops intelligence analyses to support or conduct operations countering illicit drug activities , including trends in illegal drug crop cultivation and production .

for fy2016 , the administration has requested approximately $27.6 billion for all federal drug control programs ( see table 1 ) .

of this , 20% , or $5.5 billion , is requested for international and interdiction programs .

beginning with the fy2012 budget request , ondcp significantly restructured its budgeting process , resulting in the addition of more agencies and programs to the overall drug budget .

according to ondcp , these additional agencies had not previously been included in the drug budget because the programs were deemed to be "unreliably estimated or were thought to be related to consequences of drug use ( as opposed to directly related to drug use reduction ) . .

the addition of these agencies had the effect of increasing the total budget , particularly domestic programs ( compare table 1 with table 2 ) .

a large component of the international component of ondcp's national drug budget , discussed above , is committed to civilian - and military - funded assistance to foreign countries for counterdrug support .

such foreign aid is designed to support foreign countries interdict and eradicate drugs , support the development of alternative livelihoods , and reduce the local demand for drugs .

the following sections describe both civilian and military funding and authorities for counternarcotics foreign assistance .

over the years , u.s. counterdrug efforts have expanded to include a broad array of tools to attack the drug trade using several foreign policy approaches .

through its appropriations and federal oversight responsibilities , congress is able to evaluate current efforts , which appear to center around four main drug control policy strategies: ( 1 ) combating the production of drugs at the source , ( 2 ) combating the flow of drugs in transit , ( 3 ) dismantling illicit drug networks , and ( 4 ) creating incentives for international cooperation on drug control .

the following sections describe and analyze each of these primary strategies and their legislative sources .

many observers highlight the importance of international drug control policy , particularly because of the transnational nature of the drug trade , whereas others continue to criticize existing policies and mechanisms for failing to achieve sufficient progress in combating illegal drugs .

the unodc has reported in recent years that global drug use has stabilized , on average ; global opium poppy and coca cultivation is in decline ; and global illicit drug seizures are up — and that a major contributing factor has been the continued international support for drug control policies .

global coordination , many say , is vital for lasting success in combating the international drug trade .

at the same time , however , others criticize the international drug control system for failing to achieve the united nations' stated goal of "eliminating or reducing significantly" by 2008 the production and availability of synthetic drugs and precursors , as well as the cultivation of the coca bush , cannabis plant , and opium poppy .

in 2009 , the u.n.'s commission on narcotic drugs set a new date of 2019 to "eliminate or reduce significantly and measurably" the cultivation of illegal plant - based drugs , the demand for illegal drugs , the production and trafficking of synthetic drugs , the diversion and trafficking of precursor chemicals used in the manufacture of illegal drugs , and drug - related money laundering .

congress may continue to exercise its oversight and assess existing u.s. international drug policy .

emerging questions in the drug policy debate include the following: what is the scope and extent of national flexibility in the interpretation of international drug control treaties ? .

can the international drug control system endure challenges , including implicit and explicit national and sub - national policies that authorize the use and distribution of marijuana ? .

in what ways are counternarcotics strategies facilitating or driving recent increases in drug trafficking - related violence ? .

are spikes in drug - related violence common or inevitable consequences of heightened counternarcotics operations ? .

in what ways might governments mitigate or dampen current and potentially future increases in drug - related violence ? .

how do counternarcotics policies interact with counterterrorism , counterinsurgency , and anti - money laundering priorities , particularly in countries such as afghanistan , where the u.s. government may have an interest in all three issues ? .

what role should the department of defense play in providing foreign counternarcotics assistance ? .

how should u.s. policymakers weigh the benefits of aerial eradication as a counternarcotics policy tool with the social , financial , and political costs it may incur ? .

to what extent is it a common phenomenon that human rights are violated over the course of drug - related investigations and operations ? .

in what ways might human rights violations undermine or threaten drug control policies ? .

to what extent should u.s. counternarcotics policy take into account economic development , social development , and health and harm reduction programs , and are such efforts sufficiently coordinated with international and bilateral partners ? .

how do counternarcotics policies interact with related foreign policy goals of anti - corruption , justice sector reform , and improving the rule of law ? .

how might international regulatory and legal constraints limit the reach of u.s. counternarcotics policy and potentially offer drug syndicates foreign safe havens ? .

what legislative options might be available to prevent such legal safe havens from existing ? .

