american voters elect the president and vice president of the united states under a complex arrangement of constitutional provisions , federal and state laws , and political party practices known as the electoral college system .

despite occasional close elections , this system has selected the candidate with the most popular votes in 47 of the past 51 elections since the 12 th amendment was ratified in 1804 .

these other elections have been negatively characterized by some commentators as electoral college "misfires. .

in three instances ( 1876 , 1888 and 2000 ) , the electoral college awarded the presidency to candidates who won a majority of electoral votes , but gained fewer popular votes than their principal opponents .

in a fourth case ( 1824 ) , the house of representatives decided the contest by contingent election because no candidate had an electoral vote majority .

these controversial elections occurred because the system requires a majority of electoral , not popular , votes to win the presidency , and this feature , which is original to u.s. constitution , has been the object of persistent criticism and numerous reform plans .

the most recent instance in which the popular vote runner up received a majority in the electoral college occurred in 2000 , when george w. bush and richard b. cheney were elected over al gore , jr. and joseph i. lieberman , despite having won fewer popular votes .

the 2000 election outcome hinged on the state of florida , where popular vote totals were extremely close but uncertain after the polls closed .

this was due in part to confusing ballots and poorly maintained machinery in some florida counties , which contributed to uncertainties over which candidate had won the popular vote .

various attempts to conduct recounts or ascertain individual voters' intentions led to a bitter and protracted struggle that continued for over a month following election day .

a supreme court decision ended further recounts , leading to certification of bush - cheney electors in florida , and the republicans' subsequent election .

following the 2000 presidential election , both the electoral college system and the shortcomings of election administration procedures and voting machinery ( the latter two historically a responsibility of state and local governments ) were criticized .

while a number of constitutional amendments were proposed , the 107 th congress addressed the latter element of this issue with the enactment of the help america vote act , "hava" ( p.l .

107 - 252 , 116 stat .

1666 ) , in 2002 .

this act , passed with broad bipartisan support , established national standards for voting systems and certain election procedures , and included a program of grants to assist state and local governments in meeting the act's goals .

the successful passage of hava contrasted with the lack of legislative activity in recent congresses on proposed constitutional amendments that would eliminate or reform the electoral college system .

the contrast serves to highlight the comparative difficulties faced by would - be electoral college reformers .

the fundamentals of the electoral college system were established by the constitution , and can only be altered by a constitutional amendment , a much more difficult process than the passage of legislation .

moreover , hava's prospects for enactment were boosted by the fact that , while few would defend the sometimes embarrassing failures in voting technology that contributed to passage of the act , efforts to eliminate the electoral college would arguably be vigorously opposed in congress and the public forum by its various advocates and defenders .

not all approaches to electoral college reform necessarily involve action at the federal level , however .

in 2004 , for instance , colorado voters rejected a proposed amendment to the state constitution that would have established the proportional system , one variant of electoral college reform ( discussed in the appendix ) in that state .

more recently , the national popular vote ( npv ) movement is currently coordinating a campaign that would rely on a multi - state compact , in the form of binding state legislation , to guarantee that the popular vote winners in every election would also win the electoral vote .

this report examines and analyzes alternative proposals for change , presents pro and con arguments , and identifies and analyzes 110 th congress proposals and contemporary alternative reform developments .

a wide range of constitutional proposals to reform presidential election procedures have been introduced over time .

in recent decades , they have fallen into two categories: ( 1 ) those that seek to eliminate the electoral college system entirely and replace it with direct popular election ; and ( 2 ) those that seek to repair perceived defects while preserving the existing system .

the direct election alternative would abolish the electoral college , substituting a single nationwide count of popular votes .

the candidates winning a plurality of votes would be elected president and vice president .

most direct election proposals would constitutionally mandate today's familiar joint tickets of presidential / vice presidential candidates , a feature that is already incorporated in state law .

some would require simply that the candidates winning the most popular votes be elected .

others , however , would set a minimum threshold of votes necessary to win election — generally 40% of votes cast ; in some proposals a majority would be required .

according to these proposals , if no presidential ticket were to attain the 40% or majority threshold , then the two tickets with the highest popular vote total would compete in a subsequent runoff election .

alternatively , some versions would provide for congress , meeting in joint session , to elect the president and vice president if no ticket received 40% of the vote .

reform measures that would retain the electoral college in some form have included several variants ; most versions of these plans would eliminate the office of elector , would award electoral votes directly to the candidates , and would retain the requirement that a majority of electoral votes is necessary to win the presidency .

in common with direct election , most would also require joint tickets of presidential - vice presidential candidates , a practice currently provided by state law .

the three most popular reform proposals include ( 1 ) the automatic plan , which would award electoral votes automatically and on the current winner - take - all basis in each state ; ( 2 ) the district plan , as currently adopted in maine and nebraska , which would award one electoral vote to the winning ticket in each congressional district in each state , and each state's two additional electoral votes awarded to the statewide popular vote winners ; and ( 3 ) the proportional plan , which would award each state's electoral votes in proportion to the percentage of the popular vote gained by each ticket .

more detailed explanations of these alternatives are included in the appendix to this report .

three constitutional amendments concerning the electoral college system were introduced in the 110 th congress , h.j.res .

4 , and h.j.res .

36 in the house of representatives , and s.j.res .

39 in the senate .

this measure , the every vote counts amendment , was introduced by representative gene green of texas on january 4 , 2007 .

representatives brian baird and william d. delahunt joined as cosponsors on january 9 .

on february 2 , it was referred to the subcommittee on the constitution , civil rights , and civil liberties of the house committee on the judiciary .

no further action was taken during the balance of the 110 th congress .

sections 1 , 3 , 4 , and 5 of the proposed amendment dealt with the election process .

section 1 specified election by "the people of the several states and the district constituting the seat of government. .

this provision recapitulated existing requirements of state residence ( or residence in the district of columbia ) , and implicitly excluded puerto rico and u.s. territories .

section 3 set a plurality , rather than a majority requirement for election .

section 4 established in the constitution the joint candidacies currently provided in state law .

section 5 empowered congress to provide by law for: ( 1 ) the death of candidates prior to election day ; and ( 2 ) any tie vote in a presidential election .

the section 5 language appeared to give congress broad authority in these situations , arguably extending to various options in the event of the death of a candidate or candidates and including such options as rescheduling elections and / or the date for casting electoral votes .

in the event of a tie , the amendment arguably sought to empower congress to provide for a second round election to the break the deadlock , or authorize congress itself to break a tie .

it is less clear whether the amendment would have made an implicit grant of authority to congress to intervene in the process of replacing party candidates under such circumstances , an eventuality that has historically been addressed by the parties through internal procedures .

if so , this would have constituted a departure from current practice and political tradition by empowering congress to intervene in the internal workings of the political parties .

section 2 of the proposed amendment contained three elements relating to voter qualifications .

first , it specified that voters for president and vice president "shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of senators and representatives.... " this sentence built on , and explicitly extended to the presidential electorate , existing constitutional voter qualifications stated in article i , section 2 ( for the house ) , and the 17 th amendment ( for the senate ) , and as further defined and guaranteed by the 14 th , 15 th , 19 th , 24 th , and 26 th amendments .

next , if adopted , it would have empowered the states to set "less restrictive qualifications with respect to residence.... " in contemporary practice , most states have reduced voting residence requirements to an average of 30 days .

since the states already possess the power to reduce or eliminate these periods , this section might be regarded as redundant , or perhaps as providing encouragement , admonishment , or a constitutional imprimatur , to efforts to adopt shorter residency requirements for voters , or to eliminate them altogether .

finally , section 2 proposed to empower congress to "establish uniform residence and age requirements. .

here again , this provision arguably constituted a mandate for potential expansion of federal control over elections .

voting residence requirements , as noted previously , have been traditionally a state responsibility , but the amendment sought to vest in congress authority to preempt state laws in this area , at least for presidential elections .

similarly , congress would have been empowered by the amendment to establish a lower ( or higher ) voting age for presidential elections than is currently provided in the 24 th amendment .

criticisms of both uniform residence and age requirements might expect to be countered by the argument that federal elections are a nationwide expression of the public will , for which national voting requirements are fully justified .

section 6 of the proposed amendment set the time when it would come into force if ratified: that is , for the first presidential election that occurred one year or longer after the date on which the amendment had been declared to be ratified .

for instance , if the amendment had been successfully proposed by congress , in 2008 , and ratified by the states in 2009 , it would have been effective with the presidential election of 2012 .

this measure was introduced by representative jesse jackson jr. , on february 13 , 2007 .

on march 1 , the resolution was referred to the subcommittee on the constitution , civil rights and civil liberties of the house committee on the judiciary , however , no further action was taken on the proposal .

section 1 of this measure proposed direct popular election of the president and vice president by the citizens of the united states citizens , "without regard to whether the citizens are residents of a state. .

although now moot , the meaning of this language is open to differing interpretations .

for instance , it would likely be interpreted as empowering citizens registered in u.s. territories to vote for president .

it might , however , also be considered to require state and local authorities to permit any citizen to vote in a presidential election , without regard to existing residence or voter registration arrangements .

if so , this might have led to complications in vote counting and registry and increased costs for local authorities .

they might have believed it necessary to institute one ballot for the presidential vote , and a separate one for "down ballot" elections in order to ensure that only voters who are registered in the jurisdiction cast votes for state and local office .

here again , however , the argument may be made that election of the president and vice president is of such profound national importance , it must transcend the convenience of state and local governments .

section 2 of h.j.res .

36 declared that "the persons having the greatest number of votes ... shall be elected , so long as such persons have a majority of the votes cast. .

this provision of the proposed amendment differed from most direct election proposals , which more commonly establish a 40% plurality or a simple plurality to elect .

more problematic , however , was the fact that while it established a majority requirement , h.j.res .

36 did not incorporate any procedures for elections in which no candidate wins a majority .

since popular vote plurality elections occur with some regularity , this omission could have been remedied in committee by such procedures as a runoff election or election by congress under such circumstances .

an additional option could have empowered congress to provide by legislation for such events , leaving selection of the vehicle to the judgment of the legislature .

this measure was introduced by senator bill nelson of florida on june 6 , 2008 .

it was referred to the senate committee on the judiciary the same day , but no further action was taken on it .

section 1 of this proposed amendment to the constitution sought to establish direct election of the president and vice president .

unlike some other direct election proposals , it did not require a majority or plurality threshold of popular votes to elect , but the attainment of some level of plurality in order to win the presidency is a common sense inference .

a major change proposed by the measure was that section 1 also proposed to extend participation in presidential elections beyond the states and the district of columbia to the territories of the united states .

this expansion could arguably have been justified on the grounds that inhabitants of most u.s. territories are citizens , and therefore deserve the right to vote .

supporters might suggest this to be the further and logical extension of the right to vote for president , in the same tradition as the 23 rd amendment , which granted this right to residents of the district of columbia .

prior to the amendment's ratification in 1961 , inhabitants of washington , d. c. had much in common with the current status of residents of the territories , since they were also u.s. citizens who did not reside in a state , and could not vote for president and vice president .

opponents might have argued that , while the territories are u.s. possessions , and that many of their inhabitants are citizens , they are not states , and , as a group , are unlikely to be admitted to the union at the near future .

this amendment , they might have argued , would violate the principles of federalism and devalue the institution of statehood .

nor , they might have added , is the situation analogous to that of the district of columbia , which was part of the nation since independence .

by comparison , the territories and other u.s. dependencies were largely acquired in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries , generally by treaty or purchase .

moreover , they might have added , in the case of american samoa , its inhabitants are not u.s. citizens , but rather , american nationals .

additional questions might have been raised as to the precise status of certain entities under u.s. jurisdiction whose political status remains arguably indefinite and anomalous .

section 2 of the proposed amendment sought to expand congressional authority over the presidential election process in several respects .

first , it proposed to empower congress to determine the "time , place , and manner of holding the election. .

this would have extended the existing grant of authority over congressional elections provided in article i , section 4 , clause 1 of the constitution .

this section would also have authorized congress to determine "entitlement to inclusion on the ballot. .

this language potentially superseded existing arrangements on ballot placement and status , which have traditionally been a state responsibility .

section 2 concluded by proposing further extension of congressional authority to "the manner in which the results of the election shall be ascertained and declared. .

supporters of these elements of section 2 might have argued that they were necessary to ensure that presidential elections are administered fairly and equitably .

with respect to ballot access , they might have asserted that existing state requirements are excessive and deliberately stringent , that they simultaneously guarantee ballot placement for the two major parties and impede access by new parties and independent candidates .

similarly , they might have suggested that congressional power over vote counting and election ascertainment would guarantee uniform and efficient national standards for election administration , eliminating a patchwork of existing state requirements , and providing stronger deterrence to potential vote fraud .

opponents might have asserted that these grants of authority , if embodied in legislation , would be a usurpation of functions long performed at the state level .

such legislation would , they might have asserted , constitute a further infringement on state authority , and could lead to duplicative and needlessly complex election administration systems as state authorities tried to reconcile competing and possibly conflicting state and federal procedures .

they might have further noted that legislation stemming from the provisions of section 2 would impose heavy costs on the states as they seek to meet federal requirements .

it could be noted , however that precedent exists for federal assistance in this area .

congress has provided financial assistance to the states to help them meet new voting systems standards mandated in the help america vote act , "hava" ( p.l .

107 - 252 , 116 stat .

1666 ) .

opponents might have noted in rebuttal that hava grants are expected to be a temporary expedient .

they might also have questioned the willingness of congress and the federal government to assume a permanent responsibility for , and the increased expenses associated with , greater control over these aspects of the presidential election administration process .

while only a constitutional amendment could alter the fundamental arrangements of the electoral college , some elements of the system could be changed by measures adopted in the states .

as noted previously , the constitution gives the states plenary power in the ways they choose to pick presidential electors .

the language in article ii , section 1 , clause 2 is notably broad and general: "each state shall appoint , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct , a number of electors , equal to the whole number of senators to which the state may be entitled in congress.... " this breadth of authority was intended by the founders , who sought to provide considerable discretion to the several states as to how they would choose and allocate presidential electors .

in other words , the states are free to experiment with systems of elector selection and electoral vote and allocation , up to a point .

indeed , it may be argued that with such experiments the states fulfill their traditional role as "laboratories" in which potential national policy initiatives can be developed and tested .

this report has previously identified several areas in which the states have exercised their prerogative in the past .

first , all 50 states and the district of columbia ( dc ) currently provide for joint tickets , in which the public casts a single vote for electors pledged to a single pair of candidates .

next , the states and dc provide for popular election of presidential electors .

finally , in all but two jurisdictions , maine and nebraska , the electors are chosen en bloc under the general ticket or winner - take - all system ; that is , the group or ticket electors pledged to the candidates who win a plurality of popular votes in the state are elected as a group .

three recent efforts to effect change by using the power accorded to states in article ii , section 1 , clause 2 are discussed below .

the proportional plan of awarding electoral votes has been proposed as an alternative to the winner - take - all or general ticket method dominant today .

although the plan is examined in greater detail in the appendix , briefly , it would require electors ( and electoral votes ) to be allocated in each state according to the percentage of popular votes won by the competing candidates .

for example , assume state x is allocated 10 electoral votes .

next , assume in the election , candidate a receives 60% of the popular vote , candidate b receives 30% , and candidate c , representing a third party or independent candidacy , receives 10% .

under the general ticket or winner - take - all plan , candidate a would win all 10 electoral votes .

under the proportional plan , candidate a would win six electoral votes , candidate b would receive three , and candidate c would receive one vote .

on november 2 , 2004 , colorado voters considered a proposed state constitutional amendment that would have established just such a proportional system in that state .

if the amendment had passed and survived legal challenges , it would have provided proportional allocation of colorado's presidential electors for 2004 and all future presidential elections .

this was possible through citizen action because colorado is one of the 18 states that provide for the proposal and approval of amendments to their state constitutions by popular vote .

the amendment sought to allocate electoral votes and electors based on the proportional share of the total statewide popular vote cast for each presidential ticket .

the percentage of the vote each ticket received would have been multiplied by colorado's total of nine electoral votes .

these figures would then have been rounded up or down to the nearest whole number of electors and electoral votes , but any ticket that did not receive at least one electoral vote under this method would have been eliminated from the total .

if the sum of whole electoral votes derived from this computation were to be greater than nine , then the ticket receiving at least one whole electoral vote , but fewest popular votes , would have had its electoral vote total reduced by one .

this process would have continued until the computed allocation of votes reached nine .

conversely , if the sum of whole electoral votes awarded after rounding the percentages of popular votes were less than nine , then such additional electoral votes as necessary to bring the number up to nine would have been allocated to the ticket receiving the most popular votes , until all nine electoral votes were so allocated .

in the event of a popular and electoral vote allocation tie ( i.e. , candidates a and b each receiving 4.5 electoral votes ) , then the colorado secretary of state would have determined by lot who would receive the evenly split electoral vote .

at the time , questions were raised as to whether this effort to change the allocation formula for colorado's electoral votes by initiative was constitutional .

specifically , the u.s. constitution ( in article ii , section 1 , clause 2 ) provides that , "each state shall appoint , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct , a number of electors , equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress.... " since the early years of government under the constitution , the state legislatures have generally exercised this grant of power by authorizing the voters to choose electors , and they have usually specified the winner - take - all or general ticket system as the means by which the voters' decision is used to allocate electors and electoral votes .

the fact that colorado's proposed amendment 36 would have altered the formula for awarding electoral votes by a vote of the people , not the legislature , was the salient issue in contention .

the colorado legislature's right under article ii to establish a proportional system was not in dispute ; the question rather , was , did the colorado legislature have authority to subdelegate to the voters at large its article ii powers to determine and change the existing method of appointing electors to a popular vote ? .

could the voters of colorado have acted in place of , or as the state legislature ? .

the colorado constitution specifically empowers the people of the state to "to propose laws and amendments to the constitution and to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the general assembly.... " proponents of amendment 36 argued that this was sufficient authority to change the allocation of electoral votes by popular vote .

further , it could have been argued that the u.s. constitution's failure to expressly prohibit this procedure , or others like it , provides an implicit endorsement of such actions .

on the other hand , opponents could have counter - argued that the u.s. constitution clearly delegates this power to the state legislatures , and only the state legislatures .

moreover , a commentary on the colorado process of amendment by initiative noted that , "an amendment is not valid just because the people voted for it .

the initiative gives the people of a state no power to adopt a constitutional amendment which violates the federal constitution. .

on august 13 , 2004 , colorado's secretary of state announced that the proposed amendment had gained sufficient voter signatures to qualify for inclusion on the ballot at the november 2 general election .

after a spirited campaign that stirred some national interest , amendment 36 was ultimately defeated by a vote of 1,307,000 to 697,000 .

for the record , if the amendment had been in effect for the 2004 election , the bush - cheney ticket would have received five electoral votes , while kerry - edwards would have received four .

under the winner - take - all system , the republican ticket received all nine colorado electoral votes .

the district system for awarding electoral votes is unusual among reform proposals in that two states , maine and nebraska , currently have it on the books .

briefly , under the district plan , popular votes are tallied twice: first , district by district , and again on a statewide basis .

the presidential ticket ( actually elector ) who won the most votes in each district would receive one vote ( actually one elector ) from that district .

the ticket winning the statewide count would be awarded two additional electors , representing the two additional "senatorial" electors each state receives .

for more detailed information on the district plan , see the appendix .

in july , 2007 , a group styled "californians for equal representation" filed a legislative ballot measure with the california attorney general ; the proposed statute , the presidential election reform act , incorporated a standard district system for choosing presidential electors , and hence , awarding electoral votes .

the organizers sought sufficient voter petitions to place the item on statewide ballot at the june 3 , 2008 , california congressional , state , and local primary .

supporters of the proposal asserted that the winner - take - all / general ticket system discounted and disenfranchised millions of california voters in the presidential election .

for instance , in 2004 , the democratic kerry - edwards ticket received 54.3% of the popular vote , and all 55 electoral votes , while the republican bush - cheney ticket , which received 44.4% of the popular vote , gained none .

if , on the other hand , the district system had been in place in california in 2004 , kerry - edwards would have received 33 electoral votes , and bush - cheney , 22 .

opponents claimed that californians for equal representation was a republican - dominated group whose goal was to obtain republican electors in a state that has voted democratic in presidential contests since 1992 , noting in support of this argument that most of the group's funds had been contributed by republican - connected donors .

california counts , the advocacy group coordinating support for the measure , denied the allegation and countered by releasing lists of democratic and independent voters who contributed to the effort .

the proposed measure was also criticized on constitutional grounds .

vik amar , a legal commentator , argued that the california presidential election reform act was a legislative initiative that would likely be found unconstitutional if challenged .

he based his assertion on the argument , noted previously in discussions of colorado amendment 36 , that the constitutional grant of power to the states to appoint electors "in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct.... " ought to be narrowly construed .

by this reasoning , a legislative act passed by initiative would not meet the constitutional standard , because the constitution requires action by the state legislature , and only the legislature , to change the process .

the proposed california presidential election reform act thus became an object of political and constitutional controversy almost from the start .

in addition , proponents faced the obstacle of collecting supporting petitions from a number of registered voters sufficient to meet the california state initiative threshold , which required signatures of a number of voters equal to 5% of votes cast in the most recent gubernatorial election .

computed from the 2006 gubernatorial results , this figure in 2007 would have amounted to 433,971 valid signatures of registered voters .

organizers first abandoned their effort to place the initiative on the june 3 , 2008 primary ballot , opting instead for the november 4 general election ballot , but this goal also appeared to be beyond the means of the measure's supporters .

on february 5 , 2008 , press reports indicated that no petitions had been filed with the elections division of the office of the california secretary of state , and that the california presidential reform act would not be on either ballot in 2008 .

the national popular vote ( npv ) campaign has been advanced by an interest group that draws support from members of both national parties .

the npv plan would eliminate existing electoral college arrangements and substitute de facto direct popular election by means of an interstate agreement or compact .

under the compact's provisions , legislatures of the 50 states and the district of columbia would exercise their constitutional authority to appoint presidential electors themselves .

the key provision of npv is , however , that the states would then use their power to chose electors committed to the presidential / vice presidential ticket that gained the most votes nationwide .

this would deliver a unanimous electoral college decision for the candidates winning a plurality of the popular vote .

for at least a century , american tradition has enshrined the role of the states as "laboratories of reform," in which innovative policy experiments could be tested on a limited scale , and , if successful , ultimately adopted at the federal level .

in the question of electoral college reform , at least some of the states appear to have assumed their classic role by implementing policy alternatives .

maine and nebraska , for instance , have followed the district system for decades , and for the first time in 2008 , one of the two states , nebraska , split its electoral vote .

senator obama took one electoral vote , having won the 2 nd congressional district , while senator mccain took three , having won the 1 st congressional district and the statewide tally .

arguably , the most compelling recent developments in the field of electoral college reform have emerged at the state level .

two of these , colorado amendment 36 in 2004 and "california counts" in 2006-2007 , were unsuccessful , but both aroused interest and support and criticism for their attempts to reform the electoral college , within the two respective states .

perhaps more noteworthy , or at least better publicized , has been the national popular vote campaign , an organized nationwide initiative that has drawn bipartisan support from a wide range of state and local office holders .

moreover , its advisory board includes seven former u.s .

senators and representatives representing both parties .

as noted earlier in this report , the legislatures of four states disposing a total of 50 electoral votes had approved the npv compact by the end of 2008 .

it is difficult to foresee the ultimate course of the npv movement at the time of this writing .

the clear - cut electoral college victory of senator obama in the 2008 presidential election could arguably lead to a loss of momentum by the national popular vote scheme .

without a compelling reason to proceed , the effort might stall .

the 2009 state legislative sessions may well provide an indication of the status of npv's momentum .

john f. kennedy , while serving in the senate , was a leading defender of the electoral college against proposals to establish a district plan variant in place of the current ( then and now ) general ticket or winner - take - all system of allocating electoral votes .

in the course of senate floor debate on this question in 1956 , he paraphrased a comment by viscount falkland , a 17 th century english statesman , declaring of the electoral college , "it seems to me that falkland's definition of conservatism is quite appropriate [in this instance] — 'when it is not necessary to change , it is necessary not to change.... '" this aphorism may offer a key to the future prospects of the electoral college .

to date , policymakers have generally concluded that it has not been necessary to change the existing system , or perhaps more accurately , there has been no compelling call for change .

the first and only major constitutional overhaul of the electoral college system to date , the 12 th amendment , was a direct response to turmoil accompanying the presidential election of 1800 .

this was a fundamental "crisis of regime" that , once surmounted , motivated congress to propose a major reform in very short time .

as long as the electoral college system functions well enough to avoid provoking a national crisis of similar scale , it may remain unchanged , if not unchallenged .

this reform proposal would award all electoral votes in each state directly to the winning candidates who obtained the most votes statewide .

in almost all versions , a plurality would be sufficient in individual states to win the state's electoral votes ; most versions provide for some form of contingent election in congress in the event no candidate wins a nationwide majority of electoral votes .

this alternative would constitutionally mandate the "general ticket" or "winner - take - all system" currently used to award electoral votes in 48 states and the district of columbia .

proponents of the automatic plan argue that it would maintain the present electoral college system's balance between federal and state power , and between large and small states .

proponents note that the automatic plan would eliminate the possibility of "faithless electors" further , the automatic plan would help preserve the present two - party system , under a state - by - state , winner - take - all method of allocating electoral votes .

this , they assert , is a strength of the existing arrangement , because it tends to reward parties that incorporate a broad range of viewpoints and embrace large areas of the nation .

opponents , on the other hand , note presidential elections are still indirect under the automatic system .

they further assert that "minority" presidents could still be elected under the automatic system , and it still provides no electoral vote recognition of the views and opinions of voters who choose the losing candidates .

this reform proposal would continue the current allocation of electoral votes by state , and , in common with most reform plans , would eliminate the office of presidential elector .

it would award one electoral vote to the winning candidates in each congressional district ( or other , ad hoc , presidential election district ) of each state .

two electoral votes , reflecting the two additional "constant" or "senatorial" electoral votes assigned to each state by the constitution , would be awarded to the statewide vote winners .

this alternative would constitutionally mandate the system currently used to award electoral votes in maine and nebraska .

proponents of the district plan argue that it would more accurately reflect the popular vote results for presidential and vice presidential candidates than the winner - take - all method , or the automatic plan , because , by allocating electoral votes according to popular vote results in congressional districts , it would take into account political differences within states .

they also suggest that in states dominated by one party , the district plan might provide an incentive for greater voter involvement and party vitality , because it would be possible for the less dominant party to win electoral votes in districts where it enjoys a higher level of support , e.g .

"upstate" new york versus the new york city metropolitan area , or northern california vs. the los angeles and san francisco metropolitan areas .

opponents would note that the district plan retains indirect election of the nation's chief executive , that the potential for "minority" presidents would continue , and that it might actually weaken the two - party system by encouraging parties that promote narrow geographical or ideological interests and that may be concentrated in certain areas .

in fact , they might suggest that adoption of the district plan would encourage gerrymandering , as the parties maneuvered for advantage in presidential elections .

nebraska split its district votes presidential election for the first time in the 2008 , awarding four electors to republican candidate senator john mccain , who won two congressional districts and the statewide vote , and one to the democratic nominee , senator barack obama , who received the most popular votes in state's second congressional district .

maine has yet to split its electoral votes under the district plan .

this reform proposal would award electoral votes in each state in proportion to the percentage of the popular vote gained by each ticket .

some versions , known as "strict" proportional plans , would award electoral votes in proportions as small as thousandths of one vote , that is , to the third decimal point , while others , known as "rounded" proportional plans , would use various methods of rounding to award only whole numbers of electoral votes to competing candidates .

as noted in the main body of this report , voters in colorado rejected a proposed state constitutional amendment ( amendment 36 ) at the november 2 , 2004 , general election that would have established a rounded proportional system in that state .

for further information on this proposal , please consult crs report rl32611 , the electoral college: how it works in contemporary presidential elections , by [author name scrubbed] .

proponents of the proportional plan argue that it comes closer than other reform plans to electing the president and vice president by popular vote , while still preserving the state role in presidential elections .

they also assert that the proportional plan reduces the likelihood of "minority" presidents — those who win with a majority of electoral votes , but fewer popular votes than their chief opponent .

they also suggest that this option would more fairly account for public preferences , by allocating electoral votes within the states to reflect the actual support attained by various candidates , particularly in the strict , as opposed to rounded , version of the proportional plan , while still retaining the role of the states .

opponents again suggest that it retains indirect election of the president , which they assert is inherently less democratic than direct popular election .

they also note that the proportional plan could still result in "minority" presidents and vice presidents , and by eliminating the magnifier effect of the automatic and district plans , might actually result in more frequent electoral college deadlocks , situations in which no candidate receives the requisite majority of electoral votes .

