the purpose of the endangered species act ( esa ) ( 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1531 et seq. ) .

is threefold: to provide a means to conserve ecosystems upon which endangered and threatened species depend ; to provide a program to protect those species ; and to take steps to achieve the purposes of related treaties and conventions .

section 7 of the esa requires all federal agencies to carry out programs for the conservation of endangered and threatened species in furtherance of those purposes .

the statute says that the federal agencies "shall" work toward those goals "in consultation with and with the assistance of" the two agencies that supervise the esa program: the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) of the department of the interior , and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) of the department of commerce ( together: the services ) .

the esa prohibits taking endangered wildlife species , defining take as: harass , harm , pursue , hunt , shoot , wound , kill , trap , capture , or collect , or attempt to engage in any such conduct .

the purpose of the section 7 consultation is to make sure that federal agencies ( known as action agencies ) avoid jeopardizing listed species or adversely modifying their designated critical habitat .

if a federal agency action causes some unavoidable taking incidental to an otherwise lawful purpose , the esa allows the services to issue an incidental take statement to the action agency , meaning the harm will not be prosecuted .

the action agency must also minimize the effects of the taking .

acting without a section 7 consultation leaves a federal agency at risk of violating the esa because it would not have the incidental take statement excusing its conduct .

section 7 also prohibits a federal agency from making "irreversible or irretrievable commitment of resources" that would prevent the effectiveness of any alternative measures suggested by the service .

while not stated in the statute , as a practical matter not every federal action requires consultation .

it has long been within the discretion of the action agencies to determine whether a proposed action requires consultation .

this option was provided in the regulations of 1986 .

the 1986 regulations were in place until the 2009 regulations took effect , and were reinstated in may of that year .

a comparison of the versions of the regulations is in table 1 at the end of this report .

throughout this report the regulations that were in place between january 15 , 2009 , and may 4 , 2009 , are referred to as the revised regulations .

the regulations that are in place now are referred to as the existing regulations or regulations , depending on context .

informal and formal consultation procedures were established in 1986 .

when an action agency realizes its project may affect a listed species or critical habitat , it must consult with the service .

this decision must be made "at the earliest possible time. .

if the action may affect critical habitat or species , then the action agency will submit an "initiation package" described in 50 c.f.r .

§ 402.14 ( c ) .

this information must be based on the best scientific and commercial data available .

the initiation package starts the formal consultation process .

a consultation is an ongoing conversation between the action agency and the service biologists .

a few phone calls may suffice to reassure the action agency that there are no listed species in the action area , or if there are , that they will not be affected .

fws or nmfs may ask for relatively minor amounts of additional written documentation and then conclude ( still fairly quickly ) that neither jeopardy to the species nor adverse modification of its habitat will occur .

alternatively , the services may conclude that more information is needed and ask the agency to carry out a biological assessment ( ba ) for formal consultation .

this process may proceed in days , weeks , or sometimes months .

there was no deadline for the service to respond to a request for concurrence in the previous regulations .

the statute requires the services to respond to a consultation initiation within 90 days or on a mutually agreed upon date .

the services mark initiation of the consultation from when the service receives a complete ba , i.e. , one that has sufficient information to assess the effects of the proposed action .

the action agencies' perception of when formal consultation begins is often earlier , and likely a source of the frustration noted below .

for those agencies that consult regularly ( eg , forest service , bureau of land management , environmental protection agency ) , consultation is a well - trodden path .

but for others , consultation may be an extremely rare event and difficult for the action agency to manage .

repeated requests for additional data have led to great frustration among action agencies and the non - federal parties relying on them for permits , loans , sales , licenses , etc .

some see consultation as needless delay of weeks , months , or even a year or more , even if the result of the consultation is a "no jeopardy" biological opinion ( biop ) , which finds that the action will not jeopardize the species nor adversely modify designated critical habitat .

according to the services , the workload associated with consultations has grown since 1996 , with fws reporting double the consultations .

the fws reports that in 2006 , there were 39,346 requests for technical assistance , 26,762 requests for informal consultations , and 1,936 requests for formal consultations .

on august 15 , 2008 , the services issued proposed revisions to the section 7 consultation regulations .

a draft environmental assessment was prepared under the national environmental policy act , finding that the changes would not have a significant impact on the environment .

the final version was published december 16 , 2008 , and took effect january 15 , 2009 .

a lawsuit was filed to set aside the revised regulations , claiming they violated federal law .

in march 2009 , a provision in the omnibus appropriations act of 2009 authorized withdrawal or reissuance of the regulations without a notice and comment period .

on may 4 , 2009 , the services "amended" the consultation regulations by reinstating the version that was in place prior to december 16 , 2008 .

in the notice of the proposed rule , the services stated that there was no requirement to consult on greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions' contribution to global warming .

some of the revised regulations separated projects that may affect climate change from the consultation process .

before discussing climate change in this context , it should be noted that the purpose of the consultation process is to consider the effects of agency actions on listed species and their habitats — not the effects of climate change on listed species .

there are few agency actions that produce ghgs directly .

most actions result in permits or licenses for others to produce the gases .

therefore , arguably , agency actions would have only indirect effects on producing ghgs , which then could affect climate change .

the services have argued that the lack of causation is the reason actions authorizing ghg emissions do not require consultation: there is currently no way to determine how the emissions from a specific project under consultation both influence climate change and then subsequently affect specific listed species or critical habitat , including polar bears .

as we now understand them , the best scientific data currently available does not draw a causal connection between ghg emissions resulting from a specific federal action and effects on listed species or critical habitat by climate change , nor are there sufficient data to establish the required causal connection to the level of reasonable certainty between an action's resulting emissions and effect on species or critical habitat .

the revised regulations advanced the services' position that an esa consultation should not consider the effects of ghg emissions .

the services gave these reasons for why ghg emissions from a project are not part of consultation: impacts associated with global warming do not constitute "effects of the action" because they are not an essential cause of the effects ( § 402.02 ) ; ghg emissions may be an "insignificant contributor" to any adverse impacts ( proposed § 402.03 ( b ) ( 2 ) ) [this was eliminated in the final version] ; ghg emissions may not be "capable of being meaningfully identified or detected in a manner that permits evaluation" ( § 402.03 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( i ) ) ; and the potential risk of harm to species or habitat from those ghg emissions is remote ( § 402.03 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( iii ) ) [this was moved to 402.03 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( iii ) and revised in the final version] .

the revised regulations , however , did not expressly refer to ghgs , but instead used the term global processes , which is undefined .

the services indicated they chose global processes as a way to limit application of the revised section of when consultation is needed , to exclude only those evaluations involving climate change .

it is not clear why they did not do so directly by referring to climate change , rather than using what could be found to be a vague term .

global processes could include such other interrelated factors as el niño , changing drought patterns , and rising sea levels .

most scientists agree that countless sources of ghg emissions are driving climate change .

under the revised regulations , however , ghg emissions from a particular or narrowly defined agency action would not have been considered an essential cause of any climate change effects on a species .

under the revised regulations , an agency action must be an essential cause of an effect on a species for it to be considered after the consultation process has begun .

the services described essential cause as meaning "the effect would not occur 'but for' the action under consultation.... there must be a close causal connection between the action under consultation and the effect that is being evaluated. .

the causal link to affect a species is arguably quite tenuous: ghg emissions must first affect climate change , which then must affect an ecosystem , which then must affect a species .

the remaining changes in the rule influence how the action agency decides whether consultation applies to an action .

actions that manifest themselves in global processes , which presumably would include increased ghgs , would require consultation under certain circumstances , such as if the local impacts could be reliably predicted , or the local impacts were more than "extremely small , insignificant. .

here , in the context of ghgs , the aggregation of actions could be key .

according to the services , epa modeling indicated that "the emissions of a very large coal - fired power plant would likely result in a rise in the maximum global mean temperature of less than one - thousandth of a degree. .

however , an agency action that consists of a permitting process involving hundreds of ghg sources may be significant .

projects leading to ghg emissions may not have required consultation if the effects of the action could not be meaningfully identified or detected "in a manner that permits evaluation. .

it is not clear what might have constituted an evaluation .

for example , there may be enough data to determine whether an effect will be positive or negative , but not the magnitude of the effect .

the standard for this evaluation may be the best available scientific information , in which case such an evaluation may suffice .

the services said the decision would be "based on best judgment. .

another change to the current regulations that the services have indicated will exclude some consultations on projects with ghg emissions , was the provision that the effects of the action must be such that the "potential risk of harm to species or habitat is remote. .

remote has many meanings .

noting that the provision containing the term had been modified , the services indicated that remote could apply to time , space , probability of occurrence , or other things .

the complexities of global climate modeling make such an assessment on an individual project problematic .

in the context of ghg emissions and global climate change , the question of aggregation of actions upon which to consult appears to be pivotal .

the revised regulations allowed agencies to consider not just an agency action but "a number of similar actions , an agency program , or a segment of a comprehensive plan. .

this seems targeted toward efficiency , but consolidated agency actions could have a much bigger impact than would be measurable for an individual action , and arguably constitute an essential cause of an indirect harm .

however , it is not clear from the revision whether the decision to submit just one action or a combined program for review was at the discretion of the action agency or required the concurrence of the service .

proponents of the changes contend that ghg emissions from most agency actions do not have a causal effect on species and that the esa should not be used to regulate ghg emissions .

others argue that climate change has an impact on species and should be considered under esa consultations , although proponents maintain that the number of federal agency actions with the potential to affect climate change may be so large as to overwhelm the services .

in the lawsuit challenging the regulations , the plaintiffs argued that omitting climate change from the consultation requirement leads to an inconsistent result: species may be listed as a result of climate change , but actions that contribute to climate change would not have to be reviewed by the services to determine their effect on listed species and their environments .

at least one federal court required the services to consider climate change as part of a section 7 consultation .

appendix a .

internal consultation: the national fire plan ( nfp ) of the healthy forests initiative the national fire plan , part of the healthy forests initiative , is administered primarily by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) .

joint regulations were issued in 2003 to address the effects of increasing levels of wildfires on listed species .

among other things , those regulations turn consultation into a process that occurs wholly within blm or fs , without concurrence by a service , when the action agency finds its project is not likely to adversely affect a listed species .

these regulations were issued under the provision for counterpart regulations , which some have suggested could be used as an alternative to the regulatory changes proposed .

in some respects , proposed sections 402.03 ( b ) and 402.03 ( c ) resemble the internal consultations that were created under the nfp .

a review of the delegation of some esa consultation responsibilities to the nfp agencies may illuminate possible results for similar delegations apparently envisioned in the proposed regulations .

in january 2008 , the services , fs , and blm issued a joint report on the nfp in its first full year of experience with these counterpart regulations ( fy2004 ) .

the services reviewed whether the two action agencies met the various esa requirements in their preparation of bas .

fs and blm documents for their internal review were required to do the following: describe the federal action clearly ; describe the action's direct and indirect environmental effects ; describe the specific area that may be affected by the action ; identify the listed species and the designated critical habitat that may be affected ; compare the list of species and the potential effects to determine if exposure is likely , and if so , whether any exposure is likely to be beneficial , insignificant , or discountable ; and use the best available scientific and commercial data .

nmfs and fws constructed separate analyses of the results .

table a - 1 is the summary of the 10 projects involving species under nmfs management ; table a - 2 and table a - 3 summarize the 50 projects with fws species .

the nmfs review concluded that there were deficiencies in all 10 project assessments in five of the six criteria for evaluation , including the use of the best available scientific information .

fws analyzed 50 projects .

 ( see table a - 2 and table a - 3 . ) .

of the 43 fs project bas , 18 met all of the review criteria , and 25 missed one or more .

six of the 25 ( roughly 15% of the total projects ) met none of the evaluation criteria .

of the seven blm project bas , one met all of the criteria , and six missed at least one .

of the six , there were two bas that met none of the criteria .

overall , 31 of the 53 project bas ( 66% ) were deficient in at least one respect ; 4% were deficient in all criteria .

the two action agencies approved recommended measures to improve their bas ; those measures involved oversight and further training of personnel by the action agencies .

compared to many other federal agencies , both blm and fs have substantial experience in implementing the mandates of their agencies .

additionally , they received special training by the services to perform the internal consultation .

the apparently challenging start by these two agencies might presage a difficult period of adjustment to the proposed regulations , particularly for agencies that only rarely consider endangered species issues .

appendix b .

deadlines: the desert rock energy project one major aspect of the proposed regulations is the imposition of a deadline on informal consultation and the subsequent effect of that deadline on formal consultation .

this section will examine one project's request for consultation with fws and relate it to the proposed regulations .

the desert rock energy project concerns the construction of a coal - fired power plant on navajo land in northwestern new mexico .

the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) was the action agency .

it is not clear when the phone calls and emails that often begin informal consultation first occurred .

but on april 30 , 2007 , the bia sent fws its ba concerning the effects of the proposed project on five endangered species , one threatened species , and designated critical habitat for two of the endangered species .

the ba determined that the project was not likely to adversely affect the five endangered species , nor the two critical habitats , but was likely to adversely affect the threatened species .

on july 2 , 2007 , fws asked the bia to submit additional information that was not included in the first ba .

 ( since an adequate ba had not yet been supplied , consultation was still considered informal. ) .

the bia submitted a revised ba on october 26 , 2007 .

on january 7 , 2008 , fws replied , noting that a number of the questions contained in its earlier response had not been answered , and that all of the species might be adversely affected , as might the designated critical habitats .

among the issues not addressed in the revised ba , according to fws , were: the ba assumed that the plant would be fired by coal that was different in chemical composition ( in concentrations of mercury , selenium , and other contaminants ) from the nearby coal that was likely to be used and which , according to the u.s. geological survey , had higher concentrations of these contaminants than the coal assumed in the bia analysis .

fws could not analyze species impacts until the ba included an analysis of the coal actually to be used .

heavy metals can accumulate in organisms .

if the coal that is actually used has more heavy metals than bia models assumed , then a new analysis of this risk would be necessary .

the cumulative effects of three existing plants plus the new plant , plus global climate change , were not fully analyzed .

the desert rock memorandum from fws concluded that formal consultation would begin when it had received the requested information or an explanation why the information was not made available .

no additional documents have been exchanged between the agencies , although discussion between them continues .

if the proposed regulations had been in effect , the following changes in the process might have occurred .

first , there might have been some effort on the part of bia to document the date on which informal consultation began .

second , if one assumes that the april 20 , 2007 memo started informal consultation , then the proposed regulations would have allowed bia to terminate consultation 120 days later , on august 28 , 2007 , without the concurrence of fws , due to incomplete information .

however , bia chose to continue the consultation process for several reasons .

first , considerable opposition to the desert rock energy project exists , making a citizen suit likely , and bia would not have an its excusing incidental takes .

second , fws continues to work with bia to address the problems in the second amended ba .

if jeopardy or adverse modification of critical habitat could occur , it may be possible to develop reasonable and prudent alternatives through the consultation process that would avoid jeopardy , adverse modification of critical habitat , and citizen suits .

if action agencies were to choose to terminate informal consultation , and rely on that termination to avoid formal consultation , the focus of action would likely shift from the consultation process to the courtroom .

where quick resolution is a major goal , the courts might not be an action agency's preferred choice .

more importantly , the action agency would not have an its that would excuse incidental takes of species , leaving it vulnerable to charges alleging esa violations .

