in the past decade , china's "soft power" — global influence attained through diplomatic , economic , cultural , and other non - coercive means — has grown along with its international standing .

despite this development , the united states remains the preeminent global force in many areas of soft power .

the united states exceeds the people's republic of china ( prc ) in global trade , and far surpasses china in gdp and foreign direct investment .

it continues to be the dominant external political and military actor in the middle east and political and economic influence in latin america .

it maintains robust , formal alliances in europe and asia , and far outweighs china in military spending and capabilities .

however , many analysts contend that u.s. soft power has declined in relative terms , and some studies show a dramatic loss in global confidence in the united states' foreign policies .

some experts argue that china's rise poses serious challenges to u.s. interests , while others believe that its implications are limited and that u.s. strengths remain formidable .

while the challenge of china's soft power does not alter vital u.s. interests , it affects the ways and means the united states uses to protect its interests and attain its strategic goals .

the rise of china , political recidivism in russia , and the war in iraq give rise to concerns about what the international power structure will be as we move through the 21 st century .

the united states still is the world's foremost military power , largest economy , technology leader , and cultural magnet .

however , the pull of the "chinese model," the rise of competing centers of power , the emergence of challenges not easily resolved using cold war era implements of power , the decentralization of security threats , unfavorable trends in world public opinion , and burgeoning u.s. financial problems give pause to both scholars and policymakers .

the united states and china share the same vital national interests of security and prosperity , although each has a particular additional interest and each defines its interests somewhat differently .

each seeks freedom from fear and want and to preserve its territorial integrity .

for the united states , its particular interest lies in value preservation and projection of those values .

many americans view the spread of democracy and free markets as enhancing national security and often seek improvements in human rights as part of their negotiating goals .

china has a particular existential interest in regime preservation or the survival of the chinese communist party as the sole ruler of china .

this dovetails back into the chinese vital interest of economic prosperity .

the party needs economic growth in order to deliver a rising standard of living to the people and provide legitimacy for its one - party rule .

the means , goals , and strategies by which each country pursues its national interests differ in many important respects .

each country wields an array of hard and soft power that includes its military , diplomatic and political activities , economic and financial clout , and considerable cultural and informational appeal .

each country deploys its power , however , in different ways .

in cases , the differences may be subtle , but some are glaring .

as for strategic goals , arguably each country aims at maintaining internal and external stability and developing amicable and cooperative relations with the rest of the world .

at times , though , the need for security trumps stability , and a country may undertake a destabilizing action ( such a the invasion of iraq ) .

each occupies a different position in world leadership .

even china recognizes that the united states is the only nation that has the will , stature , and means to mobilize the world community to undertake the great projects of the day .

china's philosophy has been characterized as "live and let live," a more nonconfrontational approach that eschews outside interference in "internal matters. .

china portrays itself as a benign , non - colonial power with influence , deep pockets , an ever expanding manufacturing base , and a nation that has lifted 300 million of its people out of poverty and , therefore , has become a potent model for other developing nations .

the united states has long viewed itself as exceptional and a "shining city on a hill" for freedom - loving peoples all over the world .

it too has deep pockets .

china likely recognizes that it is not the center of the world , as its name in chinese implies ( often translated as middle kingdom ) , but it seems to be wielding its soft power in order to pursue its national interests in ways not unfamiliar , but at times anathema , to the united states .

it appears that beijing views its rise as a global force or at least a dominant factor in east asia as only a matter of time .

although beijing has adopted a more accommodating and multilateralist foreign policy and has not challenged the global "status quo," many experts disagree about the prc's capabilities and long - term intentions and as well as the implications of china's rise .

some analysts warn that china's growing soft power reflects a set of well - funded , integrated foreign policy goals , developed to secure and advance china's economic and security interests at the expense of the united states .

others argue that china's rise is limited in scope , vulnerable to domestic shocks and public backlash in foreign countries , and represents a trend toward greater integration in the global community .

furthermore , this argument goes , u.s. military might , foreign aid resources , trade and foreign direct investment , and intellectual and cultural influences remain formidable .

many countries continue to seek strong diplomatic , economic , and security relations with the united states even while cultivating ties with china .

regarding china's goals , some observers contend that china's most pressing concerns , at least in the short - to medium - term , are domestic ( focused on economic growth and social stability ) .

furthermore , they argue , beijing favors a stable periphery and knowingly benefits from the u.s. role in helping to maintain global security .

to the extent that china may exploit its soft power for strategic ends , it is to forestall possible "containment" rather than to pursue expansion .

many analysts believe that economic development rather than military supremacy is the primary objective for china's international engagement for a host of reasons — not the least of which are to raise the living standards of its enormous population , to dampen social disaffection about economic and other inequities , and to sustain regime legitimacy after the demise of communist ideology as an acceptable organizing principle .

china's annual economic growth rates routinely are in the double digits ; in 2007 , they reached an annual rate of 11.4 percent — the highest since 1994 .

this rapid and sustained economic growth has created voracious domestic appetites for resources , capital , and technology .

at the same time , chinese growth has been driven by the development of overseas markets for its goods .

these twin developments have served as powerful drivers of china's international trade and investment agreements as well as foreign aid , key components of its soft power .

in energy sources alone , for example , china became a net importer in 1995 ( it became a net importer of oil in 1993 ) .

its energy demands are expected to continue increasing at an annual rate of 4% - 5% through at least 2015 , compared to an annual rate of about 1% in industrialized countries .

china steadily and successfully has sought trade accords , oil and gas contracts , scientific and technological cooperation , and de - facto multilateral security arrangements with countries both around its periphery and around the world .

access to energy resources and raw commodities to fuel china's domestic growth has played a dominant role in these relationships .

many of these activities are tied to prc pledges of foreign aid .

in pursuit of sustainable economic development , china also is seen to have placed a priority in keeping stable and relatively tension - free relations with its primary export market , the united states , and with other countries and regions .

according to this view , beijing calculates that even the appearance of a more overt pursuit of its regional and global interests could prompt the united states and other countries to strengthen their alliances or form other groupings to counterbalance and deter china's international outreach .

such a development in turn could fetter china's economic growth .

the following section examines three aspects of non - economic soft power — public diplomacy , state diplomacy , and foreign assistance .

it compares u.s. and prc efforts in a range of areas , including educational and cultural exchanges , bilateral and multilateral diplomacy , and foreign aid funding and approaches .

in the past decade , beijing has emphasized relatively short - term , economic "mutual benefits" while using these tools of soft power .

this approach , on balance , has had a positive impact on elite and public perceptions of china in many countries .

by contrast , the united states , particularly since 2001 , has focused upon longer - term goals of combating terrorism as well as promoting democratic governance and market - oriented economic development .

the bush administration's five - year , $15 billion president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) reportedly has helped to bolster public opinion in favor of the united states in africa while humanitarian assistance in places such as indonesia also have helped to boost u.s. standing .

however , many countries have not benefitted from counter - terrorism , pepfar , or millennium challenge account ( mca ) assistance .

in 2007 , over three - fourths of u.s. assistance to the middle east consisted of military assistance .

in the past decade , u.s. public diplomacy has faced serious challenges to its effectiveness , including the elimination of the u.s. information agency ( usia ) , inadequate staffing , and widespread global opposition to the u.s. - led war in iraq .

the u.s. government administers a wide array of educational and cultural exchange programs , emphasizing research , values , and ideas that may transcend national boundaries .

u.s. research universities continue to rank among the world's top educational centers and attract foreign students , many from india and china .

by contrast , china's most prominent counterpart , the confucius institutes , which teach students in other countries about chinese history and culture , have less universalistic appeal .

nonetheless , they represent a new component in china's strategy to merge its economic influence with efforts to promote an understanding of its view of the world .

the 110 th congress has held hearings and proposed measures that support u.s. public diplomacy , diplomatic efforts , and foreign aid .

the house committee on foreign affairs held two hearings on reforming foreign assistance and diplomacy .

 ( march 8 , 2007 and june 25 , 2008 ) the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) , includes provisions supporting greater communication of u.s. policies and promotion of u.s. values .

the public diplomacy resource centers act of 2007 ( h.r .

2553 ) , passed by the house and reported favorably by the senate committee on foreign relations , would provide for the establishment of new , and maintenance of existing , libraries and resource centers at or in connection with u.s. diplomatic or consular missions .

although public perceptions of the united states and china vary widely within regions and are sensitive to current events , some public opinion studies point to a significant decline for the united states after 2002 .

a comparison of surveys conducted in 2002 and 2007 by the pew research center shows that images of the united states declined in 26 of 33 countries .

in a 2005 pew 16-nation survey , images of the united states had improved somewhat from its low point following the invasion of iraq in 2003 , but its favorability rating still placed it last among five major powers — germany , france , japan , and china .

in a 2006 harris poll , among european countries , the united states was viewed as the greatest threat to global stability , followed by iran and china .

although positive attitudes toward china have declined somewhat in the past few years , the prc's image is regarded as "decidedly favorable" in 27 of 47 nations surveyed by pew in 2007 .

these responses reflect a view of china's economic influence as largely positive , especially among developing countries that do not compete directly with china .

however , concerns about china's military strength are evident in europe , japan , and south korea .

western european nations have become increasingly critical of china's role in the world .

in a 2008 harris poll , among major european countries , china has overtaken the united states as the "biggest threat to global stability. .

some observers argue that china's self - cultivated image of "peaceful development" may have been marred by reports of the prc police crackdown in tibet and chinese foreign students attacking human rights demonstrators in seoul , south korea during the olympic torch relay there .

this section discusses two aspects of the prc's military diplomacy for comparison with u.s. spending: training foreign militaries and participating in peacekeeping .

for many years , china has used military training to support arms sales as well as the diplomacy that is conducted by the military , collectively called the people's liberation army ( pla ) .

china also has highlighted its role in united nations ( un ) peacekeeping to boost its diplomatic image and contend that the prc is a cooperative country in international security and a responsible permanent member of the u.n. security council .

china is not as transparent as the united states in publishing its military spending and deployment information , and prc official media report vague and selective information about the pla's foreign contacts .

nevertheless , some funding data about the pla's role in peacekeeping operations has been objectively reported by the un .

for china , international trade is playing a key role in increasing its influence around the world and in enabling the country to import the technology , resources , food , and consumer goods needed to support its economic growth , to finance the other aspects of its national power , and to maintain the legitimacy of the communist party government .

the access that china has to foreign markets also has enabled it to attract foreign investment .

these foreign - affiliated companies not only play a key role in generating economic growth and employment but in the manufacture of world - class products that account for more than half of china's exports .

china is now the third largest trading nation in the world ( after the united states and germany ) , and its commercial interaction is having a major effect both on trading partners and on china's own economy .

international trade differs from diplomacy , foreign aid , military exchanges , and other bilateral interaction that requires explicit government action and funding .

trade is largely self - motivated and self - generated , and the financial rewards are captured largely by private producers and consumers along with the chain of service providers who facilitate the transactions .

governments , however , benefit from the international trade transactions through tariff and tax revenues , economic growth , increased economic efficiency , and a generally higher standard of living for residents .

government policy also influences trade flows either in a negative ( eg , protectionism ) or positive ( eg , trade promotion ) manner .

international trade and financial transactions , moreover , generate spillover effects , that carry over into political and security ties among nations .

trade also can be used as a weapon ( as with trade sanctions ) or it can be used to create interdependencies that may ameliorate hostile interactions or induce countries to take favorable political actions .

trade additionally creates interest groups within the trading countries who value stability and abhor political disruptions to their commercial transactions .

academic studies have shown that among nations , the greater the interdependence ( the greater the costs of exiting from an economic relationship ) , the greater the probability that the nations will not seek political demands that could lead to conflict .

on the other hand , economic interdependence also can be used as leverage to bolster political demands .

also , the greater the extent that internationally oriented coalitions in a country ( actors with interest in expanding foreign markets or in importing ) have political clout , the more likely that outside , economic incentives or sanctions will be effective in influencing policy in the country in question .

in addition , economic studies indicate that the expectation of future commercial gains between nations helps to dampen political tensions and deter the onset of hostilities .

such future gains are enhanced by preferential trading arrangements , such as free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

membership in preferential trading arrangements tends to inhibit interstate conflict .

economic interaction also increases opportunities for international communication , establishing personal ties between people , and cooperating in diplomatic endeavors .

this reduces the chances for miscalculations and misperceptions and increases the chances for direct diplomacy and back - channel communications .

on the other hand , economic arrangements may increase competition for domestic industries and invite blowback from sectors hurt by increased trade liberalization .

china has taken an aggressive stance toward establishing ftas with trading partners .

it has concluded a highly publicized fta with the association of south east asian nations that would create a zero - tariff market for china and the six early asean members ( indonesia , singapore , thailand , philippines , malaysia , and brunei ) by 2010 and for the other four members ( vietnam , cambodia , laos , and burma / myanmar ) by 2015 .

this included an early harvest program that eliminated tariffs on goods immediately , and in 2007 a further agreement brought services under the fta .

china also has ftas with hong kong , macao , new zealand , and chile .

it is negotiating with or having pre - negotiation discussions with about two dozen other countries including australia , south korea , pakistan , peru , iceland , switzerland , the gulf countries , and the southern africa customs union .

the united states also has been actively concluding free trade deals .

it has ftas in force or pending implementation with israel , canada , mexico , jordan , chile , singapore , australia , morocco , bahrain , peru , and oman , plus ftas with panama and south korea awaiting legislative approval .

negotiations have begun for ftas with malaysia , thailand , and the southern africa customs union .

a difference between china and the united states is that china tends to avoid insisting upon controversial or intrusive provisions in its ftas , whereas the united states usually attempts to negotiate according to a "gold standard template" for its agreements .

this high standard usually requires the partner country to open markets long protected for domestic political purposes or to enact legislation , such as greater protection of intellectual property , that may be politically difficult .

as a result , china's ftas usually engender less resistance and tend to result in considerable good will in the partner country — even if the fta provides only for partial market opening .

fta negotiations with the united states , on the other hand , often trigger political opposition in the potential fta partner country .

such political opposition , along with other developments , have hindered fta talks with thailand and malaysia .

negotiations on the korea - u.s. fta were concluded despite demonstrations against it in south korea , but the agreement is awaiting formal approval by each country .

rapid economic growth in china combined with a population ( 1.3 billion people ) that is larger than north america and europe combined has generated soaring demand for food , energy , and minerals as well as business equipment , and consumer goods typical of a newly industrializing nation .

chinese and other multinational corporations have established global supply chains that both feed the chinese economic juggernaut and carry its manufactured goods to world markets .

in recent years , beijing has focused particularly on securing stable supplies of petroleum and other raw materials .

it has combined its huge purchasing power with funds for overseas direct investments and economic assistance to develop supply lines and long - term contracts to ensure deliveries of needed industrial and consumer inputs .

in some cases , these efforts have occurred in countries or with autocratic regimes , such as those in africa , that are considered anathema to other nations .

 ( these issues are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this memorandum. ) .

this section on international trade provides an overview of china's international trade in goods with comparisons to that of the united states .

it shows that both nations are major traders , but that china has surpassed the united states in total exports .

both nations trade the most heavily with the rich , industrialized nations of the world .

china , however , also trades with many countries under various u.s. sanctions .

in 2007 , for example , china imported mineral fuel from the sudan and iran while the united states did not .

china also has more trade overall with cuba , north korea , and burma / myanmar .

since the comparisons of this section are between the united states and china , trade between the two countries is not addressed .

china's emergence as a world trade power has both positive and negative effects on the united states .

in 2007 , china was the largest source of u.s. imports ( $322 billion ) , the third largest market for u.s. exports ( $65 billion ) , and the country with which the united states has the largest merchandise trade deficit ( $256 billion ) .

low cost imports from china have helped moderate inflation in the united states but at the same time have applied intense competitive pressures on certain u.s. industries making similar products .

as shown in figure 9 , the total trade ( exports plus imports ) in merchandise of the united states exceeds that of china .

while both have been growing in nominal terms — no adjustment for inflation — the trade of china has been catching up with that of the united states .

in 1995 , u.s. total trade was $1,390 billion or five times that of china's $281 billion .

by 2007 , u.s. total trade of $3,116 billion was only 1.4 times that of china's $2,175 billion .

china , therefore , has become a major trading nation and a competitive rival to the united states in certain industries .

the two countries compete , not only in third country economies but also in each other's home markets .

given the rise of globalized supply chains , however , china's economy also complements that of the united states in certain areas .

u.s. companies may rely on china to manufacture products designed , advertised , and distributed by the american - based part of the multinational corporation , or they may manufacture in the united states using chinese components .

on a global scale , china now ranks second only to the european union ( eu , extra - eu trade only ) in total merchandise exports and third after the united states and the eu in imports .

japan and canada hold fourth and fifth places in both exports and imports , respectively .

a projection by global insight , an econometric consulting firm , indicates that by around 2011 , total trade in goods by china may exceed that of the united states .

 ( see figure 10 . ) .

by 2020 , the total trade of china could reach nearly double that of the united states .

these econometric projections are based on forecasts of economic growth rates for china of an average of 10.2% from 2006-2010 and about 7.4% for the following decade .

for the united states , the projected growth rates are at around 2.5% per year .

an implication of these trends in trade is that china's presence in the international marketplace is likely to continue to grow .

china's imports , in particular , are projected to continue to increase and to reach the level of its exports at around 2010 .

at that time , china's trading partners may be relying more on china than on the united states both as a market for exports and source of imports .

figure 11 shows u.s. and chinese total trade with selected major trading partners in 2007 .

the united states traded more than did china with its neighboring countries of canada and mexico as well as with brazil and venezuela .

likewise china traded more with its neighbors hong kong , japan , south korea , russia , and taiwan than did the united states .

with the european countries of germany , the uk , france , and the netherlands , u.s. total trade exceeded that of china .

in 2007 , the value of china's exports of merchandise surpassed those of the united states .

as shown in figure 12 , whereas in 1995 , u.s. exports at $620 billion were more than four times the $149 billion exports from china , in 2007 , china's exports at $1,218 billion exceeded the $1,163 billion from the united states .

it should be noted that more than half of the exports of merchandise from china originate from foreign invested enterprises .

these are products of multinational corporations based primarily in the united states , japan , south korea , and europe that manufacture products designed and marketed to industrialized societies around the world .

as for imports , as shown in figure 13 , in 2007 , u.s. imports at $1.954 billion amounted to more than twice china's total of $956 billion .

in 1995 , however , the united states imported nearly six times as much as did china .

china's imports are rising fast .

china's economy is not only consuming more imports , but its demand for imports is being added to that from other industrializing nations of the world for products such as petroleum , copper , and soybeans .

this rise in demand is considered to be one cause for the recent rise in world commodity prices .

figure 14 compares u.s. and chinese exports to selected regions of the world in 2007 .

both countries export about the same amount overall , but the united states exported more than did china to oceania / australia , the middle east , and latin america .

china exported more than did the united states to its neighbors in south asia and northeast asia as well as to africa , europe , and to the rest of the world .

u.s. exports to china and china's exports to the united states are included in the "rest of the world" category .

the importance to both countries of export markets in the industrialized countries in europe and northeast asia is evident .

figure 15 compares exports of merchandise to selected regions of the world by the united states and china over the 1995-2007 period .

for the regions selected , total exports are almost the same at about $800 billion .

 ( the u.s. and chinese exports to the regions exclude those exports to each other. ) .

the recent rapid growth in exports from china is readily apparent from the chart .

it also is clear that the industrialized regions , such as europe and northeast asia , dominate in the exports of both countries and that u.s. exports to latin america , which includes mexico , are considerably greater than those from china .

although china has been promoting trade with certain resource - rich countries , the chinese pattern of exports has come to resemble that of the united states , although china's exports to africa have increased recently .

figure 16 compares imports of merchandise from selected regions of the world for the united states and china in 2007 .

as indicated above , the united states imports considerably more overall than does china .

china , however , imports more than does the united states from its neighbors in northeast asia ( primarily japan ) .

in other regions shown , the united states imports far more than does china .

even for africa , the united states still buys nearly three times as much as does china .

a variety of factors determine why countries buy from and sell to each other .

the major factors , however , tend to be proximity , price , size and sophistication of the market , political restrictions , and endowment of natural resources .

both china and the united states trade , first , with their neighbors , then seek low cost sources of imports , large markets in which to sell , high - income consumers , and certain exporters with specific minerals or fuels to sell .

trade sanctions also may override market forces and shunt potential trade away from specific countries .

as shown in figure 17 , imports by both the united states and china have been growing rapidly .

from the selected regions shown , china imported in 2007 about the same amount as the united states did in 1997 .

the figure also shows the importance to both countries of the more industrialized economies in europe and northeast asia .

it also shows the greater amount of imports by the united states from latin america .

china's imports from latin america and from the middle east , however , have been growing rapidly .

figure 18 shows imports of energy in the form of mineral fuel and oil ( includes crude oil , other oils , petroleum products , coal and coal products , and electrical energy ) by china and the united states in 2007 .

in that year , the united states imported more than three times as much ( $361 billion ) as did china ( $105 billion ) , but the major sources of those imports were somewhat different for the two countries .

both rely heavily on imports from saudi arabia and other nations of the middle east as well as from angola , the congo , and russia .

china , however , imports energy from sudan and iran , two countries from which the united states buys none , and also buys more from kazakhstan and neighboring countries in asia .

the united states also relies much more heavily on energy imports from canada , venezuela , nigeria , algeria , iraq , brazil , and columbia .

figure 19 shows imports by the united states and china in 2007 from countries indicated by the u.s. state department as nations with serious problems with human rights , particularly those whose human rights situations have deteriorated .

some of the countries , such as north korea ( democratic people's republic of korea ) , myanmar / burma , and cuba are under u.s. trade sanctions .

the countries with which china imports significantly more than does the united states include iran , sudan , kazakhstan , north korea , cuba , burma ( myanmar ) , kyrgyzstan and sri lanka .

those countries from which the united states buys more than does china include vietnam , pakistan , bangladesh , afghanistan , syria , and lebanon .

neither country imports much from rwanda or eritrea .

figure 20 shows u.s. and china's exports to selected countries that the u.s. state department has indicated had serious problems with human rights , particularly those whose human rights situations have deteriorated .

in 2007 , the united states exported a total of $1,163 billion while china exported a total of $1,218 billion in merchandise .

with the exception of lebanon and eritrea , china exported more to all the listed countries than did the united states .

particularly significant were vietnam , iran , kazakhstan , krygyzstan , pakistan , and bangladesh .

china also exports to north korea and burma , as well as to cuba , countries under various u.s. trade sanctions .

figure 21 shows deliveries of conventional arms to the developing world that have resulted from various arms transfer agreements by the united states and china over the 1999-2006 period .

developing nations are defined to be all countries except the united states , russia , european nations , canada , japan , australia , and new zealand .

while the united states has delivered roughly ten times the amount as has china in recent years , china is a significant supplier of such weapons .

during this period , china ranked number six in the world after the united states , russia , united kingdom , france and germany .

china's arms deliveries were about the same level as those from sweden and more than those from canada and israel .

over the 2003 to 2006 period , china's arms deliveries consisted primarily of artillery , armored personnel carriers and armored cars , minor surface combatants , supersonic combat aircraft , and other aircraft .

in the middle east , the countries taking delivery of arms from china during this time were egypt , iran , kuwait , and algeria .

as in international trade , china has been generating media and government attention because of the recent surge in its overseas direct investment activity ( foreign direct investments or fdi ) in various countries of the world .

beijing has urged its companies to "go global" and is facilitating the process .

while these investments still are small when compared with those of the united states or other major industrialized nations , the rapid increase in amounts , the purposes , and destinations of these investments has raised concerns in many quarters .

as of the end of 2006 , more than 5,000 domestic chinese investment entities had established nearly 10,000 overseas direct invested enterprises in 172 countries ( or territories ) around the world , according to prc government figures .

the accumulated fdi stock had reached $90.63 billion of which non - finance fdi was $75.02 billion ( 83% ) and $15.61 billion was in finance - related fdi .

of the total , $37.24 billion ( 41% ) was in equity investments , $33.68 billion ( 37% ) in reinvested earnings , and $19.71 billion ( 22% ) in other kinds of investment .

in 2006 , fdi from china accounted for about 0.8% of global fdi stocks and 2.7% of global fdi outflows ( 13 th in the world ) .

as of the end of 2006 , the cumulative stock of fdi abroad was $2,855.6 billion for the united states as compared with $90.63 billion for china .

as for annual outbound fdi flows , in 2006 , china reported $21.16 billion while the united states reported $216.6 billion .

 ( see figure 22 . ) .

over the 2003-06 period , total overseas direct investment flows from the united states averaged 13 times those of china .

china's companies invest outside the country for many of the same reasons that other multinational firms do .

the major factors pushing the outbound direct investment are: to bypass trade barriers and to use domestic production capacity because the home market for their products is too small to service markets in order to secure access or to expand market presence ; to better compete with foreign - affiliated companies in the chinese market and to diversify manufacturing facilities ; to secure supplies of raw materials and resources ; and to circumvent domestic governmental controls ( by sending the investment funds to an offshore destination and then bringing it back as a foreign investment ) .

the first four motives are shared to some extent by producers in other countries .

the need to "round - trip" investments , however , seems be specific to china .

this practice may result in overstatement of both outward and inward fdi in china .

one study estimated that 20 to 30% of capital leaving china is "round tripped" back as foreign investment in the domestic economy .

much of this is done through hong kong , but tax havens , such as the cayman islands and the british virgin islands reportedly also are significant .

in 2006 , these were the top three destinations for chinese outward fdi with the cayman islands and hong kong receiving $14.76 billion ( 84% ) out of total outward fdi of $21.16 billion .

in china's quest for secure supplies of natural resources , for example , the chinese investing companies frequently have been dealing with regimes that are considered to be unsavory among western policy makers .

beijing counters such criticism by stating that its long - held policy is not to interfere in the affairs of others .

this policy has enabled china to sometimes "slip under the radar" and invest in places such as sudan , burma / myanmar , and north korea that are under economic sanctions by the united states and several other western powers .

as for the regional distribution of fdi flows , illustrated in figure 23 , overseas direct investment from the united states in the regions shown is considerably greater than that from china .

this also holds for u.s. and chinese investments in europe ( not shown ) .

comparing the magnitude of overseas direct investment for the two countries in the former soviet union ( fsu ) and south asia as well as in africa ( less egypt ) shows a similar pattern .

in the 2001-2006 period , the united states invested nine times as much in the fsu and south asia than did china .

over the same period , u.s. overseas direct investment in latin america and the caribbean completely dwarfs that by china .

in east asia ( excluding china , hong kong , and macau ) , the united states invested more than 30 times that done by china , although counting china's investments in hong kong would raise the chinese figure by $6.9 billion .

these capital flows include reinvested earnings by affiliated companies overseas .

over the 2001-2006 period , for example , u.s. companies and financiers reported direct investments of $70.6 billion in countries of east asia .

however , the companies also reported $82.6 billion in reinvested earnings for the major east asian countries ( indonesia , japan , s. korea , malaysia , philippines , singapore , taiwan , and thailand ) alone .

in 2006 , the united states reported reinvested earnings for latin america and other western hemisphere countries of $59.1 billion , while total overseas direct investment for that year amounted to $22.3 billion .

since 2002 , china has included reinvested earnings in its fdi totals .

these have accounted for about a third of chinese outbound direct investments .

china has been a heavy investor in its neighboring economies in east asia , but much of that fdi has gone into hong kong — some for a round trip back to china .

hong kong , macau , and the pacific islands are excluded in figure 24 .

this figure shows china's outbound fdi in east asia since 1993 .

since 2000 , this investment has risen rapidly with a surge in 2005 and a fall back to its previous growth path in 2006 .

u.s. overseas direct investment in the east asian region , however , far surpasses that of china .

the united states has long invested in countries such as japan , south korea , indonesia , singapore , and others .

in many years , however , much of the investment has been in the form of reinvested earnings from existing u.s. affiliated enterprises in east asia .

figure 25 compares u.s. and chinese outbound direct investments in billions of u.s. dollars .

figure 24 above , shows the chinese outbound fdi in millions of u.s. dollars .

as seen in figure 25 , u.s. investment has been much greater than that of china , but as seen in figure 24 , the rate of increase for china has been considerable .

note the line in figure 25 , showing much of u.s. investment is from reinvested earnings and not new equity capital flows .

figure 26 shows china's fdi in africa , excluding egypt which is included in the middle east .

as in other regions of the world , china's investments there have boomed in recent years .

chinese activity in africa has helped trigger world concern over chinese soft power .

as with international trade , chinese investing companies have been dealing with some regimes that are considered to be unsavory among western policy makers .

in addition , chinese companies have been investing in extractive industries and possibly locking in supplies of petroleum and other critical raw materials in countries that may be in political turmoil or may be under economic sanctions by other nations .

in 2006 , china reported direct investment flows of more than a half billion dollars to countries in africa .

when compared with u.s. outbound direct investments in africa , however , chinese investment was considerably less than such investments from the united states .

as shown in figure 27 ( denominated in billions of dollars ) , the u.s. outbound fdi in africa completely dominated that of china during the 1990s but recently investment from china has been rising enough to rival that of the united states .

in 2005 , the two countries invested about the same amount , while in 2006 , the u.s. amount was triple that of china .

the direct investment by china in africa appears to be a part of beijing's strategy to bolster its energy security .

in 2007 , china reportedly imported $25 billion worth of crude oil from african countries ( primarily angola , sudan , and congo ) .

this amounted to nearly a third of the total $79.7 billion worth of crude oil that china imported that year .

china also imported copper , iron ore , and other resources from africa .

beijing would like to secure this supply through ownership and investments , partly to avoid the price and supply uncertainty associated with buying such commodities on spot markets .

these resources are deemed critical for beijing to maintain the country's economic growth .

figure 28 shows chinese and u.s. direct investment in the democratic republic of the congo .

this is a country in turmoil , so some assets may have been damaged .

the cumulative stock figures for china do not seem to reflect the flows accurately .

nevertheless , this is what china reported as its outbound direct investments in the d.r .

congo .

note that while the united states has been reducing its direct investments in the country , china has been increasing its assets there .

neither country , however , has more than $100 million invested there .

figure 29 compares the amounts of u.s. and chinese direct investments in sudan .

this is another african country undergoing political turmoil .

again , there appear to be inconsistencies between annual flows and cumulative stocks in china's reported data , but the data indicate that while u.s. fdi there has virtually disappeared , china's stock was approaching $500 million .

much of this investment has been in the oil and gas industry .

figure 30 shows various oil and gas concessions in sudan .

the china national petroleum corporation has been active in partnering with the sudanese government's sudapet and other multinational oil companies in developing sudan's oil industry , funding the building of upstream resources , constructing industry infrastructure including the export pipeline and downstream facilities .

china's concessions include block no .

1 ( greater nile petroleum operating company , a consortium that includes the china national petroleum corporation ) ; block no .

3 ( petronas carigali ( malaysia ) , sudapet ( sudan ) and china national petroleum corporation ( cnpc ) ; block no .

6 ( china national petroleum corporation ) ; and block no .

7 ( sudapet and china national petroleum corporation ) .

in latin america , china's outbound direct investment has been relatively small .

the data in figure 31 exclude investments in offshore tax havens ( cayman islands and the british virgin islands ) because that investment often is directed elsewhere — even back to china .

in 1999 , china's fdi to latin america peaked at $206 million .

in 2006 , the total was less than $100 million .

as seen in figure 32 ( denominated in billions of dollars ) , latin america is a major destination for u.s. direct investment that dwarfs that of china .

in the middle east ( including egypt ) , china has been actively seeking secure supplies of petroleum .

as shown in figures 33 and 34 , even though chinese investments have been rising in recent years , they still are small compared with those from the united states .

china established its major sovereign wealth fund , the china investment corporation ( cic ) on september 29 , 2007 — six months after it first announced its intention to create such a fund .

financed with $200 billion in initial capital , the cic is the sixth largest sovereign wealth fund ( swf ) in the world , according to one assessment .

china's sovereign wealth fund potentially could provide beijing with another instrument to project its soft power around the world .

whether or not china's political leaders created the cic with this in mind is difficult to determine .

similarly , it is uncertain if china's state council is willing and able to use the cic as an instrument of soft power .

finally , even if china has no intention to project soft power globally via its sovereign wealth fund , the investments made by cic may either enhance or diminish china's global image and , thereby , indirectly augment or reduce china' soft power .

to date , the cic is known to have made a number of investments both inside china and around the world .

however , because the cic does not generally release details of its investments , it is difficult to determine when and how it has used its available capital .

some of its known major investments are: may 20 , 2007 — china jianyin investment company , now a wholly - owned subsidiary of cic , signs an agreement to purchase just under 10% of u.s. investment company , blackstone group , for $3 billion ; november 21 , 2007 — cic purchases $100 million in shares of hong kong's initial public offering ( ipo ) for the new china railway group , a railway construction company operating mainly in china ; november 28 , 2007 — cic subsidiary , central huijin investment company ( chic ) , invests $20 billion in china everbright bank , a beijing - based joint - equity commercial bank ; december 19 , 2007 — cic purchases 9.9% of morgan stanley , a major u.s. investment company , for $5 billion ; december 31 , 2007 — chic signs an agreement to invest $20 billion in china development bank , a state - owned bank ; and march 24 , 2008 — cic purchases more than $100 million in shares of visa's ipo .

many observers cast southeast asia as a crucial arena of sino - u.s. competition .

the united states has deep security , trade and investment relations with the region , and many believe that southeast asian nations deeply value the longstanding u.s. "security umbrella" against a potentially expansive china .

southeast asia's proximity to china historically has cut two ways — creating cultural and regional affinities , but also breeding an existential southeast asian fear of potential prc domination .

but the prc has spent over a decade actively courting southeast asian states with new diplomatic initiatives , trade and investment , and foreign aid .

in fact , both china and the united states have strong ties to southeast asia , and both draw upon considerable strengths in projecting soft power in the region .

despite widespread improvements in public perceptions of china and parallel declines in perceptions of the united states , the united states draws upon considerable security and diplomatic assets in southeast asia , and neither side can really claim to be the dominant power in the region .

some analysts argue that china seeks to create a sphere of influence in southeast asia and to erode u.s. dominance , while others contend that the prc has not the will , capability , nor acquiescence of countries in the region to carry out such a goal , at least in the short - to medium - term .

according to many analysts , southeast asian countries generally welcome prc aid , investment , and friendship , but do not want china to dominate the region militarily .

many citizens in the region support or accept the u.s. military presence , but feel that the united states has often neglected to engage them diplomatically or hear their concerns .

this void has been filled in part by china's growing soft power .

china's growing influence derives mainly from its role as a market for the region's natural resources , the economic benefits that it bestows through aid ( mostly loans for infrastructure projects ) and investment , gestures of friendship expressed through its diplomacy and foreign assistance , the prc's standing as an economic development model , and economic and cultural integration stemming from proximity and migration .

the united states maintains its influence based upon its military presence , foreign direct investment , its market for the region's manufactured goods , military and development assistance , and educational opportunities .

many southeast asians continue to view the united states as a model of democracy and free market economics , aspire to its middle class lifestyle , and are attracted to its popular culture .

other research emphasizes the overarching principles that inform china's soft power activities and make it a powerful alternative to u.s. soft power .

the prc's official embrace of southeast asia — what some refer to as its "charm offensive" — has nurtured china's rising influence .

by contrast , perceptions of u.s. aloofness and narrow security interests in the region and of washington's demanding conditions for diplomatic and financial support have contributed to southeast asian disillusionment with the united states .

in the past decade , china has cultivated goodwill in southeast asia by refraining from devaluing its currency and by contributing to the international monetary fund "support package" to thailand during the 1997-98 asian financial crisis ; downplaying territorial disputes and agreeing to strive for peaceful resolutions to such conflicts ; developing a very active diplomatic agenda ; promoting free trade agreements ; and providing economic assistance without conditions .

overseas chinese communities have long played important parts in the economies , societies , and cultures of southeast asian states , although their relations with china , the home of their ancestors , in many instances have been ambivalent .

ethnic chinese , who for over two centuries have migrated to southeast asia from southern china with little apparent acknowledgment from the chinese government , have long dominated the economies of the region .

recent chinese immigrants to southeast asia have both exploited contacts with older chinese communities and engendered resentment within these communities as well as among indigenous peoples .

many overseas chinese in the region have downplayed their ties to china in order to help avoid ethnic discrimination against them or to improve their economic , social , and political opportunities in their adopted countries ; however , as china has gained international stature , some of the more economically and politically influential overseas chinese have proudly proclaimed their heritage and links to china .

estimates of ethnic chinese living in southeast asia range from 30 million to 40 million , or over 6% of the region's population .

although their degree of assimilation , as well as discrimination against them , has varied by country , their long - term presence has brought about a local familiarity with chinese culture .

for china , despite its successes , southeast asia presents an uneven and challenging landscape for soft power projection .

the united states maintains alliances with the philippines and thailand , has a strategic agreement with singapore , is developing military - to - military relations with indonesia , and cooperates with malaysia on counter - terrorism efforts .

these and other countries in the region , or elements within them , continue to feel ambivalent towards china due to ongoing territorial disputes , china's past and present support for repressive regimes , and tensions between indigenous peoples and the region's ethnic chinese communities .

the united states remains asean's 2 nd largest trading partner ( china ranks 5 th ) and its 4 th largest source of foreign direct investment ( china ranks 10 th ) , although china is rapidly catching up to the united states in trade .

washington also was a major contributor to countries hit by the 2004 indian ocean tsunami , which affected several southeast asian countries .

the bush administration pledged $305 million to affected countries compared to china's $63 million and taiwan's $50 million .

the u.s. emergency response helped to improve the image of the united states in the region , particularly in indonesia , somewhat reversing a dramatic rise in negative public perceptions of the united states after the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 .

an analysis of china's bilateral relations in southeast asia leads to a regional division between mainland southeast asian states , particularly burma , cambodia , and laos , where china is more influential , and maritime southeast asian states ( indonesia , the philippines , and singapore ) , where beijing wields less power .

thailand , a major non - nato ally of the united states , appears to be more comfortable in its relationship with china than other regional states .

china's historical conflicts with vietnam , including a brief border war in 1979 , and vietnam's close economic relations with taiwan have placed limits on rapprochement between the two neighboring countries .

in the past decade , the philippines , a major non - nato ally , has pursued stable and friendly political and economic relations with china , while relying upon the united states and the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) as security and diplomatic counterweights to the prc .

muslim states in the region ( indonesia , malaysia ) look not so much to china as they do to the rest of the muslim world for models outside their national settings .

given that muslims represent approximately half the population of southeast asia , and are concentrated in maritime southeast asia , this should place limits on the extent of chinese influence there .

singapore , arguably the most strategically vulnerable and trade dependent state in the region , has promoted a balanced approach to the involvement of great powers in its region .

compared to other regions , china's main interests in central asia , which is situated along its western border , involve not only trade , but also considerations related to both external and internal security .

the region , encompassing the former soviet republics of kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan , remains under the strong russian strategic and economic influence .

since the end of the cold war but especially since 2001 , the united states has been actively engaged in the region .

as "front - line" states in the war on terrorism , central asian states have hosted u.s. and nato military personnel and have received substantial u.s. foreign assistance .

despite these constraints on chinese influence , beijing has become a major diplomatic and economic presence in central asia .

the united states wields somewhat more influence than does china in a few non - military cultural , diplomatic , and economic areas of "soft power" in the region .

these include the amount of foreign assistance and perhaps the number of mid - and lower - level official visits and presence in the regional states .

in other areas , china has more regional influence than the united states , including in trade and the number of its citizens visiting the region .

the chinese - led shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ) — which includes russia and all of the central asian states except turkmenistan and pursues economic and security cooperation — has no equivalent u.s. counterpart .

however , the united states wields influence through its membership in the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) and nato , which are active in the region .

cross - border migration between china and central asia has facilitated stronger economic ties but also has contributed to more complicated diplomatic relations .

there reportedly are over one million ethnic kazakhs in china , with most residing in the xinjiang uighur autonomous region .

several tens of thousands have moved to kazakhstan in recent years .

these ethnic kazakhs bring chinese language skills and cultural awareness that have facilitated kazakhstan - chinese ties , particularly in trade .

however , some ethnic kazakh migrants also bring critical memories of perceived prejudice against muslims in xinjiang , which may negatively influence the views of other kazakhs and conceivably affect kazakhstan - chinese relations .

about 9 million ethnic uighurs ( a turkic people ) reside in china , mostly in xinjiang , 300,000 reside in kazakhstan , and 50,000 in kyrgyzstan .

in the early 1990s , kazakhstan tolerated advocacy by its resident ethnic uighurs for greater respect for human rights and autonomy for their cohorts in xinjiang .

in the later 1990s , however , kazakhstan cracked down on such activism at china's behest .

nonetheless , kazakhstan allegedly has remained the base for clandestine uighur groups advocating independence for "east turkestan," or otherwise continuing to criticize china , which may influence the views of other kazakhs .

in kyrgyzstan , ethnic uighurs were implicated in the murder of a chinese diplomat in june 2002 and the bombing of a bus in march 2003 that killed nineteen chinese visitors , leading kyrgyzstan to ban the eastern turkestan islamic party and the eastern turkistan liberation organization .

estimates of ethnic chinese migrants in central asia are unreliable , but some observers have speculated that up to a few hundred thousand legal and illegal chinese migrants are in the region either on a temporary or indefinite basis .

the number of u.s. citizens residing in central asia is far less .

there have been complaints by some officials in central asian states about increasing numbers of illegal migrants from china .

the kyrgyz state committee on migration and employment reported in early 2008 that there were about 8,000 chinese illegal immigrants in kyrgyzstan .

in kazakhstan , president nazarbayev raised concerns in 2006 that chinese energy companies operating in the country were employing illegal chinese workers , and kazakh legislators alleged that these illegal immigrants numbered about 100,000 by late 2007 .

kazakh analyst elena sadovskaya reported that , in addition , about 40,000 legal migrants were ethnic kazakhs who had moved from china and that about 5,000 were chinese citizens who were legitimately in the country under approved travel documents .

an opinion poll she carried out indicated that while some kazakhs perceived that chinese migration was rising and was harmful to the country , most kazakhs had "indifferent" attitudes toward chinese migrants .

kyrgyzstan and tajikistan are not that attractive to potential chinese migrants , according to some observers , because their under - performing economies have contributed to the exodus of many of their workers to kazakhstan , russia , and elsewhere .

china has pursued ties with sub - saharan africa ( "africa" hereafter ) since the 1950s .

prior to china's broad economic reforms of the 1980s , its engagement in africa was primarily defined by political factors ( eg , colonial liberation , third world development , and the cold war ) .

the 1980s brought a gradual shift in chinese foreign policy in africa and elsewhere , as beijing's motivations increasingly came to be dominated by pragmatic economic and trade - related considerations .

this has increased in recent years with china's outward investment push and its search for new sources of energy and natural resources .

china continues to support aid projects in africa , but many of these projects are increasingly commercially driven .

as with china , u.s. relations were long influenced by cold war concerns , and by associated support for free markets , along with a desire to provide humanitarian assistance when needed and assist in africa's socio - economic development .

after the cold war , u.s. engagement with africa declined somewhat , but bilateral assistance levels gradually rose again starting in the early - mid 1990s .

while security concerns played a role in u.s. relations in africa during the cold war , u.s. interest in african security issues declined for a time after the cold war .

the u.s. appetite for direct military intervention in africa's many conflicts was limited , and this notably became the case following the killing of u.s. soldiers in somalia in 1993 during the infamous "blackhawk down" incident .

security concerns in africa , however , began to gain prominence in u.s. views of the region following the 1998 al qaeda bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania .

they have remained a prominent facet of bush administration policy since the al qaeda attacks on the united states in 2001 .

along with a rise in security cooperation , u.s. bilateral assistance to africa , most notably in the healthcare sector and in the fights against the aids epidemic , has grown dramatically under the bush administration .

one potential area of concern for policymakers is china's determined political courting of and growing economic support of african governments .

this may lead — and in some cases has already led — them to view china as a desirable political ally and a model for development .

china's policy of non - interference in states' internal affairs , especially with respect to issues of human rights and democracy may prove attractive , particularly in contrast to western donor governments' imposition on africans of political conditionalities in return for credit .

some africans see such western approaches as paternalistic , and some african states , when subjected to sustained western policy pressure , have already turned to china .

while such realignments may not be permanent , angola's rejection of relations with the imf in favor of access to chinese economic ties and zimbabwe's ties to china have been interpreted as reflecting such views .

rapidly expanding sino - african economic cooperation and the perceived relevance to africa of china's rapid economic development may also lead africans to view china as a more relevant political - economic model than western democracies .

chinese leaders have made a concerted effort to expand diplomatic and commercial relations with the middle east and north africa since the mid - 1990s .

as in other regions , growing commercial ties facilitated the development of closer political relationships between china and many of its middle eastern counterparts .

state - owned and private chinese firms have signed billions of dollars of construction , infrastructure , and technology contracts with regional counterparts over the last ten years , and chinese leaders and diplomats have carefully cultivated a wider array of political relationships based on perceived mutual interests .

while the united states remains the dominant external political and military actor in the middle east , the decline in public support for u.s. policies in many arab states and chinese efforts to establish broad commercial linkages across the region have strengthened china's position relative to the united states in some non - official channels .

today , observers in the middle east , asia , the united states and europe are increasingly referring to renewed ties between china and the middle east as a revival of the old silk road , anchored by the long - term logic of chinese demand for energy resources and desire in the middle east for domestic and foreign investment opportunities .

a shared focus on commercial development has helped stabilize these renewed ties in spite of potential political differences ; as one analyst has observed , the governments of china and many of its arab counterparts have demonstrated an "absolute lack of interest in interfering in one another's domestic policies. .

china's non - interference approach has provided a stark contrast to the reform - oriented and at times interventionist policies pursued by the united states since 2001 .

tang zhichao , a researcher at the china institute of contemporary international relations in beijing , has argued that "china's development model is very popular in the middle east and [chinese] investment has helped lessen the region's dependence on the us. .

while china's economic and other elements of soft power with latin american and caribbean countries have grown tremendously in recent years , such u.s. linkages with the region are far greater , largely because of geographic proximity and extensive historical and cultural ties .

compared to china's relations with southeast and central asia , security and strategic concerns have not played a significant role in china's relations with latin america .

china is cognizant of u.s. sensitivity over china's increasing involvement in a region traditionally viewed as in the u.s. sphere of influence .

as in other regions , china - latin america relations have deepened because of economic interests on both sides , while both china and latin america also have a shared interest in promoting the notion of a multipolar world .

moreover , as noted below , china's competition with taiwan for diplomatic recognition , particularly in the caribbean and central america , has been a major driver in its interest in the region .

china's growing interest in latin america and the caribbean is a fairly new phenomenon that has developed over the past several years .

beginning in april 2001 with president jiang zemin's 13-day tour of latin america , a succession of senior chinese officials have visited latin american countries to court regional governments , while latin american leaders also have been frequent visitors in beijing .

china's primary interest in the region appears to be to gain greater access to needed resources — such as various ores , soybeans , copper , iron and steel , and oil — through increased trade and investment .

beijing's additional goal is to isolate taiwan by luring the 12 latin american and caribbean nations that still maintain diplomatic relations with taiwan ( half of all nations in the world that recognized taiwan ) to shift their diplomatic recognition to china .

after several years of increased chinese engagement with latin america , most observers have concluded that china's economic involvement with the region has not posed a threat to u.s. policy or u.s. interests in the region .

in terms of economic , political , and cultural linkages , the united states has remained predominant in the region .

a study that examined the u.n. voting records of several major latin american countries — argentina , brazil , chile , mexico , and venezuela — between 1991 and 2003 concluded that the increased chinese trade with the region in recent years has had no discernable effect on the voting behavior of these nations .

u.s. trade and investment in latin america dwarfs that of china , while the future growth potential of such chinese economic linkages with the region is limited by the advantages conferred to the united states by its geographic proximity to latin america .

moreover , migration patterns to the united states from the region give the united states greater cultural ties and longer - term economic importance to the region than china .

for example , remittance flows to the region amounted to almost $67 billion in 2007 ( with three - quarters from the united states ) — a sum greater than both foreign aid and portfolio investment flows to the region , with remittances making a significant contribution to the economies of several caribbean and central american nations .

in its policy toward latin america , china has been careful not to antagonize the united states , and appears to understand that the united states is sensitive to chinese involvement in its neighborhood .

china has taken a low - key approach toward the region , focusing on trade and investment opportunities that help contribute to its own economic development and managing to avoid public confrontation with the united states .

even china's relations with venezuela are focused on oil resources rather than ideological rapport .

china reportedly does not want to become a pawn in a dispute between venezuela and the united states .

moreover , china reportedly has concerns that venezuelan president hugo chávez's efforts at spreading his populist agenda to other countries in the region could unleash instability and ultimately be detrimental to chinese trade and investment interests in the region .

nevertheless , other observers contend that china poses a potential threat to u.s. influence and interests in the region .

first , some maintain that by presenting an alternative political and economic model — rapid state - sponsored economic growth and modernization alongside political authoritarianism — the prc undermines the u.s. agenda to advance political reform , human rights and free trade in the region .

according to this view , the chinese model could help strengthen anti - democratic and anti - u.s. political leaders and actors in some countries .

second , according to some analysts , china's regional presence ultimately could have significant strategic implications for the united states in the event of a possible military conflict with china .

in this scenario , china could use its human and commercial infrastructure in the region to disrupt and distract the united states in the hemisphere .

according to this view , china's increased presence in the region could also provide the country with new opportunities to collect intelligence data against u.s. forces operating in the region .

people - to - people contact between china and latin american and caribbean countries has been growing in recent years , although it is sill very small compared with widespread u.s. exchanges .

in 2006 , china established the first confucius institute in the region , in mexico city , with the goal of promoting chinese language and culture .

there is now a second confucius institute in mexico , one in colombia , and three in peru .

there are almost 100 sister - city relationships between chinese cites or provinces with their counterparts in 15 countries in the region .

over the past five years , china has designated 17 countries in latin america and the caribbean as approved destinations for chinese citizens to travel as tourists .

such agreements allow the countries to take advantage of the increase in chinese tourist travel worldwide , which is expected to reach 100 million tourists a year by 2020 .

cuba was the first country in the region to receive such status in 2003 .

since 2005 , 16 more countries in the region have been so designated: mexico ; the south american countries of argentina , brazil , chile , peru , and venezuela ; the caribbean nations of antigua and barbuda , the bahamas , barbados , dominica , grenada , guyana , jamaica , suriname , and trinidad and tobago ; and most recently the central america country of costa rica , which switched diplomatic relations from taiwan to the prc in 2007 .

while chinese tourism to latin america to date has not been significant , this could change given the recent tourism agreements with the region as well as the marketing campaigns undertaken by various nations in the region to attract chinese tourists .

u.s. - government sponsored cultural and educational exchanges with the region have been going on for some time and are extensive .

between 1985 and 1996 , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) offered a scholarship program , the caribbean and latin american scholarship program , for more than 23,000 students from the region to receive academic or technical training in the united states .

a second ongoing usaid program also began in 1985 , the cooperative association of states for scholarships , which has provided two - year scholarships to more than 5,000 disadvantage students and rural professionals from central america , haiti , and mexico .

the fulbright program provides for the exchange of scholars , students , teachers , and professionals , with several hundred scholarships awarded each year for students from latin america and the caribbean to study in the united states , and for u.s. scholars and professionals to study and teach in the region .

the bush administration launched a partnership for latin american youth in 2007 to bring non - elite students from the latin america and the caribbean to study in u.s. community colleges .

the state department sponsors an international visitor leadership program that brings hundreds of professionals from the region to meet with their counterparts in the united states , as well as citizen exchanges , with three current projects funded in the region .

u.s. cities and counties currently maintain sister - city relationships with 336 counterparts in 13 latin american and caribbean countries , with over 70% of these with cities in mexico .

in addition to government - sponsored exchanges , the united states remains a major destination for foreign students from latin america and the caribbean .

overall , almost 16% of the u.s. nonimmigrant visas for students and exchange visitor and their families in 2006 were from latin america and the caribbean , more than 183,000 visas .

in terms of tourism , while china has approved many latin american and caribbean countries as approved tourist destinations , geographic proximity ensures that latin american and caribbean countries will continue to be the destination for millions of u.s. tourists each year .

language programs abound for u.s. students visiting the region , and many u.s. universities have accredited programs abroad for students to study in latin american and caribbean schools .

there are two main drivers in china's expansion of its relations with latin american and caribbean countries: competition with taiwan for diplomatic recognition , particularly in the caribbean and central america ; and strengthened relations with resource - rich countries in the region that could help feed china's resource needs and expanding economy .

prc diplomatic overtures in latin america also promote china's efforts to foster relations with other developing countries worldwide and further south - south cooperation .

for a number of years , china , with some success , has been trying to woo countries away from recognizing taiwan .

of the 33 independent countries in the latin america and caribbean region , china currently has official diplomatic relations with 21 , while the remaining 12 nations currently maintain relations with taiwan ( see table 15 ) , a disproportionately large percentage compared with other regions .

for decades , taiwan was a consistent provider of financial assistance and investment in latin america and the caribbean in order to nurture its remaining official relationships , a policy often referred to as checkbook or dollar diplomacy .

but taipei now is hard - pressed to compete against the growing economic and diplomatic clout of china , which in recent years has stepped up its own version of checkbook diplomacy .

since 2004 , three countries in the region have switched their diplomatic recognition from taiwan to the prc: dominica in march 2004 , grenada in january 2005 , and most recently , costa rica in june 2007 .

in late april 2008 , president - elect fernando lugo in paraguay announced that his government , which takes office in august , would like to establish diplomatic relations with china .

china's overtures in the caribbean experienced a setback in may 2007 , when st. lucia switched its diplomatic recognition back to taiwan after ten years of recognizing the prc .

the diplomatic switch was related to the ouster of prime minister kenny anthony's st. lucia labour party ( slp ) from power in december 2006 , and the election of a new government led by the united workers party ( uwp ) .

taiwan's promises of assistance to the new uwp government included support for public health , education ( including the provision of computers and scholarships ) , and development of the agricultural sector .

over the years , china has signed a variety of bilateral partnership agreements with several countries in the region in order to strengthen relations .

the most politically significant of these are known as "strategic partnership agreements. .

to date , china has signed such agreements with brazil ( 1993 ) , venezuela ( 2001 ) , mexico ( 2003 ) , and argentina ( 2004 ) .

additional "cooperative partnership" or "friendly and cooperative partnership" agreements have been signed with bolivia , chile , colombia , cuba , ecuador , jamaica , and peru .

in the 1980s , china began to augment its expertise on latin america through agreements for chinese officials to travel to the region to study spanish , and through the development of think tanks such as the institute of latin american studies of the chinese academy of social sciences ( cass ) and the department of studies about latin america of the chinese communist party .

the prc's ability to develop and expand contacts in the region has been facilitated by a decision by the organization of american states ( oas ) in may 2004 to accept china as a formal permanent observer in the oas .

the oas has 35 members , including the united states and all 12 of the region's countries currently conferring diplomatic relations on taiwan .

some 60 countries worldwide are oas permanent observers , but beijing has strongly objected to taiwan's efforts to seek observer status .

in addition to the oas , china has participated in several other regional organizations .

dating back to 1975 , china has often sent its observers to the annual meetings of the agency for the prohibition of nuclear weapons in latin america and the caribbean ( opanal ) , the organization established in the aftermath of the 1967 signing of the tlatelolco treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons in the region .

the prc has been an observer since 1994 to the latin american integration association ( aladi ) , a 12-member regional organization focusing on trade integration and the goal of a common market .

china is a member of the east asia - latin american cooperation forum ( focalae ) , an organization first established in 2001 that brings together ministers and officials from 33 countries from the two regions for strengthening cooperation in such areas as education , science and technology , and culture .

the prc also is a member of the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum that annually brings together leaders of 21 pacific rim nations ( including taiwan as "chinese taipei" ) as well as the latin american nations of chile , mexico , and peru .

more recently , in march 2007 , china signed an agreement with the inter - american development bank ( idb ) to formalize talks on the prc's request to become an idb member .

the bank has launched an internal discussion on whether to accept china as a member .

if accepted , china would join japan and korea to become the third asian country to join the idb .

china is already a member of the caribbean development bank based in barbados .

since chinese president jiang zemin visited latin america in 2001 , high - level visits by senior chinese officials to the region have been common as have visits by latin american heads of state to china .

chinese president hu jintao's visits to the region in 2004 and 2005 prompted widespread interest in both latin america and the united states regarding china's growing presence in latin america .

president hu plans to visit once again in november 2008 , when peru hosts the annual apec summit .

u.s. interests in latin america and the caribbean are diverse , and include economic , political and security concerns .

geographic proximity has ensured strong economic linkages between the united states and the region , with the united states being the major trading partner and largest source of foreign investment for most countries in the region .

free trade agreements with mexico and canada , chile , central america and the dominican republic ( cafta - dr ) , and peru have augmented u.s. economic linkages with the region .

the region is also the largest source of migration , both legal and illegal , with geographic proximity and economic conditions in the region being major factors in the migration .

curbing the flow of illicit drugs from mexico and south america into the united states has been a key component of u.s. relations with latin america for almost two decades .

latin american nations , largely venezuela and mexico , supply the united states with over 30% of its imported crude oil .

the united states maintains full diplomatic relations with 32 of the 33 independent nations in latin america and the caribbean .

the exception is cuba , but even here the united states and cuba maintain interest sections in each other's capitals and , despite comprehensive u.s. economic sanctions on cuba , the united states is cuba's fourth most important import market because of the exception to the embargo that allows for the export of agricultural products to cuba .

the united states has remained engaged with latin american and caribbean nations since its early history when the united states proclaimed the monroe doctrine in 1823 warning european nations not to interfere with the newly independent nations of the americas .

the region has often been described as america's backyard , and extra - hemispheric incursions into the region have met with u.s. opposition .

during the cold war , for example , the united states confronted the soviet union over its attempt to install nuclear weapons in cuba in 1962 , and helped nations in the region fight soviet and cuban - backed insurgencies and revolutionary regimes in the 1980s .

in the aftermath of the cold war , the united states initiated a summitry process with hemispheric nations that advanced regional cooperation in a wide range of areas such as trade , energy , the environment , and anti - corruption , counternarcotics and anti - terrorism efforts .

the first summit of the americas was held in 1994 , while there have been three subsequent summits , the last in 2005 held in argentina , and two special hemispheric summits on sustainable development and on economic , social , and political challenges facing the region .

the fifth summit of the americas is planned for april 2009 in trinidad and tobago .

the oas remains the key multilateral forum in the hemisphere , and the united states remains committed to working through the oas to resolve regional problems and engage latin american and carribean nations on topic of hemispheric concerns .

the united states — a key player in the oas — contributes some 59% of regular oas funding , and also has contributed millions for specialized oas programs such as the unit for the promotion of democracy and the inter - american drug abuse control commission .

the united states also plays a key role in international financial institutions such as the world bank , the international monetary fund , and the idb that provide considerable financial support and development financing for the region .

in the aftermath of the cold war , u.s. policy interests in latin america and the caribbean shifted away from security concerns and focused more on strengthened economic relations , but the september 2001 terrorist attacks in the united states resulted in security interests re - emerging as a major u.s. interest .

as a result , bilateral and regional cooperation on anti - terrorism efforts have intensified .

the bush administration has described the caribbean region as america's third border , with events in the region having a direct impact on the homeland security of the united states .

cooperation with mexico on border security and migration issues has also been a key component of the bilateral relationship .

despite the tensions in u.s. relations with venezuela over the past several years , overall the united states remains fully engaged with latin american and caribbean nations .

high - level visits are the norm between the u.s. and countries in the region .

president bush has visited the region eight times during his presidency , including six trips to mexico and travel to nine other countries in the region .

u.s .

cabinet - level and other high - levels visits to the region are common as are visits by latin american and caribbean heads of state and other officials to the united states .

the exact level of china's foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean is uncertain , but reportedly the region receives about 10% of china's foreign aid worldwide , far behind assistance that china reportedly provides to asia and africa .

aid to the region appears to focus on bilateral assistance rather than through regional or multilateral institutions , with the objectives of strengthening diplomatic relations and isolating taiwan .

particularly in the caribbean and central america , china has used assistance in recent years as part of its checkbook diplomacy to entice countries in the region to switch their diplomatic recognition from taiwan , while a number of countries in the region have been adept at playing the two countries against each other in order to maximize financial benefits .

chinese assistance to dominica and grenada was instrumental in those countries deciding to switch diplomatic recognition .

costa rica was also rumored to have been offered substantial assistance , although costa rican officials maintain the prospect of increased trade and investment was the primary rationale for the switch to china .

in preparation for the cricket world cup 2007 played in the caribbean , china provided assistance and workers to build cricket stadiums in antigua and barbuda , grenada , jamaica , and even st. lucia , which subsequently switched its diplomatic recognition back to taiwan .

china also had built a cricket stadium in dominica in 2004 .

china also has provided assistance for housing , education ( including scholarships as well as the construction of schools ) , health ( including the construction of hospitals ) , and other infrastructure such as railways and highways .

in recent years , china also has provided additional types of assistance to the region , including disaster assistance , debt forgiveness , and concessional loans .

in the aftermath of such natural disasters as earthquakes , floods , and hurricanes , china often has responded with assistance .

for example , china provided hurricane reconstruction assistance to grenada in the aftermath of hurricane ivan in 2004 .

in august 2007 , china provided support to peru in the aftermath of a devastating earthquake in the southern part of that country .

while most of china's debt forgiveness has been for low - income african countries , china announced in july 2007 that it would write off over $15 million in debt owed by guyana , one of the poorest countries in the hemisphere .

in terms of concessional loans , china's export - import bank provided a $12 million loan to jamaica in the water sector in 2000 .

in addition to jamaica , china has signed concessional loan framework agreements with three other countries in the region — suriname , venezuela , and trinidad and tobago .

in september 2007 , china announced that it would provide about $530 million in favorable loans over three years to chinese companies investing in the caribbean .

in november 2007 , china and venezuela agreed to establish a joint development fund ( with a $4 billion contribution from china and a $2 billion contribution from venezuela ) that would be used to finance loans for infrastructure , energy , and social projects in both nations .

the chinese contribution to the fund , made in february 2008 , reportedly will be paid back by venezuela with fuel oil .

while the lack of data on chinese foreign assistance ( excluding state - sponsored investments ) going to the region makes it difficult to compare chinese and u.s. assistance , it is safe to assume that u.s. assistance is far greater .

looking at 2005 statistics comparing foreign assistance levels from developed countries to latin america and the caribbean , the united states was by far the single largest bilateral donor to the region , accounting for 29% of the $4.6 billion in bilateral assistance .

the united states maintains a variety of foreign assistance programs in latin america and the caribbean that are designed to achieve a variety of goals , from poverty reduction to economic growth .

 ( see table 16 . ) .

aid to the region increased during the 1960s with the alliance for progress , while during the 1980s aid to central america increased as leftist insurgencies were battling governments friendly to the united states and where a leftist movement in nicaragua had taken control of the government .

since 2000 , u.s. assistance has largely focused on counternarcotics efforts , especially in the andean region , although the administration has requested over $1 billion in assistance for mexico and central america in the mérida initiative that would increase security cooperation to combat the threats of drug trafficking , transnational crime , and terrorism .

the united states has also sponsored thousands of peace corps throughout latin america and the caribbean ; there are currently some 2,300 volunteers working in 22 countries in the region .

the inter - american foundation , an independent agency established in 1969 , provides funding to nongovernmental and community - based organizations for self - help projects ; currently the foundation sponsors grassroots development project in 15 countries in the region .

the bush administration's fy2009 foreign aid request for latin america is for $2.05 billion , compared to an estimated $1.47 billion provided in fy2008 ( not including a $550 million fy2008 supplemental request not yet acted upon ) and $1.55 billion provided in fy2007 .

the fy2009 request reflects an increase of almost 40% over that being provided in fy2008 .

however , if congress funds the $550 million fy2008 supplemental request for the mérida initiative for mexico and central america , the fy2009 request would be only slightly higher than the overall amount of $2.02 billion that would be provided in fy2008 .

u.s. support to counter the hiv / aids epidemic in the region has increased significantly in the past several years , with both guyana and haiti designated as focus countries under the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) .

for fy2009 , the administration has requested $143 million in assistance to combat hiv / aids in the region .

in addition to direct bilateral assistance , the united states also provides contributions to multilateral efforts , such as the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria , which provides assistance to many countries in the region .

looking at the top foreign aid recipients in the region , five countries — colombia , mexico , haiti , peru , and bolivia — account for the lion's share of u.s. assistance going to latin america ; about 73% of the fy2009 request for the region will go to these five countries ( see table 17 ) .

as it has been for the past eight years , colombia is the single largest aid recipient in the region , with u.s. efforts supporting colombia's counternarctics and counterterrorism efforts ; in the fy2009 foreign aid budget request , the country would receive about $543 million or about 26% of assistance going to the region .

the united states has not traditionally provided large amounts of foreign assistance to mexico , but the fy2009 requests includes almost $501 million , accounting for about 24% of aid to the region , with almost $478 million of that under the mérida initiative that would increase security cooperation with mexico to combat the threats of drug trafficking , transnational crime , and terrorism .

assistance to haiti has increased significantly over the past several years as the united states provides support to the préval government .

the fy2009 request for haiti is for almost $246 million , or about 12% of assistance to the region .

peru and bolivia have received significant assistance over the past eight years under the andean counterdrug initiative , now known as the andean counterdrug program .

in the fy2009 request , peru would receive $103 million and bolivia $100 million .

as in many parts of the world , the image of the united states has declined in latin america over the past several years .

according to a 2007 study by the pew research center , favorable views of the united states have declined in the region , with sharp declines in several countries .

among seven countries surveyed in 2007 , argentina had the lowest favorable view of the united states , just 16% , while in two countries , bolivia and brazil , less than half the population , 42% and 44% respectively , had favorable views of the united states .

in four other countries surveyed , however , a majority of the populations had positive views of the united states: chile , 55% ; mexico , 56% ; peru , 61% , and venezuela , 56% .

while it might seem strange to see venezuela in this category given the poor state of u.s. - venezuelan relations , the 2007 figure actually reflects a 33% drop from the year 2000 .

in latin america's view ( with the exception of mexico ) , china's increasing presence in the region tends to be perceived as a promising trend rather than as something negative , in large part because china's expanding interest in the region appears to be moderate and nonconfrontational .

according to one assessment , public opinion of china in latin america and the caribbean tends to be positive because chinese leaders use such concepts such as growth , development , mutual benefits , and non - interference in national affairs when they speak about their aims and goals in the region , characteristics that are viewed positively in the region .

for these reasons , the view of china in latin america , as reflected in the pew study , tends to be either favorable or mixed .

of the seven latin american countries in the pew study , three — chile , venezuela , and peru — had favorable views of china ( over 50% ) , while brazil , bolivia , mexico , and argentina had mixed views .

china's growing economic power is viewed more positively than negatively in six of the seven countries surveyed , while in mexico , china's growing economic power is viewed as negative and a threat to mexico's economy by 55% of the population .

the balance of opinion toward china and the united states in latin america tend to be roughly comparable , according to the pew study .

two exceptions are argentina , where china is viewed much more favorably than the united states , and in mexico , where the united states is viewed much more favorably than china .

in all seven latin american countries surveyed , the united states was viewed as being more influential than china in terms of local developments in their countries .

