as of june 2009 , the general schedule ( gs ) covered roughly 59.8% of federal employees .

the gs contains 15 pay grades , each of which is divided into 10 steps .

the higher an employee's grade and step , the higher his or her pay .

federal employees rise within grades in the gs pay scale based on performance and length of service .

the department of defense ( dod ) , however , operates a pay system called the national security personnel system ( nsps ) , which attempts to link pay increases more closely to employee performance without the use of grades or steps .

nsps is "the first civilian alternate personnel system to be implemented on a broad basis , across an entire executive department," and dod is "the largest department in the federal government. .

as of june 2009 , dod employed more than 717,000 civilian employees — about 35.4% of federal civilian executive branch personnel worldwide .

not every dod employee , however , is eligible to enter nsps .

as of june 2009 , 211,000 ( 29.4% ) of dod's 717,000 employees were covered by nsps .

on october 7 , 2009 , house and senate conferees reported a version of the national defense authorization bill for fiscal year 2010 that included language to terminate nsps by 2012 .

the legislation to eliminate the pay system follows years of complaints of nsps performance evaluation inconsistencies and litigation related to nsps payouts .

on october 8 , 2009 , the house agreed to the conference report .

the senate agreed to the conference report on october 22 , 2009 .

on october 28 , 2009 , the president signed the bill into law ( p.l .

111-84 ) .

dod must now return employees to the pay system in which they were formerly enrolled prior to the installation of nsps .

this report reviews the creation of the nsps , examines how nsps operates , and discusses litigation against it .

the report then analyzes lessons that can be learned from nsps and that may be applied to future attempts to create a federal performance - based pay system .

this report will be updated as necessary .

nsps grew out of george w. bush administration assertions that the gs system was incapable of creating a responsive and flexible national security workforce .

in april 2003 , dod sent a proposal , entitled "the defense transformation for the 21 st century act," to congress .

the proposal recommended changing the statutory basis for much of dod's civilian personnel system to create a "more flexible , mission - driven system of human resources management" that could "adequately address the 21 st century national security environment. .

many provisions in the dod proposal were ultimately included in title xi of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 ( p.l .

108-136 ) — including personnel flexibilities to create nsps .

the act made some dod personnel policies more flexible than those governed by title 5 of the u.s. code , which includes most of the provisions governing civilian employees .

the flexibilities , including the authority to eliminate pay grades and steps , gave dod and office of personnel management ( opm ) officials the opportunity to design a pay system that attempted to more closely link employee performance to pay .

the new system was to help the department "develop a more flexible civilian personnel management system that would enhance [the department's] ability to execute [its] national security mission. .

on june 2 , 2003 , shortly after dod released its proposed changes in personnel flexibilities for nsps , senator susan collins , then - chairman of the senate committee on governmental affairs , introduced s. 1166 ( 108th congress ) .

the bill , entitled the national security personnel system act , would have granted dod additional pay flexibilities for its large civilian workforce .

the bill was referred to the senate governmental affairs committee .

on june 4 , 2003 , the committee conducted a hearing on the bill .

following the hearing , senators george v. voinovich and thomas carper asked then - comptroller general david m. walker to respond to several additional questions about dod's ability to motivate and control its workforce .

walker's response , submitted on july 3 , 2003 , included the following comments: based on our experience , while dod's leadership has the intent and the ability to transform the department , the needed institutional infrastructure is not in place in a vast majority of dod organizations... .

in the absence of the right institutional infrastructure , granting additional human capital authorities will provide little advantage and could actually end up doing damage if the authorities are not implemented properly by the respective department or agency .

the bill was reported by the committee on governmental affairs on september 9 , 2003 , and was placed the senate legislative calendar , but was not passed .

another bill that addressed dod personnel , however , h.r .

1588 , was concurrently moving through the legislative process .

h.r .

1588 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 , set definitions and provided guidelines for a new dod personnel system .

the senate passed the bill , as amended , by voice vote on june 4 , 2003 .

then - president george w. bush signed the legislation on november 24 , 2003 , as p.l .

108-136 ( 117 stat .

1392 ) .

p.l .

108-136 , among other things , authorized the director of opm to "establish , and from time to time adjust , a human resources management system for some or all of the organizational or functional units of the department of defense. .

the law protected employees' collective bargaining rights , and required that the system be "fair , credible , and transparent" and provide "effective safeguards to ensure that the management of the system is fair and equitable and based on employee performance. .

dod began transitioning employees to nsps in 2006 .

the system has weathered several delays in its implementation , but currently covers 211,000 of dod's civilian employees .

on january 28 , 2008 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) was enacted .

the law required the nsps system to pay annual bonuses and supplements that are closer in value to those given gs employees .

more specifically , the law required nsps employees with satisfactory ratings to receive at least 60% of the annual pay increase given to gs employees , and ensured that all employees receive a pay supplement to keep pace with growing labor costs .

additionally , on may 22 , 2008 , dod and the office of personnel management jointly published proposed rules in the federal register that clarified nsps labor - management regulations .

the july 2009 review of the national security personnel system performed by the defense business board recommended dod a "reconstruction" of nsps , saying a "'fix' could not address the systemic problems discovered" during the review .

to date , the vast majority of employees that have transitioned to nsps are white - collar , non - bargaining dod personnel .

each employee in the nsps system is assigned to a career group , a pay band , and a pay schedule .

instead of the 15-step gs pay system , those who are in nsps have pay bands that usually encompass a wider pay range than a single gs grade .

the wider pay bands are designed to give managers greater flexibility to hire qualified employees at a higher rate of pay than they could under the gs scale , and to retain high - performing employees by increasing their pay at a faster pace than was possible under the gs scale .

pay bands , like gs grades , limit minimum and maximum pay rates .

unlike the gs scale's pay grades , pay bands do not have steps through which employees advance automatically with satisfactory job performance .

instead , in nsps , funds formerly used to pay for within - grade , quality - step , and other increases in the general schedule are pooled and used to fund the pay increases determined at the end of the performance appraisal cycle .

nsps contains four career groups: standard career group ; scientific and engineering career group ; investigative and protective services career group ; and medical career group .

according to dod's nsps website , "[c]areer groups are sets of occupations that involve similar types of work and have similar career and pay progression patterns .

career groups are based on mission or function , nature of the work , qualifications or competencies , promotion or pay progression patterns , and relevant labor market features. .

finally , nsps has four pay schedules: professional / analytical ; technician / support ; supervisor / manager ; and student .

and there are between two and four pay bands within each pay schedule .

pay schedules divide employees into groups by the "types of work being performed , knowledge or skill level , and pay ranges. .

because of the nature of career groups , some groups have higher starting salaries and higher salary caps than others .

a professional / analytical employee , for example , has a higher salary cap than a technician / support employee .

most pay schedules have three pay bands: expert ; journey ; and entry / development .

figure 1 uses the standard career group to demonstrate how pay schedules and pay bands fit within career groups .

on november 7 , 2005 , a coalition of ten unions that represent dod employees — including the american federation of government employees ( afge ) — filed a lawsuit in federal district court challenging the dod's final regulations for nsps published in the federal register .

on february 27 , 2006 , the court enjoined the regulations , saying they failed to ensure collective bargaining rights ; did not provide for independent , third - party review of labor relations decisions ; and failed to provide a fair process for appealing adverse actions .

dod originally stated that it would not appeal the decision , but the department of justice — on behalf of dod and opm — filed an appeal on april 17 , 2006 .

the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia reversed the federal district court decision and upheld the dod's regulations , saying the national defense authorization act "grants dod expansive authority to curtail collective bargaining through november 2009. .

the decision also upheld all other regulations that were contested by the unions .

on july 2 , 2007 , the coalition of unions requested a full court review of the appellate court decision .

the courts denied the request on august 10 , 2007 .

on august 29 , afge filed an appeal with the u.s. supreme court to stop dod implementation of nsps .

on september 5 , 2007 , the court denied the motion for a stay , and dod continued its implementation of nsps .

nsps has been assessed by both the federal government and private entities .

a 2007 opm assessment of nsps implementation , for example , concluded that dod was successfully transitioning to the new system , but found continued measurement of the department's ability to retain key employees and hire quality workers was needed .

in october 2007 , three members of the virginia congressional delegation — representatives tom davis , frank wolf , and james moran — sent defense secretary robert gates a letter condemning dod's announcement that 110,000 nsps employees with satisfactory performance ratings would receive pay increases that were equal to only half of the annual pay increase given to gs employees .

"[t]hese employees ... reportedly were informed from the outset that for the first year in nsps they would at least receive their base bay increase. .

the members added: it would be difficult if not impossible to recruit or retain employees if they could not rely on their promised salaries .

but an even more difficult task will be meeting the cost of replacing employees or increasing hiring efforts in general if employees do not have confidence in the personnel system .

according to media reports , the average raise for employees covered by the nsps in 2008 was 7.6% — more than double the average raise for employees on the gs pay scale ( 3.5% — 2.5% across the board , and a 1% increase in locality pay ) .

afge president john gage told the federal times that he believed the high percentage pay increases will drop in the future because it would cost too much to continue them .

nsps program executive officer mary lacy responded by saying the pay system does not cost more to run because some employees get no pay increases , while others receive large ones .

in april 2008 media reports , unions criticized nsps for its lack of transparency .

greg junemann , president of the international federation of professional and technical engineers told government executive that , "defense is intentionally misleading employees by simply releasing a [pay raise] number without releasing the data that supports their number .

congress should ask the dod to release any and all data relating to their 7.6% payout. .

in august 2008 , the federal times acquired performance evaluations of 102,239 civilian dod employees in the nsps system and analyzed pay outcomes .

in one report , the federal times claimed nsps was "living up to its promise of tying bigger raises and bonuses to better performance on the job. .

the federal times stated that "all but 165 employees at [rating] [l]evels 1 through 5 receive total pay increases that were equal to or greater than the average 3.5 percent pay raise that general schedule employees received. .

but many of these pay increases were distributed as one - time bonuses , and not as increases to an employee's basic salary that would be paid to the employee in perpetuity .

moreover , when the local market supplement is not included as a performance - based increase , 5,039 employees who were rated as valued performers ( level 3 ) received a pay increase of less than 1 percent .

according to another federal times report that used the same data , "[w]hite employees received higher average performance ratings , salary increases and bonuses ... than employees of other races. .

in addition , civilian employees at dod agencies were assigned overall higher performance ratings than civilian personnel in the air force , navy , and marine corps .

finally , employees who received similar rating scores were , in some cases , given different pay increases .

the government accountability office released a report on nsps in september 2008 stating that dod had "taken some steps to implement internal safeguards to ensure that nsps is fair , effective , and credible," but added "some safeguards could be improved. .

specifically , gao cited nine "safeguards" currently in place that aim to improve nsps operation , including linking "employee objectives and the agency's strategic goals and mission," and requiring "ongoing performance feedback between supervisors and employees. .

gao added that dod could improve the implementation of some of the safeguards by having an uninvested third - party analysis performed on nsps's pay determinations as well as requiring publication of department - wide rating results to increase the system's transparency .

additionally , the report recommended dod give pay pool administrators and supervisors more guidance on rating employees "appropriately" and charged dod with creating a plan to combat the increasingly negative perception employees have of nsps .

bradley bunn responded to gao's recommendations on behalf of dod in september 2008 saying "the [d]epartment does not concur with all the finding and recommendations in the ... report" but "[a]s we have implemented nsps , we have heard many of the same concerns as your auditors and have attempted to differentiate between those that warrant prompt action , and those that reflect the uncertainty and skepticism that typically accompany major changes. .

further , dod disagreed with gao's recommendation to require third - party analysis of pay pool decisions , saying that nsps was "fair , equitable , and based on employee performance," and had clear grievance procedures in place for an employee who disagreed with his or her rating .

dod also disagreed with gao's assertion that some rating scores may not have made "meaningful distinctions" among employees' performances .

gao agreed that it should publish its agency - wide rating results , and said it would take steps to accomplish that goal .

prior to his election on november 4 , 2008 , then - presidential candidate barack obama wrote a letter to afge president john gage saying that he had "several concerns about the nsps pay system," including "restrictions of bargaining rights , the disconnection between pay and performance despite what employees have been told , the requirement that performance ratings be pushed into a forced distribution , or bell cure , the suppression of wages by permitting bonuses to be paid instead of base salary increases , and the virtual elimination of merit consideration in the promotion process. .

on october 28 , 2009 , president obama signed into law a bill that eliminated nsps ( p.l .

111-84 ) .

for 2009 , nsps employees who were rated a "2" or above were eligible to receive a 1.74% pay increase , or 60% of the gs pay increase for 2009 .

employees rated "3" or higher were additionally eligible to receive a performance - based pay increase .

on april 1 , 2009 , brenda s. farrell , director of defense capabilities and defense management at gao testified at a congressional hearing on nsps , and reiterated some of the same concerns about the pay system that were previously reported by gao .

in her testimony , ms. farrell said that dod had "taken some steps to implement internal safeguards to ensure that the nsps performance management system is fair , effective , and credible," but added that implementation of other safeguards could be improved .

the areas cited for possible improvement were as follows: to involve employees in the system's design and implementation ; to link employee objectives and the agency's strategic goals and mission ; to train and retrain employees in the system's operation ; to provide ongoing performance feedback between supervisors and employees ; to better link individual pay to performance in an equitable manner ; to allocate agency resources for the system's design , implementation , and administration ; to include predecisional internal safeguards to determine whether rating results are consistent , equitable , and nondiscriminatory ; to provide reasonable transparency of the system and its operation ; and to impart meaningful distinctions in individual employee performance .

in july 2009 , the defense business board , a federal entity that advises the secretary of defense on ways to adopt private sector employee practices in dod , released its review of the national security personnel system .

the review , which was drafted after the board collected public comment and administered a series of interviews and public meetings , recommended a "reconstruction" of nsps "that begins with a challenge to the assumptions and design" of the pay scale .

the report also recommended that dod "reestablish … a commitment to partnership" by "collaborating with employees through their unions," "establish dod's commitment to strategic management and investment in career civil servants," and stop moving additional employees into the nsps system .

although he has not addressed nsps directly , opm director john berry has called the multitude of performance - based pay structures across the federal government "balkanized. .

mr. berry has reportedly stated his desire to create a government - wide performance - based pay system .

dod is one of many federal departments and agencies seeking to create a more effective workforce .

the elimination of nsps will affect the pay system of more than 200,000 federal employees , all within dod .

modifying title 5 of the u.s. code , another approach , could affect more than 2 million federal employees .

although congress has mandated the elimination of nsps , it has not eliminated all performance - based pay systems across the federal government .

congress may choose to keep the gs as the primary pay system for federal employees , or it may choose to create a new performance - based pay system in the future .

this section analyzes possible legislative , oversight , and policy options for the future of performance - based pay , using examples from dod's experience with nsps .

congress created nsps and granted dod pay flexibilities to run the performance - based system .

many members have consistently been interested in ensuring that the federal government maintains a transparent and fair pay system that is trusted by administrators , supervisors , and employees .

unions have , historically , not favored pay - for - performance systems , and dod's nsps was no exception .

congress may use nsps as a model — evidencing both good and bad experiences — for a federal workforce that may transition to a performance - based pay system in the future .

nsps has faced , solved , and failed to solve a variety of challenges in its attempt to attract and retain a high - quality workforce .

overall , nsps serves as a demonstration of how elements of a performance - based pay system can work or cannot work in certain large federal agencies .

