intellectual property rights ( ipr ) traditionally have been matters of national concern .

individual nation states have developed ipr regimes reflecting their domestic needs and priorities .

over time , ipr protection and enforcement have come to the forefront as a key international trade issue for the united states — largely due to the role of intellectual property in an innovative u.s. economy and competitive advantage — and figure prominently in the multilateral trade policy arena and in regional and bilateral u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

congress has legislative , oversight , and appropriations responsibilities related to ipr and trade policy .

this role of congress stems from the u.s. constitution , which provides congress with the power to "promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries" and to "regulate commerce with foreign nations. .

since 1988 , congress has included ipr as a principal u.s. trade negotiating objective , and has passed laws , such as "special 301" to advance protection and enforcement of u.s. ipr in global markets .

the context for congressional interest may include policy concerns such as: the role of ipr in the u.s. economy ; the impact of ipr infringement on u.s. commercial , health , safety , and security interests ; and the balance between protecting ipr to stimulate innovation and advancing other public policy goals .

this report discusses the different types of ipr and ipr infringement ; the role of ipr in the u.s. economy ; estimated losses associated with ipr infringement ; the organizational structure of ipr protection and u.s. trade policy ; and issues for congress regarding ipr and international trade .

according to the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) , innovation is the "implementation of a new or significantly improved product ( good or service ) , or process , a new marketing method , or a new organizational method. .

possible innovation - related indicators include activities concerning commercializing inventions and new technologies .

trends in the total number of patent applications under the patent cooperation treaty ( pct ) , an international patent filing system administered by the world intellectual property organization ( wipo ) , may be illustrative ( see table 1 and figure 1 ) .

the united states remains the source of the world's largest number of pct filing applications and , along with germany and japan and china , accounted for over 60% of all 2014 pct applications .

china notably had double - digit growth in 2014 .

the top fields of technology in pct filings were computer technology , digital communication , electrical machinery / apparatus / energy , medical technology , and measurement .

intellectual property generally is viewed as a longstanding strategic driver of u.s. productivity , economic growth , employment , higher wages , and exports .

it also is considered a key source of u.s. comparative advantage , such as in innovation and high - technology products .

nearly every industry depends on it for its businesses .

among the industries that are dependent on patent protection are the aerospace , automotive , computer , consumer electronics , pharmaceutical , and semiconductor industries .

copyright - based industries include the software , data processing , motion picture , publishing , and recording industries .

other industries that indirectly benefit from ipr protection include retailers , traders , and transportation businesses , which support the distribution of goods and services derived from intellectual property .

advances in information and technology and declining costs of transportation and communication , spurred by globalization , have fundamentally changed information and trade flows .

such changes have created new markets for u.s. exporters , but at the same time , have been associated with the proliferation of counterfeiting and piracy on a global scale .

several factors contribute to the growing problem of ipr infringement .

while the costs and time for research and development are high , ipr infringement occurs with relatively low costs and risks and a high profit margin .

according to phrma , it takes a pharmaceutical company over 10 years of r&d on average to create a new drug , with the average cost to develop a drug about $2.6 billion during the 2000s to early 2010s .

in 2014 , phrma member companies collectively spent an estimated $51 billion for research and development ( domestic and abroad ) .

in contrast , drug counterfeiters can lower production costs by using inexpensive , and perhaps dangerous or ineffective , ingredient substitutes .

the development of technologies and products that can be easily duplicated , such as recorded or digital media , also has led to an increase in counterfeiting and piracy .

increasing internet usage has contributed to the distribution of counterfeit and pirated products .

additionally , civil and criminal penalties often are not sufficient deterrents for piracy and counterfeiting .

the united states is especially concerned with foreign ipr infringement of u.s. intellectual property .

compared to foreign countries , ipr infringements levels in the united states are considered to be relatively low .

given the importance of intellectual property to the u.s. economy and the economic losses associated with counterfeiting and piracy , the united states is a leading advocate of strong global ipr rules .

since the mid - 1980s , the united states has integrated ipr policy in its international trade policy activities , pursuing enhanced ipr laws and enforcement through multilateral , regional and bilateral trade agreements , and national trade laws .

congress has legislative , oversight , and appropriations responsibilities related to ipr and trade policy .

what follows are certain key issues that congress could consider as it fulfills those responsibilities .

u.s. efforts to protect and enforce ipr through u.s. trade policy are likely to continue to be of interest for congress .

the reliance on ipr as a competitive advantage to drive an innovative u.s. economy is reflected in u.s. trade policy .

congress may set the course of u.s. trade policy concerning ipr through the development of negotiating objectives in any future trade promotion authority .

it also may consider the treatment of ipr in ongoing u.s. fta negotiations for the proposed trans - pacific partnership and trans - atlantic trade and investment partnership .

it may weigh the balance between greater intellectual property rights in free trade agreements and the ability to conclude agreements containing such provisions with other countries .

it may wish to examine how to incorporate the ipr aspects of new issues such as digital trade in u.s. policy .

congress may also examine the enforcement of u.s. ipr through existing trade agreements , as well as the effectiveness of u.s. trade policy tools such as special 301 .

congressional debates may continue in areas such as how ipr protection and enforcement relate to other public policy goals , such as access to affordable medicines .

the organizational structure for ipr protection and the priority to place on such enforcement when allocating budgetary resources also may be of congressional interest .

patent and copyright provisions in the trips agreement and u.s. ftas overview of ipr - related u.s. government agencies and coordinating bodies what follows is a discussion of key u.s. government agencies and coordinating bodies involved in u.s. efforts to protect and enforce ipr .

office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) the ustr is the lead u.s. trade negotiator and negotiates ipr provisions in u.s. trade agreements , at the multilateral , plurilateral , regional , and bilateral levels .

currently , the ustr is leading free trade agreement negotiations for the united states for the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) and transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) , among other negotiations .

it also enforces u.s. rights under existing trade agreements .

additionally , through its annual special 301 report , ustr is charged with monitoring the adequacy and effectiveness of ipr protection of our trading partners as well as their compliance with bilateral and multilateral trade agreements , to identify countries not in compliance with such agreements , and to negotiate with those countries better compliance .

the ustr further administers the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program , under which a country's eligibility for u.s. trade preferences may be contingent on its ipr protection .

department of commerce ( commerce ) two agencies within the department of commerce , the patent and trademark office and the international trade administration , address ipr issues .

the patent and trademark office ( pto ) administers the u.s. laws pertaining to patents and trademarks .

it processes patent and trademark applications , and issues patents and registers trademarks .

the pto develops ipr protection and enforcement policy and collaborates with other agencies to develop intellectual property provisions in ftas and other international agreements .

additionally , the pto offers training , technical assistance , and trade capacity building programs to assist in promoting strong ipr regimes in foreign countries .

its ipr attaché program places individuals with technical expertise and experience overseas to promote strong international ipr protection and enforcement , such as through helping to influence laws , regulations , and practices in host countries .

the pto does not have jurisdiction over determining patent and trademark infringements ; such determinations and remedies are made at the u.s. federal district court level or through the u.s. international trade commission's section 337 proceedings .

the pto is fully funded through fees generated from patent and trademark applications .

the international trade administration ( ita ) administers many of the international trade programs of the department of commerce , include aspects involving ipr .

the ita monitors foreign countries' progress in implementing intellectual property agreements ; reviews gsp petitions submitted by industry and coordinates the commerce department's response to these petitions ; represents the commerce department at the wto trips council ; meets with trading partners to advance u.s. intellectual property interests abroad ; and works with u.s. businesses and industry groups to make sure that ipr - related trade concerns are addressed .

department of justice ( doj ) the doj enforces criminal laws that protect ipr in the united states and internationally through the prosecution of intellectual property cases .

key units of the doj that have ipr enforcement responsibilities are the criminal division , u.s. attorney's office , the civil division , the federal bureau of investigation , and the office of justice programs .

the criminal division prosecutes intellectual property crimes involving criminal offenses , namely through its computer crime and intellectual property section ( ccips ) .

federal prosecutors in the u.s .

attorneys' offices pursue computer crime and intellectual property offenses .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) has an intellectual property enforcement program focusing on intellectual property crimes that have the most bearing on national and economic security , such as trade secret theft , internet priority , and counterfeit tracking goods .

its ipr strategic objective is to "disrupt and dismantle state sponsored groups and international and domestic criminal organizations that steal , manufacture , distribute and otherwise profit from the theft of intellectual property. .

ipr is a top priority of the cyber division , though ipr crimes may be investigated in other divisions .

other ipr priorities for investigations are counterfeit health and safety products and theft of trade secrets .

the civil division prosecutes civil actions to recover penalties imposed by the department of homeland security's customs and border protection ( cbp , discussed below ) with respect to importation of counterfeit goods , brings affirmative cases when u.s. intellectual property rights are infringed , and defends cbp enforcement of the international trade commission's section 337 exclusion orders , among other things .

the office of justice program awards grants to support intellectual property enforcement efforts by state and local law enforcement partners .

in addition to enforcement activities , the doj also works with congress to develop laws that increase protection of ipr , and provides training and technical assistance programs on ipr enforcement through its criminal division .

department of homeland security ( dhs ) one of the aims of dhs is to ensure the facilitation of legitimate trade , while enforcing u.s. trade and ipr laws and investigating ipr violations , specifically trademark , counterfeiting , and copyright piracy .

key parts of dhs that are involved in ipr enforcement include u.s. customs and border protection , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , u.s. secret service ( usss ) , and the national intellectual property rights coordination center ( ipr center , discussed in next section ) .

taking the lead in day - to - day ipr enforcement activities at the u.s. border , the customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for detecting and seizing counterfeit and pirated goods entering the united states and determining penalties for infringement .

cbp has the authority to determine whether or not imports infringe federally registered trademarks and copyrights and to detain or seize such infringing goods .

owners of copyrights and trademarks are able to record information about their rights in the cbp's electronic ipr database .

in contrast to trademarks and copyrights , cbp does not have the jurisdiction to make determinations about patent infringements .

however , it is able to block imports determined by the itc to infringe a u.s. patent by a section 337 investigation .

immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is charged with investigating violations of u.s. law that are connected with u.s. borders .

ice identifies , investigates , apprehends , and removes international criminal groups and other criminals .

ice conducts inquiries into the importation and distribution of counterfeit goods .

ice activities are closely linked with those of cbp .

for instance , when cbp identifies and seizes counterfeit goods , the issue is referred to ice for criminal investigation .

likewise , information obtained from ice that is relevant to identifying and apprehending counterfeit shipments is provided to cbp .

the u.s. secret service ( usss ) investigates violations of laws relating to counterfeiting of obligations and securities of the united states ; financial crimes ; and computer - based attacks on u.s. financial , banking , telecommunications , and other critical infrastructure .

as part of such activities , usss may find links to ipr violations .

department of health and human services the fda , which is an agency of the department of health and human services ( dhhs ) , is responsible for protecting public health by ensuring the safety and effectiveness of medicines , food , and other products .

as part of its activities , the fda works to protect consumers against counterfeit medicines .

to combat the entry of foreign counterfeit drugs into the u.s. drug supply , the fda works in conjunction with the cbp to conduct border inspections of fda - regulated products .

the fda also engages in foreign inspections to ensure that foreign manufacturers meet fda quality and labeling requirements .

funding for preventing counterfeits from entering the united states is part of overall fda import safety efforts .

library of congress the copyright office of the library of congress administers u.s. copyright law by registering claims to copyright and related documents , including "assignments or transfers of rights" and maintains information on registrations , recordings , compulsory licenses , and other copyright - related actions .

additionally , the copyright office provides legal and technical expertise on national and international copyright issues to the u.s. government .

the copyright office also works with other federal agencies to provide assistance and advice in negotiations for international intellectual property agreements , as well as technical assistance to foreign countries crafting their own copyright laws .

department of state the department of state represents u.s. views in both bilateral and multilateral arenas .

it works to build international consensus for ipr enforcement .

information from state's foreign postings informs the ustr special 301 review .

in particular , the bureau of international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) works to combat intellectual property piracy , while the bureau of economics and business affairs supports stronger international ipr standards to combat global piracy and counterfeiting .

u.s. agency for international development ( aid ) aid funds training and technical assistance to improve the compliance with the trips agreement and bilateral trade agreements with the united states .

funding for these projects generally have been undertaken by regional or country missions ; there is no separate budgetary line item for ipr enforcement and training .

united states international trade commission ( itc ) the itc is a quasi - judicial federal government agency responsible for investigating and arbitrating complaints of unfair trade practices .

it adjudicates allegations of imported products that infringe u.s. patents , trademarks , and copyrights through its section 337 proceedings .

the primary remedy employed by the itc is to order the cbp to stop imports from entering the border .

additionally , the itc may issue "cease and desist" orders against individuals determined to be ipr violators .

damages for ipr infringement cannot be received through itc court proceedings ; right holders seeking damages must file a civil action with a u.s. federal district court .

coordinating and advisory bodies the ustr leads interagency coordination of u.s. trade policy formulation , negotiation , and implementation .

beyond this general mechanism , the u.s. government also has interagency intended to specifically coordinate ipr protection and enforcement activities , as well as private sector advisory bodies that provide input into the formulation of u.s trade policy .

certain key coordinating and advisory bodies are outlined below .

office of the u.s .

intellectual property enforcement coordinator ( ipec ) the ipec , located in the office of management and budget ( omb ) of the executive office of the president , provides executive direction and coordination of federal agencies involved in ipr enforcement .

the position of the u.s .

intellectual property enforcement coordinator , subject to senate confirmation , was statutorily established in october 2008 , through the prioritizing resources and organization for intellectual property act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-403 ) .

among its key responsibilities are to develop and implement a "joint strategic plan on intellectual property enforcement" for combating counterfeiting and piracy ; provide assistance to the ustr in conducting trade negotiations relating to ipr enforcement abroad ; and chair an advisory committee composed of representatives from the omb ; departments of justice , commerce , state , homeland security , agriculture ; fda ; aid ; and the register of copyrights .

national intellectual property rights coordination center ( ipr center ) the department of homeland security houses the ipr center , an interagency task force whose mission is "to ensure national security by protecting the public's health and safety , the u.s. economy , and our war fighters , and to stop predatory and unfair trade practices that threaten the global economy. .

established by ice in 2002 , the ipr center's role is to improve and coordinate federal intellectual property functions to more effectively combat ipr - infringing products .

it is led by the ice homeland security investigations ( hsi ) director , with deputy directors from hsi and cbp .

according to ustr , the ipr center can be distinguished from itec ( discussed below ) because of the former's focus on the law enforcement response to ipr theft ( primarily coordinating investigation and prosecution of ipr infringers under u.s. criminal laws ) and the latter's focus on enforcement of u.s. rights under trade agreements across a range of issues , one of which is ipr .

interagency trade enforcement center ( itec ) the itec is an interagency coordinating body established in february 28 , 2012 , by executive order .

its aim is to strengthen and coordinate enforcement of u.s. rights under international free trade agreements and of u.s. trade laws through a "whole - of - government" approach .

the itec is housed within the ustr with a designated director from the ustr ; a designated deputy director from the department of commerce ; and support from the departments of state , the treasury , justice , agriculture , commerce , and homeland security , as well as the director of national intelligence .

the administration has emphasized the need for creating the itec in order to better combat unfair trade practices by countries such as china .

private sector advisory committee system the ustr manages a private sector advisory committee system for trade policy , intended to provide information and advisory on u.s. negotiating objectives and bargaining positions before the united states enters into trade agreements , the operation of existing u.s. trade agreements , and other u.s. trade policy matters .

statutorily established under section 135 of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) , the private sector advisory system includes 16 industry trade advisory committees ( itacs ) , which are jointly administered by the ustr and department of commerce .

itac membership draws from industry and labor .

the itacs reflect a range of u.s. economic sectors and policy issues , and one of the itacs focuses on ipr .

