during the 110 th congress , several house and senate committees have engaged in oversight activities , including hearings and requests for expeditious production of documents and information regarding the administration's warrantless foreign intelligence surveillance programs , as possible changes to the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 , as amended , were explored .

in july 2007 , an unclassified summary of the national intelligence estimate on "the terrorist threat to the u.s .

homeland" was released .

it expressed the judgment , in part , that the u / s .

homeland will face a persistent and evolving threat over the next three years , the main threat coming from islamic terrorist groups and cells , particularly al qaeda .

on august 2 , 2007 , the director of national intelligence ( dni ) released a statement on "modernization of the foreign intelligence surveillance act. .

in his statement , admiral mcconnell viewed such modernization as necessary to respond to technological changes and to meet the nation's current intelligence collection needs .

he deemed it essential for the intelligence community to provide warning of threats to the united states .

he perceived two critically needed changes .

first , he stated that a court order should not be required for gathering foreign intelligence from foreign targets located overseas , although he did agree to court review of related procedures after commencement of the needed collection .

second , he contended that liability protection was needed for those who furnished aid to the government in carrying out its foreign intelligence collection efforts .

on august 5 , 2007 , the protect america act of 2007 , p.l .

110-55 , was enacted into law with a 180 day sunset provision , providing a temporary solution to concerns raised by the director of national intelligence .

both the house and the senate have considered or are considering possible legislation to provide a longer - term statutory approach to these concerns .

on november 15 , 2007 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

3773 , the responsible electronic surveillance that is overseen , reviewed , and effective act of 2007 or the restore act of 2007 .

on october 26 , 2007 , senator rockefeller reported s. 2248 , the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 amendments act of 2007 or the fisa amendment act of 2007 , an original bill , from the senate select committee on intelligence .

s. 2248 was referred to the senate judiciary committee on november 1 , 2007 .

on november 16 , 2007 , s. 2248 was reported out of the senate judiciary committee by senator leahy with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

on december 14 , 2007 , senator reid made a motion to proceed with consideration of s. 2248 , and presented a cloture motion on the motion to proceed .

the motion to proceed was then withdrawn .

on december 17 , 2007 , the senate considered the motion to proceed with the measure .

cloture on the motion to proceed was invoked by a vote of 76-10 , record vote number 435 .

after some debate in the closing hours before the senate broke for the holidays , a decision was made to revisit the measure when the members returned in january .

senate floor activities on s. 2248 resumed on january 23 and 24 , 2008 .

a modified version of the senate judiciary committee's amendment in the nature of a substitute to s. 2248 was tabled .

senator reid sought unanimous consent for consideration of the house - passed bill , h.r .

3773 , but senator mcconnell objected .

senator rockefeller , for himself and senator bond , proposed an amendment in the nature of a substitute to s. 2248 ( s.amdt .

3911 ) .

on january 28 , 2008 , a cloture motion by senator mcconnell on this amendment failed to pass .

a cloture motion on an amendment proposed by senator reid to s. 2248 to extend the sunset on the protect america act for an additional 30 days ( s.amdt .

3918 ) also fell short of the required votes .

other amendments to s. 2248 have been proposed .

on january 29 , 2008 , both the house and the senate passed h.r .

5104 , a 15-day extension to the sunset for the protect america act , to allow further time to consider , pass , and go to conference on proposed legislation to amend fisa , while ensuring that the intelligence community would have the authority it needed in the intervening period .

pursuant to an agreement and order of january 31 , 2008 , s.amdts .

3909 , as modified ; 3932 , as modified ; 3960 , as modified ; and s.amdt .

3945 were agreed to , while other amendments were scheduled for floor debate .

in the ensuing floor consideration to date , s.amdt .

3941 was agreed to , while s.amdts .

3913 and 3915 failed to pass on february 7 , 2008 .

s.amdt .

3930 fell short of the requisite 60 votes and was withdrawn on february 6 , 2008 .

still pending are s.amdts .

3938 , as modified , 3911 , 3907 , 3927 , 3919 , 3920 , and 3910 .

floor debate is anticipated to continue early next week , with additional votes expected on tuesday , february 12 , 2008 .

h.r .

3773 , s. 2248 and the senate amendment in the nature of a substitute to s. 2248 , each includes amendments to the foreign intelligence surveillance act .

this report provides a side by side comparison of the provisions of these three measures , using h.r .

3773 as the basis for the comparison .

as title i of fisa defines a number of key terms critical to understanding the import of the bills' language , a glossary of fisa terms as defined in section 101 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 is attached to assist in understanding the effect of these measures .

senator reid introduced two additional fisa bills on december 10 , 2007 , s. 2440 and s. 2441 , which were read twice the following day and placed on the senate legislative calendar as numbers 529 and 530 , respectively .

s. 2402 was introduced by senator specter on december 3 , 2007 , and referred to the senate judiciary committee .

in committee markup on december 13 , 2007 , an amendment in the nature of a substitute to s. 2402 was adopted by unanimous consent .

then , by a vote of 5-13 , the committee rejected s. 2402 , as amended .

the proposal would have permitted substitution of the government for electronic communication service providers in law suits where certain criteria were met .

these bills will not be included in this side - by - side comparison .

as used in title i of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 et seq .

: ( a ) "foreign power" means — ( 1 ) a foreign government or any component thereof , whether or not recognized by the united states ; ( 2 ) a faction of a foreign nation or nations , not substantially composed of united states persons ; ( 3 ) an entity that is openly acknowledged by a foreign government or governments to be directed and controlled by such foreign government or governments ; ( 4 ) a group engaged in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor ; ( 5 ) a foreign - based political organization , not substantially composed of united states persons ; or ( 6 ) an entity that is directed and controlled by a foreign government or governments .

 ( b ) "agent of a foreign power" means — ( 1 ) any person other than a united states person , who — ( a ) acts in the united states as an officer or employee of a foreign power , or as a member of a foreign power as defined in subsection ( a ) ( 4 ) of this section ; ( b ) acts for or on behalf of a foreign power which engages in clandestine intelligence activities in the united states contrary to the interests of the united states , when the circumstances of such person's presence in the united states indicate that such person may engage in such activities in the united states , or when such person knowingly aids or abets any person in the conduct of such activities or knowingly conspires with any person to engage in such activities ; or ( c ) engages in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefore ; or ( 2 ) any person who — ( a ) knowingly engages in clandestine intelligence gathering activities for or on behalf of a foreign power , which activities involve or may involve a violation of the criminal statutes of the united states ; ( b ) pursuant to the direction of an intelligence service or network of a foreign power , knowingly engages in any other clandestine intelligence activities for or on behalf of such foreign power , which activities involve or are about to involve a violation of the criminal statutes of the united states ; ( c ) knowingly engages in sabotage or international terrorism , or activities that are in preparation therefor , for or on behalf of a foreign power ; ( d ) knowingly enters the united states under a false or fraudulent identity for or on behalf of a foreign power or , while in the united states , knowingly assumes a false or fraudulent identity for or on behalf of a foreign power ; or ( e ) knowingly aids or abets any person in the conduct of activities described in subparagraph ( a ) , ( b ) , or ( c ) or knowingly conspires with any person to engage in activities described in subparagraph ( a ) , ( b ) , or ( c ) .

 ( c ) "international terrorism" means activities that — ( 1 ) involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that are a violation of the criminal laws of the united states or of any state , or that would be a criminal violation if committed within the jurisdiction of the united states or any state ; ( 2 ) appear to be intended — ( a ) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population ; ( b ) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion ; or ( c ) to affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping ; and ( 3 ) occur totally outside the united states , or transcend national boundaries in terms of the means by which they are accomplished , the persons they appear intended to coerce or intimidate , or the locale in which their perpetrators operate or seek asylum .

 ( d ) "sabotage" means activities that involve a violation of chapter 105 of title 18 , or that would involve such a violation if committed against the united states .

 ( e ) "foreign intelligence information" means — ( 1 ) information that relates to , and if concerning a united states person is necessary to , the ability of the united states to protect against — ( a ) actual or potential attack or other grave hostile acts of a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power ; ( b ) sabotage or international terrorism by a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power ; or ( c ) clandestine intelligence activities by an intelligence service or network of a foreign power or by an agent of a foreign power ; or ( 2 ) information with respect to a foreign power or foreign territory that relates to , and if concerning a united states person is necessary to — ( a ) the national defense or the security of the united states ; or ( b ) the conduct of the foreign affairs of the united states .

 ( f ) "electronic surveillance" means — ( 1 ) the acquisition by an electronic , mechanical , or other surveillance device of the contents of any wire or radio communication sent by or intended to be received by a particular , known united states person who is in the united states , if the contents are acquired by intentionally targeting that united states person , under circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes ; ( 2 ) the acquisition by an electronic , mechanical , or other surveillance device of the contents of any wire communication to or from a person in the united states , without the consent of any party thereto , if such acquisition occurs in the united states , but does not include the acquisition of those communications of computer trespassers that would be permissible under section 2511 ( 2 ) ( i ) of title 18 ; ( 3 ) the intentional acquisition by an electronic , mechanical , or other surveillance device of the contents of any radio communication , under circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes , and if both the sender and all intended recipients are located within the united states ; or ( 4 ) the installation or use of an electronic , mechanical , or other surveillance device in the united states for monitoring to acquire information , other than from a wire or radio communication , under circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes .

 ( g ) "attorney general" means the attorney general of the united states ( or acting attorney general ) , the deputy attorney general , or , upon the designation of the attorney general , the assistant attorney general designated as the assistant attorney general for national security under section 507a of title 28 , united states code .

 ( h ) "minimization procedures," with respect to electronic surveillance , means — ( 1 ) specific procedures , which shall be adopted by the attorney general , that are reasonably designed in light of the purpose and technique of the particular surveillance , to minimize the acquisition and retention , and prohibit the dissemination , of nonpublicly available information concerning unconsenting united states persons consistent with the need of the united states to obtain , produce , and disseminate foreign intelligence information ; ( 2 ) procedures that require that nonpublicly available information , which is not foreign intelligence information , as defined in subsection ( e ) ( 1 ) of this section , shall not be disseminated in a manner that identifies any united states person , without such person's consent , unless such person's identity is necessary to understand foreign intelligence information or assess its importance ; ( 3 ) notwithstanding paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , procedures that allow for the retention and dissemination of information that is evidence of a crime which has been , is being , or is about to be committed and that is to be retained or disseminated for law enforcement purposes ; and ( 4 ) notwithstanding paragraphs ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , and ( 3 ) , with respect to any electronic surveillance approved pursuant to section 1802 ( a ) of this title , procedures that require that no contents of any communication to which a united states person is a party shall be disclosed , disseminated , or used for any purpose or retained for longer than 72 hours unless a court order under section 1805 of this title is obtained or unless the attorney general determines that the information indicates a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person .

 ( i ) "united states person" means a citizen of the united states , an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence ( as defined in section 1101 ( a ) ( 20 ) of title 8 ) , an unincorporated association a substantial number of members of which are citizens of the united states or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence , or a corporation which is incorporated in the united states , but does not include a corporation or an association which is a foreign power , as defined in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , or ( 3 ) of this section .

 ( j ) "united states," when used in a geographic sense , means all areas under the territorial sovereignty of the united states and the trust territory of the pacific islands .

 ( k ) "aggrieved person" means a person who is the target of an electronic surveillance or any other person whose communications or activities were subject to electronic surveillance .

 ( l ) "wire communication" means any communication while it is being carried by a wire , cable , or other like connection furnished or operated by any person engaged as a common carrier in providing or operating such facilities for the transmission of interstate or foreign communications .

 ( m ) "person" means any individual , including any officer or employee of the federal government , or any group , entity , association , corporation , or foreign power .

 ( n ) "contents," when used with respect to a communication , includes any information concerning the identity of the parties to such communication or the existence , substance , purport , or meaning of that communication .

 ( o ) "state" means any state of the united states , the district of columbia , the commonwealth of puerto rico , the trust territory of the pacific islands , and any territory or possession of the united states .

