congress continues to demonstrate interest in and support for nanotechnology due to what many believe is its extraordinary potential for delivering economic growth , high - wage jobs , and other societal benefits to the nation .

to date , congress has directed its attention particularly to three topics that may affect the united states' realization of this hoped for potential: federal research and de velopment ( r&d ) investments under the national nanotechnology initiative ( nni ) ; u.s. international competitiveness in nanotechnology ; and environmental , health , and safety ( ehs ) concerns .

this report provides a brief overview of these topics and two others of interest to congress: nanomanufacturing and public attitudes toward , and understanding of , nanotechnology .

nanotechnology r&d is directed toward the understanding and control of matter at dimensions of roughly 1 to 100 nanometers .

at this size , the physical , chemical , and biological properties of materials can differ in fundamental and potentially useful ways from both the properties of individual atoms and molecules , on the one hand , and bulk matter , on the other hand .

in 2000 , president clinton launched the nni to coordinate federal r&d efforts and promote u.s. competitiveness in nanotechnology .

congress first supported the nni in fy2001 and provided increased regular appropriations for nanotechnology r&d for each year through fy2010 .

from fy2010 to fy2016 , however , overall nni funding has declined by $478 million ( 25.0% ) ; during the same period , overall federal r&d funding fell by less than 1% .

president obama's proposed funding of $1.443 billion for nanotechnology r&d for fy2017 is little changed from the fy2016 level .

in 2003 , congress enacted the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act ( p.l .

108-153 ) .

the act provided a statutory foundation for the nni , established programs , assigned agency responsibilities , and authorized agency funding levels for fy2005 through fy2008 .

though no funding has been explicitly authorized for the nni beyond fy2008 , congress has continued to appropriate funds to agencies for nanotechnology r&d , and the executive branch continues to operate and report on the nni , as coordinated by the nanoscale science , engineering , and technology ( nset ) subcommittee of the national science and technology council ( nstc ) .

federal r&d investments are focused on advancing understanding of fundamental nanoscale phenomena and on developing nanomaterials , nanoscale devices and systems , instrumentation , standards , measurement science , and the tools and processes needed for nanomanufacturing .

nni appropriations also fund the construction and operation of major research facilities and the acquisition of instrumentation .

the nni also supports research directed at identifying and managing potential environmental , health , and safety impacts of nanotechnology , as well as its ethical , legal , and societal implications .

most current applications of nanotechnology are evolutionary in nature , offering incremental improvements to existing products and generally modest economic and societal benefits .

for example , nanotechnology has been used in display screens to improve picture quality , color , and brightness , provide wider viewing angles , reduce power consumption and extend product lives ; in automobile bumpers , cargo beds , and step - assists to reduce weight , increase resistance to dents and scratches , and eliminate rust ; in clothes to increase resistance to staining , wrinkling , and bacterial growth and to provide lighter - weight body armor ; and in sporting goods , such as baseball bats and golf clubs , to improve performance .

nanotechnology plays a central role in some current applications with substantial economic value .

for example , nanotechnology is a fundamental enabling technology in nearly all microchips and is fundamental to improvements in chip speed , size , weight , and energy use .

similarly , nanotechnology has substantially increased the storage density of non - volatile flash memory and computer hard drives .

in the longer term , proponents of nanotechnology believe it may deliver revolutionary advances with profound economic and societal implications .

the applications they discuss involve various degrees of speculation and varying time - frames .

the examples below suggest a few of the areas where revolutionary advances may emerge , and for which early r&d efforts may provide insights into how such advances might be achieved .

detection and treatment of disease s .

a wide range of nanotechnology applications are being developed to detect and treat diseases: c ancer .

current nanotechnology disease detection efforts include the development of sensors that can identify biomarkers — such as altered genes , receptor proteins that are indicative of newly - developing blood vessels associated with early tumor development , and prostate specific antigens ( psa ) — that may provide an early indicator of cancer .

some of these approaches are currently in clinical trials or have been approved for use by the food and drug administration .

one approach uses carbon nanotubes and nanowires to identify the unique molecular signals of cancer biomarkers .

another approach uses nanoscale cantilevers — resembling a row of diving boards — treated with molecules that bind only with cancer biomarkers .

when these molecules bind , the additional weight alters the resonant frequency of the cantilevers indicating the presence and concentration of these biomarkers .

nanotechnology also holds promise for showing the presence , location , and / or contours of cancer , cardiovascular disease , or neurological disease .

current r&d efforts employ metallic , magnetic , and polymeric nanoparticles with strong imaging characteristics attached to an antibody or other agent that binds selectively with targeted cells .

the imaging results can be used to guide surgical procedures and to monitor the effectiveness of non - surgical therapies in killing the disease or slowing its growth .

nanotechnology may also offer new cancer treatment approaches .

for example , researchers have developed a chemically engineered adenovirus nanoparticle to deliver a molecule that stimulates the immune system and a nanoparticle that safely shuts down a key enzyme in cancer cells .

another approach employs nanoshells with a core of silica and an outer metallic shell that can be engineered to concentrate at cancer lesion sites .

once at the sites , a harmless energy source ( such as near - infrared light ) can be used to cause the nanoshells to heat , killing the cancer cells they are attached to .

yet another treatment uses a dual cancer - killing approach .

a gold nanoshell containing a chemotherapy drug attaches itself to a cancer cell .

the shell is then heated using a near - infrared light source , killing the cancer cells in the vicinity while also rupturing the shell , releasing the chemotherapy drug inside the tumor .

another approach would employ a nanoparticle to carry three or more different drugs and release them "in response to three distinct triggering mechanisms. .

ebola .

in february 2015 , amid the ebola outbreak in west africa that began in 2014 , the food and drug administration provided emergency authorization of a nanotechnology - enabled antigen test for the detection of ebola viruses .

i nfluenza .

medical researchers at the national institutes for health are using nanotechnology in the development of a molecule they intend to serve as a universal influenza vaccine that "stimulates the production of antibodies to fight against the ever - changing flu virus. .

diabetes .

diabetes is the target of a nano - enabled skin patch that painlessly delivers insulin using an array of microneedles , each of which contains more than 100 million vesicles that release insulin in response to the detection of high glucose levels .

renewable energy .

a number of different nanotechnology applications may deliver important advances in renewable energy .

one of the nni's signature initiatives — nanotechnology for solar energy collection and conversion — seeks to improve photovoltaic solar electricity generation , solar thermal energy generation and conversion , and solar - to - fuel conversions .

the national renewable energy laboratory has developed a nanoparticle etching process that creates a texture on photovoltaic cells that gives a black appearance which can better absorb the sun's energy .

these "black silicon" solar cells set a world record ( 18.2% ) for energy conversion efficiency .

an application developed to improve solar thermal energy conversion efficiency uses a low - cost , scalable process to produce high - performance nanostructured coatings that enable thermal conversion efficiencies of more than 90% and increases the temperature range for heat - transfer fluids to more than 1200° fahrenheit .

in addition , bio - inspired applications seek to use nanomaterials to produce fuels or feedstocks for high - value - added chemical products directly from sunlight .

nanoscale semiconductor catalysts and additives show promise for improving the production of hydrogen from water using sunlight .

the optical properties of these nanoscale catalysts allow the process to use a wider spectrum of sunlight .

similarly , nanostructured photovoltaic devices ( eg , solar cells ) may improve the efficiency of converting sunlight into electricity by using a wider spectrum of sunlight .

improved hydrogen storage , a key challenge in fuel cell applications , may be achieved by tapping the chemical properties and large surface area of certain nanostructured materials .

nanotechnology offers the potential for improvements in energy storage , a key enabling technology for renewable energy , with at least one current prototype exceeding the energy storage of standard batteries by 40% .

water treatment .

nanotechnology approaches — such as nanosorbents , nanocatalysts , bioactive nanoparticles , nanostructured catalytic membranes , and nanoparticle enhanced filtration — may enable improved water quality in both large - scale water treatment plants and point - of - use systems .

nanotechnology water desalination and filtration systems may offer affordable , scalable , and portable water filtration systems .

filters employing nanoscale pores work by allowing water molecules to pass through , but preventing larger molecules , such as salt ions and other impurities ( eg , bacteria , viruses , heavy metals , and organic material ) , from doing so .

some nanoscale filtration systems also employ a matrix of polymers and nanoparticles that serve to attract water molecules to the filter and to repel contaminants .

agricultural and food applications .

nanobiosensors capable of monitoring and detecting the presence of a virus or disease - infecting particle may enable early , targeted application of pesticides and herbicides increasing crop yield , lowering costs , and reducing environmental impact ; similarly , other nanotechnology sensors may help to improve nutrient and water management .

reducing health - promoting bioactive compounds to nanoscale particles can improve delivery properties , solubility , targetability , and efﬁcient absorption through cells .

nanotechnology can also improve the shelf life of products by incorporating antimicrobial properties into the packaging to protect food against pathogens .

nanotechnology also offers the potential for improved nutrition .

some companies are exploring the development of nanocapsules that release nutrients targeted at specific parts of the body at specific times .

self - healing materials .

nanotechnology may offer approaches that enable materials to "self - heal" by incorporating , for example , nanocontainers of a repair substance ( eg , an epoxy ) throughout the material .

when a crack or corrosion reaches a nanocontainer , the nanocontainer could be designed to open and release its repair material to fill the gap and seal the crack .

toxin and pathogen s ensors .

microfluidic and nanocantilever sensors ( discussed earlier ) may be engineered to detect specific pathogens ( eg , bacteria , virus ) or toxins ( eg , sarin gas , hydrogen cyanide ) by detecting their unique molecular signals or through selective binding with an engineered nanoparticle .

environmental remediation .

the high surface - to - volume ratio , high reactivity , and small size of some nanoscale particles ( eg , nanoscale iron ) may offer more effective and less costly solutions for remediation of environmental contamination .

by injecting engineered nanoparticles into the ground , these characteristics can be employed to enable the particles to move more easily through a contaminated site and bond more readily with targeted contaminants .

epa notes , however , that site - specific conditions ( eg , site location and layout , geologic conditions , concentration of contaminants , types of contaminants ) may limit the effectiveness of nanoparticles .

nanotechnology is also expected by some to make substantial contributions to federal missions such as national defense , homeland security , and space exploration and commercialization .

estimates of u.s. private - sector nanotechnology r&d funding range from two times the amount of u.s. public funding to more than nine times as much .

in general , the private sector's efforts focus on translating fundamental knowledge and prototypes into commercial products ; developing new applications incorporating nanoscale materials ; and developing technologies , methods , and systems for commercial - scale manufacturing .

many other nations and firms around the world are also making substantial investments in nanotechnology .

president clinton launched the national nanotechnology initiative in 2000 , establishing a multi - agency program to coordinate and expand federal efforts to advance the state of nanoscale science , engineering , and technology , and to position the united states to lead the world in nanotechnology research , development , and commercialization .

in fy2016 , the nni includes 11 federal departments and independent agencies and commissions with budgets dedicated to nanotechnology r&d , as well as nine other federal departments and independent agencies and commissions with responsibilities for health , safety , and environmental regulation ; trade ; education ; training ; intellectual property ; international relations ; and other areas that might affect nanotechnology .

the environmental protection agency , food and drug administration , and consumer product safety commission conduct nanotechnology r&d and have regulatory responsibilities .

congress has played a central role in the nni , providing appropriations for the conduct of nanotechnology r&d , establishing programs , and creating a legislative foundation for some of the activities of the nni through enactment of the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act of 2003 .

the act authorized appropriations for fy2005 through fy2008 for nni activities at five agencies: the national science foundation ( nsf ) , department of energy ( doe ) , national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , department of commerce ( doc ) national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , and environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

congress has continued its active engagement in the nni through hearings , proposed authorizing legislation , and annual appropriations .

while many provisions of the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act have no sunset provision , fy2008 was the last year for which it authorized appropriations .

legislation to amend and reauthorize the act was introduced in the 114 th congress , 113 th congress , 111 th congress , and 110 th congress .

in the 114 th congress , subtitle b of h.r .

1898 , the america competes reauthorization act of 2015 , would reauthorize the nni .

the american innovation and competitiveness act ( s. 3084 ) would modify certain nni statutory reporting requirements .

h.r .

1898 was introduced on april 21 , 2015 , and referred to the house committee on science , space , and technology , and subsequently referred to two subcommittees .

no further action has been taken .

s. 3084 was introduced on june 22 , 2016 , and referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

the bill was ordered reported favorably with an amendment in the nature of a substitute on june 29 , 2016 .

no further action has been taken .

efforts to enact comprehensive nni reauthorization legislation in the 110 th congress , 111 th congress , and 113 th congress were unsuccessful .

for additional information , see crs report rl34401 , the national nanotechnology initiative: overview , reauthorization , and appropriations issues , by [author name scrubbed .

the remainder of this report discusses four nanotechnology issues of congressional interest: u.s. competitiveness ; environmental , health , and safety implications ; nanomanufacturing ; and public attitudes and understanding .

the federal government has made sustained investments in nanotechnology under the nni since fy2001 .

while numerous nanotechnology applications have been incorporated in commercial products , they have generally offered incremental improvements in product performance .

proponents assert that nanotechnology has the potential to bring revolutionary products to market , reshaping existing industries and creating new ones .

the federal government's investments under the national nanotechnology initiative also play important roles in other key science and technology initiatives as well , including the advanced manufacturing partnership ( amp ) , the networking and information technology research and development ( nitrd ) program , and the materials genome initiative ( mgi ) , the national cancer moonshot , and cybersecurity .

the products that emerge from these efforts may bring significant economic and social benefits to the united states and to the world ; however , substantial research , development , and innovation - related hurdles remain before many of these benefits might be realized .

congress may play an active role in addressing some or all of these hurdles .

the issues congress may opt to consider include budget authorization levels for the covered agencies ; r&d funding levels , priorities , and balance across the program component areas ; administration and management of the nni ; translation of research results and early - stage technology into commercially viable applications ; environmental , health , and safety issues ; ethical , legal , and societal implications ; education and training for the nanotechnology workforce ; metrology , standards , and nomenclature ; public understanding ; and international dimensions .

as of march 2016 , the nset subcommittee included the following member departments , agencies , and offices: consumer product safety commission † * department of agriculture agricultural research service† forest service† national institute of food and agriculture† department of commerce bureau of industry and security economic development administration national institute of standards and technology† u.s. patent and trademark office department of defense † department of education department of energy † department of health and human services agency for toxic substances and disease registry food and drug administration† national institute for occupational safety and health† national institutes of health† department of homeland security † department of the interior department of justice department of labor department of state department of transportation † department of the treasury environmental protection agency † intelligence community national aeronautics and space administration † national science foundation † nuclear regulatory commission* u.s. international trade commission* office of science and technology policy office of management and budget † indicates a f ederal department , independent agenc y , or commission with a b udget dedicated to nanotechnology research and development .

* indicates an independent commission that is represented on nset but is non - voting .

source: nset subcommittee , nstc , eop , the national technology initiative: supplement to the president's fy2017 budget , march 2016 , http: / / www.nano.gov / sites / default / files / pub_resource / nni_fy17_budget_supplement.pdf .

