the controlled substances act ( csa or the act ) is the statutory framework through which the federal government regulates the lawful production , possession , and distribution of controlled substances .

the csa places various plants , drugs , and chemicals ( such as narcotics , stimulants , depressants , hallucinogens , and anabolic steroids ) into one of five schedules based on the substance's medical use , potential for abuse , and safety or dependence liability .

further , the act requires persons who handle controlled substances or listed chemicals ( such as drug manufacturers , wholesale distributors , doctors , hospitals , pharmacies , and scientific researchers ) to register with the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) in the u.s. department of justice , which administers and enforces the csa .

registrants must maintain detailed records of their respective controlled substance inventories as well as establish adequate security controls to minimize theft and diversion .

although the csa sets forth criminal provisions for the unlawful manufacture , possession , and distribution of controlled substances , this report will instead focus on the act's non - criminal regulatory requirements for those who legitimately produce , distribute , and dispense controlled substances .

the placement of drugs or other substances into schedules under the csa is based upon the substance's medical use , potential for abuse , and safety or dependence liability .

the act further provides a mechanism for substances to be controlled , or added to a schedule ; decontrolled , or removed from the scheduling framework altogether ; and rescheduled or transferred from one schedule to another .

the proceedings to add , delete , or change the schedule of a drug or substance may be initiated by the dea , the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , or by petition by any interested person .

when a petition is received by the dea , the agency initiates its own investigation of the drug or substance .

the dea may also initiate an investigation at any time in response to information received from law enforcement laboratories , state and local law enforcement and regulatory agencies , or other sources of information .

after the dea's initial investigation , the dea administrator ( administrator ) requests from the assistant secretary of health of hhs ( assistant secretary of health ) a scientific and medical evaluation and recommendation as to whether the drug or substance should be controlled or removed from control .

the assistant secretary of health in turn solicits information from the commissioner of the food and drug administration , and obtains evaluations and recommendations from the national institute on drug abuse .

the assistant secretary of health then consolidates the requested information and transmits back to the dea a medical and scientific evaluation regarding the drug or substance , along with a recommendation as to whether the drug or substance should be controlled and into which schedule it should be placed .

the administrator then evaluates all of the relevant data and makes a final determination as to whether the drug or substance should be controlled or removed entirely from control .

in making a determination regarding the control of a drug or substance , the administrator must consider factors such as the drug's actual or relative potential for abuse ; scientific evidence of its pharmacological effect ; the current state of scientific knowledge regarding the drug or substance ; the risk to the public health ; and whether the substance is an immediate precursor of a substance already controlled under the act .

after the administrator makes such a determination , he must make specific findings concerning the drug or substance that dictate the schedule in which the drug or substance will be placed .

congress may also add a substance to a schedule through legislation .

the csa creates a "closed system" of distribution in which distribution may lawfully occur among registered handlers of controlled substances , referred to as "registrants. .

central to this closed system of distribution is the registration of all persons or entities authorized by the dea to handle controlled substances .

the dea has described the movement of a controlled substance from manufacture to the patient as follows: [a] controlled substance , after being manufactured by a dea - registered manufacturer , may be transferred to a dea - registered distributor for subsequent distribution to a dea - registered retail pharmacy .

after a dea - registered practitioner , such as a physician or a dentist , issues a prescription for a controlled substance to a patient ( i.e. , the ultimate user ) , that patient can fill that prescription at a retail pharmacy to obtain that controlled substance .

in this system , the manufacturer , the distributor , the practitioner , and the retail pharmacy are all required to be dea registrants , or to be exempted from the requirement of registration , to participate in the process .

all registrants are required by the csa to maintain complete and accurate inventories and records of all regulated transactions involving controlled substances and listed chemicals , as well as provide adequate security controls to prevent their diversion .

therefore , a particular controlled substance is always under the control of a dea - registered person until it reaches the patient or is destroyed , and the csa's regulatory requirements "ensure that all controlled substances are accounted for from their creation until their dispensing or destruction. .

it is important to note that the csa allows for exceptions and also exempts certain individuals from some or all of its regulatory requirements .

for example , individuals exempted from registration requirements include , among others , officers or employees of the dea , officers of the u.s. customs service , offers or employees of the u.s. food and drug administration , and any other federal officers who are authorized to possess , import , or export controlled substances in the course of their official duties .

officers or employees of any state , or political subdivision of a state , who are engaged in enforcement of state or local laws relating to controlled substances , are also exempt from registering with the dea .

a person who has lawfully obtained , and who possesses , a controlled substance for his own use is also not required to register .

in addition , only those actually engaged in activities relating to manufacturing , distributing , and dispensing controlled substances are required to obtain registration , but related or affiliated persons who are not engaged in such activities are not required to register .

for example , a stockholder or parent corporation of a corporation that manufactures controlled substances is not required to obtain registration , nor are employees of a registered manufacturer , distributor , or dispenser .

the dea administrator may , by regulation , waive the registration requirement for certain manufacturers , distributors , or dispensers , if he finds it consistent with the public health and safety .

in certain circumstances , the csa recordkeeping provisions do not apply .

the csa recordkeeping provisions do not apply to the prescribing or administering of a controlled substance in schedules ii - v by practitioners acting in the lawful course of their professional practice unless such substance is prescribed or administered in the course of maintenance or detoxification treatment of an individual .

for example , the prescribing or administering of methadone for the treatment of narcotic addiction must be in conformity with the csa's recordkeeping provisions .

the csa also does not apply to research conducted in conformity with the exemption granted under certain provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) or to preclinical research or teaching .

