as has been the case with most of the world's economies , the russian economy has been hit hard by the global financial crisis and resulting recession that became readily apparent in the last quarter of 2008 .

even before the financial crisis , russia was showing signs of economic problems when world oil prices plummeted sharply around the middle of 2008 , diminishing a critical source of russian export revenues and government funding .

the crisis brought an abrupt end to about a decade ( 1999-2008 ) of impressive russian economic growth that helped to raise the russian standard of living and brought economic stability that russia had not experienced for more than two decades .

this success was a major factor in the popular support that former president ( now prime minister ) putin and the current president , dmitrij medvedev enjoyed , and it was also arguably a factor in the boldness with which the russian leadership reasserted russia's status as a world power , challenging the united states , europe , the other former soviet states , including its military confrontation with georgia in august 2008 .

russia is showing signs of recovery in 2010 because of a government stimulus package and the rise of world oil prices , but that recovery appears to be fragile .

russia has some of the world's largest reserves of oil , natural gas and other raw materials , many of which are critical to industrialized countries .

many european countries and former soviet states are highly dependent on russian natural gas .

russia is a significant player on a number of issues critical to the united states , such as nuclear proliferation by iran and north korea .

russia's perceived national interests do not always match those of the united states , creating an environment for disagreement if not conflict .

russia is also a member of the g - 8 group of highly developed economies and of the larger g - 20 which has been the primary forum for the multilateral response to the global economic crisis .

while u.s. exports to russia are still relatively small , russia is an important market to u.s. exporters of poultry , energy equipment , and technology.. russia is also an important supplier of a number of raw materials that are critical to u.s. manufacturers .

these links have drawn the attention of some members of congress .

congress may consider whether to pass legislation to extend permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status to russia .

russian economic policies and performance raise important policy questions for the united states and the u.s. - russian relationship which this report addresses .

might russia's robust economic growth return ? .

is an economically strong russia a threat or benefit to the united states ? .

is russia following economic strategies that promote a market economy that underlies the international trade system manifested in the wto ? .

the first seven years of russia's transition from the soviet central planned economy ( 1991-1998 ) were not easy .

this period , which coincided with most of the regime of president boris yeltsin were , by most accounts , a time of economic chaos , if not near collapse and failure .

during the period , russia lost close to 30% of its real gross domestic product ( gdp ) , a decline reminiscent of the great depression of the 1930s in the united states .

russia also suffered very high rates of inflation – over 2,000% in 1992 and over 800% in 1993 – before it declined to more tolerable , but still high , levels of around 20% by the end of the 1990s .

the inflation robbed russian citizens of their savings as the value of the ruble collapsed , eventually forcing the russian government to sharply devalue the ruble on january 1 , 1998 , with 1 new ruble equaling 1,000 old rubles .

as a hedge against inflation , some residents , who were in a position to do so , invested in hard assets such as art works , foreign currencies , and real estate .

but the greater portion of the population saw their savings evaporate .

the disposable income ( income available after taxes ) of the average russian declined 25% in real terms between 1993 and 1999 .

the quality of life of the average russian deteriorated in other terms .

in 1991 , the life expectancy of the average russian male was 64 years and for the average russian woman it was 74 years .

by 1999 , the life expectancy had declined to 59 years for males and 72 for females .

russia did not perform much better in the foreign sector .

foreign direct investments ( fdi ) flows were meager given the size and needs of the russian economy .

furthermore , russia was incurring serious capital flight – some $150 billion worth between 1992 and 1999 by one estimate .

russian foreign debt soared in part because russia had taken on the foreign debts of the entire former soviet union in an arrangement made with the other former soviet states .

however , russia had also incurred its own foreign obligations since the collapse of the soviet union .

the economic problems were in part a continuation of economic collapse that was a factor in the demise of the soviet government .

the problems were also in part the result of the rapid disintegration of an economic system in which the state , guided by the communist party , maintained complete control and market forces were an anathema .

it was a system in which the government emphasized heavy industry production regardless of cost and to the detriment of other sectors , including agriculture , services , and consumer industries .

the central planned economy also operated huge production facilities that proved to be inefficient , not very adaptable to change , often producing products of poor quality , and not competitive in world markets .

however , the problems were also the product of poorly executed , if not poorly conceived , economic policies of the yeltsin regime .

the regime failed to rein in government spending as it tried to deal with the soviet legacy of massive subsidies for industry and the population .

during the period , the russian government ran up large budget deficits that reached as high as 9.8% of gdp , forcing the government to finance debt at very high interest rates .

the yeltsin regime was also criticized for employing "shock therapy," or radical macroeconomic measures , as part of its economic reform program , largely attributed to then - prime minister yegor gaidar .

critics claimed that the measures unnecessarily created inflation and destabilized the economy because market prices were introduced too early in the reform process .

the most controversial aspect of the early post - soviet economic transition was the effort to privatize state - owned and operated production facilities , in particular , the so - called loans for shares program .

in 1995 , the government auctioned off to local banks shares in 29 of the most potentially lucrative firms , including major oil companies and mineral producers ( yukos , lukoil , sufgutneftegas , and novolietsk iron and steel ) .

the banks held the shares as collateral against which they issued loans to the government to finance its ballooning deficits .

the auctions were controlled by individuals with close ties to the yeltsin regime and whose banks won the bids .

they obtained the shares at a fraction of their market value and were able to keep them when the government failed to pay back the loans .

the government did not challenge their control of these assets because their owners , who became known as "oligarchs," financed yeltsin's reelection as president in 1996 .

they used their new wealth to gain control over other interests such as the media .

the privatization program also resulted in small and medium - sized firms owned by those who managed them during the soviet period – the "red directors. .

russia's economic problems came to a head in the financial crisis of august 1998 .

the crisis proved to be a pivotal event in russia's transition to a market economy .

it exposed many of the weaknesses of russian economic policies and the need for economic reform .

the crisis culminated in august 1998 , when the government abandoned its defense of a strong ruble .

it also defaulted on official domestic debt , forcing its restructuring and imposed a 90-day moratorium on commercial external debt payments .

the crisis led to the demise of many russian banks , owned by "oligarchs," which had held government debt .

symptoms of the crisis developed months before august: russian interest rates soared ; prices on the russian stock market plummeted ; and the value of the russian ruble sank .

 ( between the end of july 1998 and the end of september 1998 , the ruble lost 60% of its ( nominal ) value in terms of the dollar. ) .

in addition , foreign reserves declined sharply – between the end of july 1998 and august 1998 .

the reserves , including gold , dropped from $18.4 billion to $12.5 billion , and real gdp declined 4.9% in 1998 .

the immediate cause of the crisis was the accumulation of russian government short - term debt in the form of treasury bills ( the gkos ) and bonds ( ofzs ) , to finance burgeoning budget deficits .

as long as the russian government could service the debt , it managed to maintain large budget deficits without incurring inflation and was able to keep the ruble stable .

but beginning in 1997 and into 1998 , a number of forces came into play that placed russia in a financially vulnerable position: world prices for oil and other commodities , on which russia depends for much of its foreign currency earnings , plummeted , putting downward pressure on foreign currency reserves and making it more difficult to service the debt and defend the ruble .

the asian financial crisis , which occurred at the same time , made investors much more wary of holding risky short - term securities such as gkos .

foreign economic shocks that hit a financially vulnerable russia largely explain the suddenness of the 1998 financial crisis .

but russia became vulnerable because of more fundamental problems associated with its economic policy and economic structure .

these included the failure to institute tax reform , property rights , and bankruptcy laws and procedures .

despite the setbacks , russia made some strides toward economic reform during this period .

it jettisoned the centrally planned economic system and introduced market prices for most goods and services , it made the russian ruble convertible for trade transactions , and the economy was opened to foreign trade and investment .

the downturn in the russian economy was likely , given its transition from an economy that was 100% controlled by the state at the direction of ubiquitous communist party officials .

at the same time , the downturn was exacerbated by bad policies .

the turmoil of the economic crisis and yeltsin's poor personal health and very low level of popular support led him to relinquish the presidency to his prime minister , vladimir putin , whom yeltsin had appointed in july 1999 .

putin became acting president on december 31 , 1999 , which set him up to win election as president in his own right in march 2000 .

beginning in 1999 and through mid - 2008 , russia's economic fortunes reversed on many accounts .

the radical improvement was arguably a factor in the wide popularity that putin enjoyed during his two terms as president.. at the same time , improved economic conditions brought a significant degree of economic stability to russia .

however , russia's good fortune came to an end when the global financial crisis and economic downturn hit beginning in late 2008 .

russia began to recover from the recession in late 2009 and into 2010 , albeit slowly .

the economic growth that russia experienced from 1999 to 2008 was largely driven by favorable trends in the russia's international economic conditions — depreciation of the ruble and high oil prices .

but by definition , such factors are ephemeral .

when putin took the reins of authority in 1999-2000 , first as acting president , then in march 2000 as president , his task was to avoid the economic chaos that had plagued russia earlier and to put russia on track toward long - term economic growth .

to do so required the putin leadership to take advantage of the window of opportunity of the post - 1998 crisis economic surge and undertake some major economic reforms , which it did at least during putin's first presidential term ( 2000-2004 ) .

however , the economic reform effort lagged , and in some cases slid back during putin's second term ( 2004-2008 ) .

the financial crisis and economic downturn exposed structural weaknesses in the russian economy .

president medvedev has cited the weaknesses and the need for the reform .

russia possesses the world's eighth largest reserves of oil and is the world's second largest oil exporter ( next to saudi arabia ) .

it also possesses the world's largest natural gas reserves and is the largest exporter of natural gas .

in addition , russia has the second largest coal reserves .

these natural resources , particularly oil , have been a major driving force of the russian economy for a long time and a significant determinant of russia's economic health .

therefore , the role of oil requires special attention in a discussion of russia's economic conditions .

the levels of russian oil production have varied over the years and have roughly mirrored overall conditions of the russian economy and global demand .

the graph in figure 2 above indicates that from 1989 to 1996 , the volume of oil production decreased appreciably , from 11.1 million barrels / day ( mbd ) to 6.1 mbd or about 45% .

this period is contemporaneous with the deep slide in russian economic growth shortly before and immediately after the collapse of the soviet union .

the decline was caused by a dramatic drop in world demand for oil , a decrease in world oil prices , the depletion of exploited russian oil fields , and the lack of investment in discovering new ones .

production began to grow in 1997 , at first gradually , then more rapidly reaching 9.8 mbd in 2008 , still below the 1989 level .

oil production has continued to increase but at a decelerating rate , with possible implications for the future .

among the factors which contributed to the deceleration of oil production was the yukos case which led russian oil companies to reduce investment in upstream activities .

also , the heavy taxation of oil revenues is another contributing factor .

most oil - sector investment in russia is aimed at increasing current production rather than developing new fields ; therefore , any slowdown in the growth of capital spending is soon reflected in slower growth of production and exports .

russia will be not be able to sustain oil production over the long term if the investment in the sector is not increased .

while oil production activities represent a small direct part of russian gdp , the income derived from oil production has contributed significantly through the multiplier effect to overall gdp growth .

according to the imf , the russian federal government budget enjoyed a fiscal surplus equivalent to 4.6% of gdp in 2007 ; however , if oil - related revenues are excluded , the budget would have been in a deficit equivalent to 4.7% of gdp .

of course , the imf calculation assumes that the russian government would have maintained the level of expenditures .

this analysis suggests that russia is becoming more reliant on world oil prices increasing or at least remaining high .

the significance of oil and other natural resources to the russian economy is perhaps no more evident than in russian foreign trade .

even during the soviet period , oil and other natural resources were by far the primary source of hard currency revenues .

they have maintained and , at times increased , their importance in post - soviet era russian foreign trade .

in 2008 , oil , natural gas , and other fuels accounted for 68.6% of russian exports .

if metals are included , the share of raw materials was 80.3% in 2008 .

exports of machinery and equipment accounted for only 4.9% of russian exports .

russia's increasing reliance on exports oil and other energy resources and raw materials has made russian trade vulnerable to the volatility of international commodity prices .

while the volume of russian energy production and net exports ( exports minus imports ) have increased significantly since the mid - 1990s , the rate of increase has reached a plateau , suggesting that the growth , and perhaps even the maintenance , of surplus of oil - dependent revenues will depend on world oil prices growing or at least remaining high .

in 2005 , the volume of net oil exports reached 6.8 mbd and remained at that level in 2006 .

the volume of net exports rose to 7.1 mbd in 2007 and declined slightly to 6.9 mbd in 2008 nevertheless , the overall ( current account ) russian trade surplus continued to expand in u.s. dollar terms , as the increase in oil prices offset both the weak export performance and the rise in imports .

the trade surplus reached a record of $102 billion in 2007 , up from the previous record of $94 billion in 2006 .

however , world oil prices have plummeted ( as noted in figure 3 ) .

after having peaked at $134.37 per barrel in mid - july 2008 , the price urals - 32 declined to $34.20 per barrel on january 2 , 2009 , a 75% decline .

the price has risen since that time to over $70 / barrel in 2010 .

the russian government to the crisis with various measures to prop up the stock market and the banks .

the packages , valued at around $180 billion , are proportionally larger in terms of gdp than the u.s. package that congress approved in september 2008 .

in mid - september 2008 , the government made available $44 billion in funds to russia's three largest state - owned banks to boost lending and another $16 billion to the next 25 largest banks .

it also lowered taxes on oil exports to reduce costs to oil companies and made available $20 billion for the government to purchase stocks on the stock market in late september , the government announced that an additional $50 billion would be available to banks and russian companies to pay off foreign debts coming due by the end of the year .

on october 7 , 2008 , the government announced another package of $36.4 billion in credits to banks .

in 2009 , the government changed strategies by focusing on macroeconomic measures rather than measures to assist specific industries or firms .

for example , the government reduced the corporate tax rate from 24% to 20% and the tax rate on small companies to try to stimulate investment .

the government expects to rein in expenditures as it anticipates lower revenues but still incurred a budget deficit in 2009 — its first budget deficit in 10 years , which the government financed at least from accumulated reserves .

russia began to show signs of recovery during the second half of 2009 , and this trend is expected to continue into 2010 .

among other things , russia is benefitting from a resurgence in oil prices and world demand .

the world bank projects that russia's gdp will increase 5.0-5.5% in 2010 but will increase only 3.5% in 2011 .

while russia may have survived the most recent crisis , most experts have concluded that for russia to achieve sustainable , good economic growth in the longer - term , it must address structural problems that restrict growth and development .

for example , russia remains highly dependent on oil and natural gas exports as a source of income .

if world oil prices continue to be depressed , the russian economy would likely experience slow growth , if any .

many economists have argued that , in the long run , for russia to achieve sustainable growth , it must reduce its dependence on exports of oil , natural gas , and other commodities and diversify into more stable production .

until the economic crisis hit in late 2008 , russia had shown signs of some diversification .

russian fixed capital investment increased 12.3% on average per year 1999-2008 .

in 2007 alone , it increased 21.1% , the highest in recent russian history , but declined to a still robust 10.0% in 2008 .

official russian economic data show that investment is spread throughout the economy .

about 14% of the fixed investments ( in 2007 ) were in the energy sector , 15% were in manufacturing , 22% were in transportation and communication , and 17% were in real estate , renting , and business activities .

growth in fixed investment indicates confidence in the future as firms replenish or add to production capacity .

however , the eiu estimates that gross fixed investment will decline by 16% in 2009 and increase only modestly , about 3% , in 2010 .

the oecd indicates that despite the surge , russia still lags far behind other emerging economies in terms of capital investment .

the oecd calculated that from 2000-2005 , russia's average capital investment as a percent of gdp was around 18% , while that of china was close to 40% , south korea's was 30% , and the czech republic's was 27% .

these data would indicate that russia still has much room to catch up with similar economies .

one study has concluded much of the economic growth prior to the current downturn could be attributed to russia employing increasing amounts of unused production capacity inherited from the soviet period. , but this capacity was being used up or getting out of date and will have to be replaced if russia is to achieve sustainable economic growth .

the same study concluded that the russian labor force is shrinking due to low birth rates and low average life - spans which will impede increases in labor productivity and overall growth .

the increase in state control over the economy has also coincided with a sharp decline in the pace of economic restructuring and reforms that occurred during putin's first term .

one indicator of the decline in economic reforms is the measure of the business environment in russia .

each year the world bank evaluates the ease of doing business in 181 countries by examining a range of criteria , such as ease of starting a business , closing a business , employing workers and , protecting workers .

in april 2006 , russia ranked 96 th .

in april 2008 , it ranked 106 th , although it had improved from 112 th during the previous year .

in april 2009 , russia had slipped to 120 th .

russia has ranked behind such former soviet republics as azerbaijan ( 33rd ) , armenia ( 44 th ) , georgia ( 15 th ) , and kazakhstan ( 70 th ) .

singapore was ranked first and the united states was ranked third .

the congo democratic republic was ranked 181 st .

another indicator is russia's economic growth compared to those of other former soviet states .

in 2008 , russia's real gdp increased 5.6% , and it was only 8 th among the 15 former soviet states .

however , it is highly likely that russia's continued dependence on oil and the world price of oil will be a dominant factor in russia's economic prospects for foreseeable future .

this is a double - edged sword for russia .

on the one hand , russia has benefitted from record - high prices .

on the other , its oil production capacity is limited and showing signs of strain .

russia's economic prospects have direct and indirect implications for the united states .

one way to measure the direct implications is by examining the status of u.s. - russian economic ties .

u.s. - russian trade and investment flows have increased in the post - cold war period reflecting the changed u.s. - russian relationship .

many experts have suggested that the relationship could expand even further .

u.s. imports from russia have increased substantially , rising from $0.5 billion in 1992 to a peak of $26.8 billion in 2008 .

the large increase in u.s. imports reflects not so much an increase in the volume of trade but the rise in world prices of raw materials , particularly oil , that comprise the bulk of those imports .

u.s. exports have increased from $2.1 billion in 1992 peaking at $9.3 billion in 2008 .

u.s. exports to and imports from russia declined in 2009 as a result of the global economic downturn .

major u.s. exports to russia consist of machinery , vehicles , and meat ( mostly chicken ) .

despite the increase in bilateral trade , the united states and russia still account for small shares of each others' trade .

russia was the 32 nd largest export market and 20 th largest source of imports for the united states in 2009 .

the united states the third largest source of imports and 9 th largest export market for russia in 2009 .

according to russian government data , by the end of 2008 , the united states accounted for 3.3% of total accumulated foreign direct and portfolio investments in russia and was the eighth largest source of foreign investment .

however , the first three countries were cyprus ( 21.5% ) , the netherlands ( 17.5% ) , and luxembourg ( 13.0% ) , suggesting that at least 50% of the investments night have been repatriated russian funds .

russia and the united states have never been major economic partners , and it unlikely that the significance of bilateral trade will increase much in the near term .

however , in some areas , such as agriculture , russia has become an important market for u.s. exports .

russia is the largest foreign market for u.s. poultry .

furthermore , u.s. exports to russia of energy exploration equipment and technology , as well as industrial and agricultural equipment , have increased as the dollar has declined in value .

russian demand for these products will likely grow as old equipment and technology need to be replaced and modernized .

russia's significance as a supplier of u.s. imports will also likely remain small given the lack of international competitiveness of russian production outside of oil , gas , and other natural resources .

u.s. - russian investment relations could grow tighter if russia's business climate improves ; however , u.s. business concerns about the russian government's seemingly capricious intervention in energy and other sectors could dampen the enthusiasm of all but adventuresome investors .

the greater importance of russia's economic policies and prospects to the united states lie in their indirect effect on the overall economic and political environment in which the united states and russia operate .

from this perspective , russia's continuing economic stability and growth can be considered positive for the united states .

because financial markets are interrelated , chaos in even some of the smaller economies can cause uncertainty throughout the rest of the world .

such was the case during russia's financial meltdown in 1998 and more recently with the 2008-2009 crisis .

promotion of economic stability in russia has been a basis for u.s. support for russia's membership in international economic organizations , including the imf , the world bank , and the wto .

as a major oil producer and exporter , russia influences world oil prices that affect u.s. consumers .

the impact of russian economic policies and prospects also plays a role in u.s. national security interests .

for example , russia is a major supplier of natural gas to many u.s. european allies .

in 2006 , russia accounted for 20% of france's , 25% of italy's , and 36% of germany's consumption of natural gas , making these allies possibly vulnerable to political pressure .

on several occasions , most recently on january 1 , 2009 , russia has temporarily shut - off gas supplies to ukraine over a price dispute , and in so doing cut supplies to europe .

although supplies were resumed two weeks later , the disruptions have affected european views of russia as a reliable supplier of gas .

russia is also a primary supplier of natural gas to other former soviet republics , providing it with potential political leverage .

the united states has been promoting the construction of pipelines that by - pass russia , thus decreasing moscow's monopoly control of caspian and central asian energy flows .

