the brownfields tax incentive in section 198 of the internal revenue code expires on december 31 , 2007 .

it was first enacted in the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-34 ) , and has been extended four times , most recently in 2006 .

the provision is intended as a stimulus to the development of brownfields by allowing developers to recoup some of their cleanup costs .

there is now more information available to the congress as it considers the future of section 198 than was available when previous extensions were enacted .

the 110 th congress may consider another short - term ( or long - term ) extension , making the tax extension permanent , or allowing it to expire .

another possibility is to repeal the recapture provision .

a brownfield is a commercial or industrial site that is abandoned or underutilized , and where redevelopment has not occurred because of the presence , or perception of the presence , of hazardous substances , and the fear of the accompanying liability for the costs of environmental cleanup .

these are not traditional superfund sites , which are the nation's worst hazardous waste locations .

generally ( though not always ) , they are not highly contaminated and therefore present lower risks to health , and cost comparatively less to clean up than superfund sites .

in a 2004 report , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) estimated that there are between 500,000 and 1 million brownfield sites , though how many would require cleanup to make them safe for reuse is unknown .

based on information from epa's brownfield assistance programs , 70% of them ( 350,000 — 700,000 ) might require some degree of cleanup expenditure .

using rough estimates , epa also calculated that total expenditures at state sites , excluding those on the superfund national priorities list , by both public and private entities have been about $1 billion annually in recent years .

during this same period cleanup has been accomplished at about 5,000 state and private party sites per year .

at this rate , 150,000 sites would be cleaned up , at a cost of $30 billion over the next 30 years , which was the time horizon of the epa report .

to help address this problem , congress enacted epa's brownfields program of grants and technical assistance , and also relaxed certain superfund liability provisions , established a "brightfields" demonstration program ( for brownfield sites redeveloped using solar energy technologies ) , authorized tax - exempt facility bonds for qualified green building and sustainable design projects , and provided two brownfield tax incentives .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

this report examines the extent to which one of these , the federal section 198 tax incentive , has been used .

the section 198 brownfields tax incentive expires on december 31 , 2007 .

first enacted as part of the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-34 ) , the incentive allows a taxpayer to fully deduct the costs of environmental cleanups in the year the costs were incurred ( called "expensing" ) , rather than spreading the costs over a period of years ( "capitalizing" ) .

its purpose is to encourage developers to rehabilitate sites where environmental contamination stands in the way of bringing unproductive properties back into use .

 ( the provision has no direct application for public sector entities , such as municipalities , that develop brownfields and do not pay income taxes. ) .

to take advantage of the brownfields tax incentive , the developer of a property has to obtain a statement from the state environmental agency that the parcel is a "qualified contaminated site" as defined in the law .

a significant factor concerning the tax incentive is that it is subject to "recapture. .

this means that the gain realized from the value of the property when it is later sold must be taxed as ordinary income ( rather than at the generally lower capital gains rate ) to the extent of the expensing allowance previously claimed .

this dilutes the benefit of the tax break and has the effect of simply postponing a certain amount of the developer's tax liability until the property is resold .

as a stimulus to development , the overall value of the brownfields tax break is dependent on a number of factors , including the total cost of the project , the cost of cleanup , how long the developer intends to hold the property before selling it , and the developer's individual tax situation .

repeal of the recapture provision has been favored by the real estate roundtable and its partner associations representing various aspects of the real estate industry ( architects , building owners and managers , mortgage bankers general contractors , and others ) .

federal tax law generally requires that the cost of improvements to a property must be deducted over a period of years , whereas other expenses , such as repairs , may be deducted in the same year they are incurred .

being able to deduct the costs in the year when they are incurred is a financial benefit to the taxpayer .

a 1994 ruling by the internal revenue service ( irs ) held that the costs of cleaning up contaminated land and groundwater are deductible in the current year , but only for the person who contaminated the land .

in addition , the cleanup would have to be done without any anticipation of putting the land to a new use .

further , any monitoring equipment with a useful life beyond the year it was acquired would have to be capitalized .

on the other hand , a person who acquired previously contaminated land , such as a brownfield site , would have to capitalize the costs of cleanup , spreading them out over a number of years .

some have noted that this is a somewhat perverse situation that works against one who would want to buy and clean up a contaminated property , and put it to use .

cleanup costs are a major barrier to redevelopment of contaminated land .

the taxpayer relief act of 1997 , which included the brownfields tax incentive , thus had the effect of expanding benefits and allowing developers who had not caused the contamination to deduct cleanup costs from their taxable income in the current year , rather than having to capitalize them .

as initially enacted , the brownfields tax incentive was available only to a property that was located in a "targeted area. .

the law defined a targeted area as a census tract with greater than 20% poverty , an adjacent commercial or industrial census tract , an empowerment zone or enterprise community , or one of the 76 brownfields to which epa had awarded a brownfield grant at that time .

congress repealed the targeted area geographic restrictions and extended the tax break to all brownfields ( "qualified contaminated sites" ) in the consolidated appropriations act , 2001 ( p.l .

106-170 ) .

since fy2003 , the administration's budget proposals have proposed making the tax incentive permanent .

it has been in effect continuously since its enactment in 1997 and has been extended four times , most recently in the tax relief and health care act of 2006 , p.l .

109-432 ( division a , title i , § 109 ) .

this extension through 2007 , which was enacted on december 20 , 2006 , was made retroactive to december 31 , 2005 , when the previous extension expired .

epa supports the permanent extension , as does the real estate roundtable and its partners noted above .

this 2006 enactment also broadened the definition of hazardous substances to include petroleum products ( including crude oil , crude oil condensates , and natural gasoline ) for purposes of the tax incentive ( but not for any other part of the superfund act ) .

until recently , there was no official information available at the federal level on the extent of use of the § 198 provision .

it did not have its own separate line on either individual or corporate federal income tax forms ( which is why crs was first asked to perform the state survey in 2003 ) .

in 2004 the irs introduced a new form , schedule m - 3 , which provides information , for the first time , on the use of the section 198 brownfields tax incentive .

because of this discrepancy between expectations and the apparent results , crs asked the state agency representatives who responded to the survey for their opinions as to why so few brownfield developers were taking advantage of the tax incentive .

crs also contacted four private developers and the editor of a brownfields trade publication to solicit their viewpoints on the subject , as well .

a summary of their comments follows .

land development is a large and diverse industry .

there is only a very limited number of developers who specialize in brownfields .

the size of brownfield projects ranges from one acre to about a thousand acres ; 25 to 50 acres is typical .

they take longer to complete — probably double the time of non - brownfield development — because environmental cleanup can be unpredictable .

several respondents felt that the incentive doesn't offer that much financial benefit , especially when one considers the recapture provision , and particularly if the property is sold in the short term .

it is not a driving factor that will tip the decision toward cleanup .

also , a number of states offer tax breaks and other incentives that are more generous than the federal incentive , which by comparison may not seem worth the effort .

on the other hand , one developer observed that it was necessary to have the right circumstances to successfully use the section 198 incentive .

depending on the project , and the tax status of the different investors , he indicated it might be more advantageous to employ other tax strategies .

another agreed that the benefit was meaningful , especially when used at a larger site .

it is another way to make a deal incrementally successful .

the provision has been extended only for periods of a year or two at a time , and twice the extensions were partially retroactive , since it had expired before the extension was passed .

this on - again , off - again history creates uncertainty regarding its future availability , and makes it difficult for developers to plan , particularly for large - scale , multi - year projects .

even smaller projects can encounter unforseen delays , pushing them past the provision's end date , and causing forfeiture of anticipated benefits .

for an economically marginal project , this uncertainty could be enough to decide against going forward .

one state official mentioned that at times he was unsure of the incentive's status , which made him reluctant to recommend it .

lack of information about the incentive's availability was also blamed for the level of use .

sometimes this was accompanied by criticism of epa for insufficient leadership , although it was also acknowledged that the agency had improved in recent years .

some states also recognized their own shortcomings in promoting the incentive .

a few mentioned that the new eligibility of petroleum - contaminated sites might increase its use .

one developer observed that publicity , or an outreach program aimed at accountants might be what was needed .

another commented that even after 10 years , the provision remained somewhat "esoteric," and even tax advisors were not all aware of it .

a corollary of the previous point is that it is possible that many developers , especially smaller ones , are unaware of both the 1994 irs ruling and the existence of the section 198 brownfields tax incentive .

these persons would simply claim their environmental cleanup costs on their tax returns in the same way they claimed other development costs .

the irs authority on section 198 said that she found this plausible , and while there is no direct information on how much it is used , an indirect indicator is that she has received no inquiries from irs auditors about taxpayers who use the incentive .

one state thought it was possible that developers used the agency's "milestone letters" ( certifying that the developer has reached a certain point in the cleanup process ) for other purposes , including supporting their income tax returns .

a few states mentioned that llcs ( limited liability companies ) are sometimes created for brownfield projects .

in the first few years , when the environmental cleanup would be carried out , they would have no income tax , so the incentive would be useless .

in the 110 th congress , one bill has been introduced that addresses section 198 .

h.r .

1753 makes the brownfields tax incentive permanent and repeals the recapture provision .

introduced by representatives jerry weller and xavier becerra on march 29 , 2007 , the bill was referred to the ways and means committee .

there has been no further action .

crs conducted the interviews before learning of the existence of schedule m - 3 .

none of the interviewees knew of the form either , judging by the conversations .

the early information from the new irs form shows that the brownfields tax incentive is indeed being used by large and midsize businesses , and somewhat more than the survey indicated .

the number of corporations reporting its use are likely to rise from 110 as other corporations and partnerships begin filing the m - 3 .

there will also continue to be an unknown number of smaller businesses with total assets of less than $10 million that will take advantage of section 198 .

the survey showed an average of about 44 brownfield certifications per year in 2003-2007 , and the irs form revealed that 110 corporations reported deductions for cleanup costs of $295 million in 2004 , an average of $2.68 million per company .

one would expect , but there is no way to know , that the companies worked on more than one site each .

the schedule m - 3 data confirm the survey findings that the provision is not used as much as was expected when section 198 first became law .

nevertheless , these first results show that $295 million was reported as a deduction item on schedule m - 3 for tax purposes by the private sector for cleaning up brownfields in 2004 , and that was the goal of the provision: to provide an incentive to bring contaminated lands back into productive use .

the $295 million figure is from voluntary reporting by only a portion of the pertinent taxpayer universe , and it is very likely to increase now that the use of schedule m - 3 is mandatory for all corporations and partnerships .

there is probably no way to measure whether the tax incentive has proven to be the reason why any certain number of brownfields have been cleaned up .

nor are we likely to know if repeal of the recapture provision would lead to more cleanups at economically marginal sites .

the best observation may be what the interviewed developers said: that it can be a useful tool in some circumstances in putting a brownfield remediation / land development deal together .

in that sense , brownfield supporters note that it has been a help in cleaning up the half million or more brownfield sites around the united states .

it should be remembered that there is a certain unknown number of cleanups being accomplished by firms with assets under $10 million .

from the survey , it does not seem that there are a great many of them , but it is also plausible that a fair number are also being done by individuals with no knowledge of irs's 1994 revenue ruling or the section 198 tax incentive , and are simply treating their cleanup costs as normal development expenses .

a factor that has sometimes affected the passage of the brownfields tax incentive is that it is one of a number of tax credits , deductions , and taxpayer benefits that have all been considered together in recent years .

this group changes from year to year .

for more information , see crs report rl32367 , certain temporary tax provisions ( " extenders " ) expired in 2007 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

 table 2 presents the results of the survey in detail .

nineteen states reported in both the 2003 and 2007 surveys that they had received no applications for certification .

many in that group said they had received inquiries but no formal applications , and some of those states added that they had made efforts to publicize the availability of the incentive through their websites and at in - person presentations at various meetings .

the 19 states that reported receiving no applications were: four states reported receiving no requests in 2003 , but did receive and approve requests in the 2003-2007 period .

these are new mexico , colorado , west virginia , and new hampshire .

two states that received requests for certification in the first survey period reported receiving none in the 2003-2007 period: georgia and kentucky .

in 2003 , seven states had 10 or more applications: wisconsin had 20 ; massachusetts , 17 ; delaware , 16 ; new york , 14 ; virginia 11 ; and michigan and pennsylvania , 10 each .

in 2007 , six states had at least 10 applications: wisconsin had 19 ; massachusetts , 16 ; rhode island , 15 ; maryland and texas , 12 each ; and pennsylvania , 10 .

in addition to their income tax returns , corporate and partnership taxpayers are required to file financial statements ( also called "balance sheets" or "books" ) which provide an overview of a business's profitability and financial condition , and permit comparisons both with the entity's financial statements of previous periods , and with other taxpayers .

ideally , a business's income tax return and its financial statement will agree with , and be consistent with each other .

for a variety of reasons , "adjustments must be made to reconcile the differences between financial accounting based books and records[,] and the presentation required for federal income tax return purposes... .

schedule m - 1 , reconciliation of income ( loss ) per books with income per return fulfilled this role for corporate tax returns of all sizes for over forty years. .

schedule m - 1 is very short , only 10 lines long .

as the national and international business environment evolved , and tax and financial issues became more complex over the last four decades , m - 1 proved less and less useful .

the major purpose of the form is to flag which returns should be examined further , and possibly audited .

but as more and more information was aggregated into m - 1's 10 lines , its strength as an analytical tool declined .

consequently , schedule m - 3 was developed for use by large and midsize businesses ( those with total assets of $10 million or more ) .

compared to the 10 items of information collected on the m - 1 , the new m - 3 collects about 300 data points on more than 75 lines .

the additional information enables the irs to more easily identify returns that may be using questionable means ( "aggressive transactions," as they are sometimes referred to ) to reduce their tax burden .

it also increases efficiency by allowing prompt identification of returns that do not require further review .

the increased transparency should have a deterrent effect , as well .

on a broader level , the new m - 3 provides a wealth of information for research and can bring to light trends that irs may wish to investigate further .

another feature of the m - 3 that irs views as particularly significant is the form's distinction between temporary and permanent differences .

it has been explained as follows: temporary ( timing ) differences occur because tax laws require the recognition of some items of income and expense in different periods than are required for book purposes .

temporary differences originate in one period and reverse or terminate in one or more subsequent periods.... by their very nature , [they] involve issues regarding the correct year for the item's inclusion in income or deduction as an expense .

from a tax administration standpoint , they concern the time value of money.... purely temporary differences are generally low risk for tax administration — and important in terms of the magnitude of the difference and the time before the temporary difference turns — because of the time value of money .

in contrast to temporary differences , permanent differences are adjustments that arise as a result of fundamental permanent differences in financial and tax accounting rules .

those differences result from transactions that will not reverse in subsequent periods.... [p]ermanent differences have the potential to substantially influence reported earnings per share computations , and , in the case of public companies , stock prices .

accordingly , permanent differences of a comparable size generally have a greater audit risk than temporary differences .

schedule m - 3 was phased in for tax year 2004 for firms reporting total assets greater than $10 million filing the regular form 1120 corporation income tax return .

the m - 3 is optional for firms with total assets less than $10 million .

some of these firms did report an m - 3 .

it was not used for the following return types: 1120s for s corporations , 1120-l for life insurance companies , 1120-pc for property and casualty insurance companies , 1120-f for foreign corporations , 1120-ric for regulated investment companies , 1120-reit for real estate investment trusts , and 1120-a for small firms .

those using m - 3 for 2004 were not required to complete the whole form ; certain parts were optional , but the whole m - 3 was required for 2005 ( if the taxpayer's total assets exceeded $10 million ) .

for three of the other form 1120 return types ( 1120s , 1120-l , and 1120-pc ) , 2005 was the phase - in year , and 2006 was the full compliance year .

form 1120-f had phase - in in 2007 , and the whole form will be required for 2008 .

tax year 2005 information will be available in february 2008 .

there were 5,557,965 corporate taxpayers for 2004 , of whom 35,929 filed the accompanying schedule m - 3 .

partnerships ( which use form 1065 ) were required to use schedule m - 3 beginning with tax year 2006 ( phase - in ) .

that information will be available in february 2009 .

for tax year 2004 , there were 2,546,877 partnership filers .

schedule m - 1 is still being used by corporations with total assets under $10 million .

it contains no information on the section 198 brownfields tax incentive .

