concerns about doe's ci program came to a boil in 1999 , a year in which congress became more fully aware of doe's espionage vulnerabilities .

in march of that year , allegations surfaced that a scientist employed by the los alamos national security laboratory had failed to notify doe officials of his contacts officials of the people's republic of china ( prc ) .

it also was alleged that the scientist , a taiwanese - born american named wen ho lee , had failed to properly safeguard classified material and had refused to cooperate with authorities with regard to certain security matters .

lee was fired from his research position at los alamos national laboratory after allegedly failing a polygraph examination .

he later pleaded guilty to one felony count of unlawful retention of national defense information .

in may 1999 , a bipartisan house select commission charged that the prc had stolen design information on the united states' most advanced thermonuclear weapons and was using the information to speed the building of its next generation of thermonuclear weapons .

the commission concluded that the prc had been penetrating u.s. national weapons laboratories for years , and continued to do so .

in june 1999 , the president's foreign intelligence advisory board ( pfiab ) issued an extraordinarily harsh assessment of doe's security practices .

the board criticized doe for the "worst" security record on secrecy that members said they had ever encountered .

it also reported that its examination had revealed a department in denial over its security and counterintelligence vulnerabilities and failures , and blamed doe's decades - long record of security failures on poor organization and a failure of accountability .

the board concluded that with regard to security matters , doe was dysfunctional and incapable of reform .

despite its harsh criticism , the pfiab dismissed assertions that doe had suffered wholesale losses of nuclear weapons technology as a result of espionage .

the board , concurred , however , with an earlier u.s. intelligence community assessment that had concluded the prc had stolen classified u.s. nuclear weapons information that probably enabled it to accelerate its development of nuclear weapons .

to fix doe's security problems , the pfiab recommended that policymakers consider two options .

the first option called for the creation of a semi - autonomous agency within doe that would be strictly segregated from the rest of the department , be more mission focused and bureaucratically streamlined , and that would be devoted principally to nuclear weapons and national security matters .

the board cited the national security agency and defense advanced research projects agency , both elements of the defense department , as models of this approach .

a second option called for the creation of a new agency that would be entirely independent of doe and would be headed by an administrator who would report directly to the president .

the national aeronautics and space administration and the national science foundation were cited as models of this approach .

the 111 th congress may deem the current approach to be the appropriate one , which would have the effect of reestablishing nnsa's ci office in 2010 and retaining doe's fi / ci program consolidation .

if organizational changes are sought , policymakers might consider several questions .

first , should the 2010 sunset provision currently in law be retained and nnsa's ci office be reestablished in 2010 ? .

second , should doe's fi / ci consolidated program be retained , or should congress direct doe to reestablish independent fi and ci offices within doe ? .

within the context of these two overarching questions , the range of possible options include ( 1 ) eliminate the 2010 sunset provision contained in p.l .

109 - 364 and not reestablish nnsa's ci office in 2010 ; retain doe's fi / ci consolidated program ; ( 2 ) maintain the 2010 sunset provision and reestablish nnsa's ci office , but as an office independent of doe , dropping the previously existing bifurcated ci structure ; retain doe's fi / ci consolidated program ; ( 3 ) eliminate both the 2010 sunset provision and doe's fi / ci consolidated program , reestablishing independent fi and ci offices within doe ; ( 4 ) maintain the 2010 sunset provision and reestablish nnsa's ci office , but consolidate within that office doe's ci directorate ; retain doe's fi / ci consolidated program ; ( 5 ) maintain the 2010 sunset provision and reestablish nnsa's ci on a bifurcated basis under which nnsa and doe would share certain ci resources ; eliminate doe's fi / ci consolidated program and reestablish independent fi and ci offices within doe ; and ( 6 ) place the fbi in charge of doe ci .

the congress also could consider adopting one or more of several oversight alternatives .

the range of alternatives includes ( 1 ) instituting classified ci briefings ; ( 2 ) commissioning a formal assessment of the benefits derived from doe's fi / ci consolidation ; ( 3 ) ensuring doe compliance with current law ; and ( 4 ) codifying portions of pdd - 61 .

congress could require that doe brief the appropriate congressional committee or committees on the types of ci methods being used , especially on the department's most significant pending ci cases .

an advantage of such an approach would be that it could provide congress with significant new insight into doe's overall ci efforts .

such briefings could also lead to a better understanding of the strategic interests of certain foreign powers and could provide insights into how effectively doe is interacting and cooperating with the intelligence community at large .

a disadvantage of this alternative would be that such briefings could be considerably time - consuming ; the number of such cases can be numerous , detailed , and complicated .

such cases also are invariably quite sensitive .

doe might try to restrict such briefings to committee leadership .

as a result , committee leadership could find themselves assuming a significant oversight responsibility .

a second approach would be for congress to commission an assessment of any benefits that have been derived from the doe fi / ci consolidation .

such an assessment could enable congress to better evaluate whether the consolidation has indeed improved communication between the two disciplines , as doe has suggested .

as part of such an assessment , the department's senior intelligence officer could be requested to demonstrate with concrete examples how the department's fi / ci consolidated program has led to certain program synergies which could not have otherwise been achieved through greater management resourcefulness .

other than the cost that may be associated with conducting such an assessment , there is no apparent disadvantage to such approach .

another approach congress could pursue is to ensure that doe complied with the law when it consolidated the office of intelligence and counterintelligence under the new office of intelligence and counterintelligence .

some have questioned whether the consolidation is consistent with current law , suggesting that consolidation amounted to a "transfer of function" from the office of counterintelligence or the office of intelligence to a new layer of bureaucracy within the office of intelligence and counterintelligence .

under this approach , congress could codify certain pdd - 61 provisions .

two such provisions could be viewed as being particularly relevant .

the first requires that doe's laboratory contracts contain specific ci goals , objectives , and performance standards .

the second provision stipulates that senior laboratory ci personnel be granted direct access to laboratory directors .

codifying these provisions would ensure that they are legally binding and not subject to termination by administration fiat .

a possible disadvantage of such a approach is that it could limit certain executive branch flexibility .

the 1998 pdd - 61 formalized what until then had been a more informal fbi role in supporting doe's ci program .

the directive established an independent office of counterintelligence and directed that the fbi director select and place in charge of the office a senior fbi representative .

a more recent example of the fbi's formal role is the joint fbi - doe "agents - in - the labs" ( ail ) program .

the ail program is designed to support the fbi counterintelligence division's strategic priorities , which include: 1 .

preventing or neutralizing the foreign acquisition of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) technology or equipment ; 2 .

preventing the penetration of the intelligence community , u.s. government , or contractors ; 3 .

preventing the compromise of u.s. critical national assets ; and 4 .

conducting aggressive ci operations against most significant threat nations .

under this program , the fbi has 16 special agents at 12 doe locations working with doe ci professionals to execute the ci mission .

despite its expanded role , the fbi has more recently lost some of its authority over the program .

congress eliminated the fbi director's authority to select a director for doe's ci program , and the individual serving in that role is no longer required to be a senior fbi executive .

under current law , the secretary of energy now exercises the selection authority .

 ( see table a - 1 below ) .

whether the congressional action eliminating the fbi's role in the selection process will result in the diminishment of the fbi's role in doe's ci program continues to be the debated .

whether fbi assumes a diminished role turns in part on whether doe develops the capability to recruit , train , and retain its own ci professionals and thus reduce its historical reliance on the fbi .

if it is unable to do so , fbi's potentially diminishing role could be viewed in a less positive light .

