in response to an increasing number of uninsured individuals , the declining number of employers offering insurance to their employees , and the absence of federal action , states and localities have experimented with certain measures to address the problems of health care financing and access .

one approach has been to enact fair share laws , also referred to as "pay or play" statutes , which generally require employers to choose between paying a certain amount for health expenditures or coverage for their employees , or contributing to the state or locality to offset the cost of medical expenses for their uninsured residents .

recently , questions have been raised as to whether the employee retirement income security act's ( erisa's ) express preemption provision , section 514 , prevents the application of fair share laws .

there have been legal challenges to fair share laws enacted in maryland , san francisco , and suffolk county , new york , with courts reaching varying conclusions .

in addition , the state of massachusetts , which has received a great deal of attention for enacting comprehensive health care reform , maintains a fair share requirement as part of its health care reform package .

this report provides an overview of erisa preemption , discusses legal challenges that have been brought against fair share laws , and discusses the fair share requirements of the massachusetts health care reform act .

erisa provides a comprehensive federal scheme for the regulation of employee pension plans , and a somewhat less detailed scheme for regulating welfare benefit plans , offered by private employers .

an "employee welfare benefit plan" is defined , in relevant part , as any plan , fund , or program ... established or maintained by an employer ... for the purpose of providing for its participants or their beneficiaries , medical , surgical , or hospital care or benefits , or benefits in the event of sickness , accident , disability , death or unemployment .. .

although erisa does not require an employer to offer pension or welfare benefits , it does mandate compliance with its provisions if such benefits are offered .

congress enacted erisa to eliminate the conflicting and inconsistent regulation of pension and employee welfare benefit plans by state laws .

accordingly , section 514 ( a ) of erisa expressly preempts "any and all state laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan ..." the u.s. supreme court has interpreted this language as applying to any state law that "has a connection with or reference to such a plan. .

the court has explained that to determine whether a state law has a connection with an erisa plan , a court must consider the objectives of erisa as a guide to the scope of the statute that congress understood would survive , as well as the nature of the effect of the state law on erisa plans .

a state law has a reference to an erisa plan if it acts "immediately and exclusively" on erisa plans or if the existence of such a plan is essential to the law's operations .

a state law that "relates to" an erisa plan may avoid preemption if it regulates insurance within the meaning of erisa's "saving clause. .

section 514 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) "saves" from preemption "any law of any state which regulates insurance , banking , or securities. .

however , an additional clause serves as an exception to erisa's saving clause .

section 514 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) , erisa's "deemer clause," indicates that a state law that "purport[s] to regulate insurance" cannot deem an employee benefit plan to be an insurance company for purposes of regulation .

until 1995 , the court's decisions on erisa preemption suggested generally that the application of section 514 ( a ) was limitless .

however , with its decision in new york state conference of blue cross & blue shield plans v. travelers ins .

co. , the court began to show a greater willingness to uphold various state laws .

in travelers , several commercial insurers challenged a state law that required them , but not blue cross and blue shield , to pay surcharges on hospital services .

the commercial insurers argued that the law was preempted by erisa because it "relate[d] to" employer - sponsored health insurance plans .

in addressing the application of erisa's preemption clause , the court first noted that there is a "presumption that congress does not intend to supplant state law. .

the court then considered whether congress intended to preempt state law by looking to "the structure and purpose" of erisa .

the court concluded that "nothing in the language of the act or the context of its passage indicates that congress chose to displace general health care regulation , which historically has been a matter of local concern. .

although the court continued to uphold several other state laws following travelers , it nevertheless concluded in 2001 that a washington state law was preempted by erisa despite the fact that it gave plans an option for avoiding its requirements .

the washington law at issue in egelhoff v. egelhoff provided that the designation of a spouse as the beneficiary of a nonprobate asset would be revoked automatically upon divorce .

under the law , plan administrators were required to alter the terms of a plan to indicate that the plan would not follow the law .

it was argued that the law not only avoided the regulation of plan administration , but also did not apply so long as the plan documents expressly provided otherwise .

the court determined that the washington law had an impermissible connection with erisa plans because it interfered with nationally uniform plan administration .

the court explained that one of the principal goals of erisa is to enable employers to establish a uniform administrative scheme that provides standard procedures for the processing of claims and disbursement of benefits .

the court maintained that uniformity is impossible if plans are subject to different legal obligations in different states .

moreover , the court declined to find the law saved from preemption because of its "opt out" option: it is not enough for plan administrators to opt out of this particular statute .

instead , they must maintain a familiarity with the laws of all 50 states so that they can update their plans as necessary to satisfy the opt - out requirements of other , similar statutes .. .

this 'tailoring of plans and employer conduct to the peculiarities of the law of each jurisdiction' is exactly the burden erisa seeks to eliminate .

the fair share laws discussed in this report present similar questions about preemption and the impact of a plan or plan sponsor's ability to choose from various compliance options .

courts have evaluated fair share laws enacted in maryland , suffolk county , new york , and san francisco , with varying results .

in 2006 , massachusetts enacted "an act providing access to affordable , quality , accountable health care," considered to be the most comprehensive health care reform legislation ever enacted by a state .

the act has received a great deal of attention , in part due to the fact that it is the first state law to require residents to obtain and maintain health care coverage or be subject to adverse tax consequences .

the act establishes a "connector" through which individuals and small groups may obtain health coverage , and creates numerous requirements for private insurers as well as employers .

one of the employer requirements is a fair share requirement .

there has been speculation over whether this requirement of the massachusetts act could be preempted by erisa .

under the act , employers with more than 11 full - time equivalent employees that do not make a "fair and reasonable" contribution to a group health plan for their employees' health coverage must pay a "fair - share contribution" into a state trust fund in order to help cover costs of health care provided to uninsured massachusetts residents .

regulations set forth two alternative tests to determine whether an employer has made a fair and reasonable contribution .

under the "primary test," an employer has made a fair and reasonable contribution if 25% or more of its employees who are employed at massachusetts locations are enrolled in the employer's health plan .

under the "secondary test," an employer who fails the primary test , but offers to pay at least 33% of the cost of premiums of a group health plan offered to full - time employees employed over a certain time period , meets the contribution requirements .

if the employer cannot meet either of these tests , the employer must make a fair - share contribution , which is required to be calculated annually and takes into account factors such as the cost of the state - funded care used by the employees of non - contributing employers .

however , the fair - share contribution amount cannot exceed $295 per employee .

despite speculation that the massachusetts act would be subject to a preemption challenge under erisa , to date , no actions have been brought .

if the fair share provisions were to be challenged , it is likely that a reviewing court would look to the travelers case and its progeny in making its determination .

similar to those cases , a court may evaluate whether the massachusetts fair share requirements have a "connection with" erisa plans by looking to erisa's objectives ( eg , establishing uniform , nationwide regulation of employee benefit plans ) "as a guide to the scope of the state law that congress understood would survive" preemption .

a reviewing court may also look to the "nature of the law's effect on erisa plans" ( i.e. , whether the massachusetts fair share requirements mandate the structure or administration of employee benefit plans , or have more of an indirect influence on erisa plans ) .

in addition , a reviewing court could examine whether the fair share requirements of the massachusetts act have a "reference to" an employee benefit plan .

as stated by the supreme court , "where a state's law acts immediately and exclusively upon erisa plans ... or where the existence of erisa plans is essential to the law's operation ... that 'reference' will result in pre - emption. .

further , a court could also rely on or distinguish the fair share requirements of the massachusetts act from the egelhoff case .

as the court held in egelhoff , a law that regulates the structure or administration of an erisa plan will not be saved from preemption just because there is a way to opt out of its requirements .

it is also possible that a reviewing court could adopt similar reasoning used by courts in evaluating other fair share laws .

for example , as discussed above , in fielder , the fourth circuit found the maryland fair share act was preempted because it effectively forced employers to restructure their employee health plans , and as such , interfered with erisa's goal of providing uniform nationwide administration of these plans .

the fielder court opined that just because an employer had the option not to spend money on health care for their employees , this option was not a "meaningful alternative" and did not protect the law from preemption .

a court evaluating the fair share requirements of the massachusetts act could make arguments similar to those articulated in the fielder case .

like maryland's fair share law , the massachusetts act provides that employers covered by the act must either make a contribution towards employee health benefits , or contribute to a state trust fund .

and , as argued in fielder , any "reasonable employer" would choose not to pay money to a state when it can , in the alternative , reap benefits from spending money on employee health care .

some commentators have pointed out that compared to the maryland fair share act , the massachusetts act requires a relatively small amount ( i.e. , no more than $295 per employee ) to be paid to the state , as a "penalty" for not offering health coverage .

it may be argued that since the massachusetts fair share contribution amount is relatively small , it does not bind the choices of employers , as the court found in fielder .

still , despite this smaller "penalty," a court may still see the massachusetts fair share scheme as a means of coercing an employer to offer health coverage and thus , not escape erisa preemption .

in addition , it is possible to argue that the massachusetts fair share requirements may be more susceptible to preemption than the fielder and suffolk county cases .

this is because the massachusetts act requires employers to pay the fair and reasonable premium contribution amounts to a group health plan ( which is likely regulated by erisa ) , in order to avoid making a fair - share contribution to the state .

under maryland and suffolk county's fair share laws , employers had some choices as to how an employer could make these expenditures ( eg , under the maryland's fair share law , expenditures could be made towards an on - site medical clinic ) .

given that the fielder and suffolk county courts found that requiring an employer to pay these health care expenditures directly affected employers' erisa plans , it may be argued that requiring employers to contribute to a group health plan ( versus contributing money to the state ) creates an impermissible "reference to" an employee benefit plan .

alternatively , if a court were to review the massachusetts act , it could sustain the fair share requirements by applying the reasoning used by the ninth circuit in golden gate restaurant association .

as discussed above , the ninth circuit , in explaining why the ordinance had no "connection with" an erisa plan , pointed to the fact that the san francisco ordinance did not require an employer to adopt an erisa or other health plan , or provide specific benefits through such plans .

because an employer could discharge its obligations in whole or in part to an erisa plan , or in whole or in part to the city , the ordinance preserved erisa's uniform regulatory regime and was not preempted .

a similar argument could be made for the massachusetts fair share requirement , as an employer is not required to establish an erisa health plan , or provide any health benefits to its employees .

the ninth circuit also found that the ordinance does not make reference to an erisa plan because , among other things , it "does not act on erisa plans at all , let alone immediately and exclusively" and is "fully functional" in the absence of an erisa plan .

again , it may be argued that the massachusetts act does not "solely apply" to erisa plans , and that the formation of a plan is not essential for meeting the requirements of the massachusetts act .

