the bush administration described the strategy of "tailored deterrence" to define the role that nuclear weapons might play in u.s. national security policy .

yet , there has been little discussion of this concept , either in congress or in the public at large , that would allow this concept to serve as a mechanism to help determine the size and structure of the u.s. nuclear force .

this absence of discussion has also made it difficult to identify the ways in which tailored deterrence differs , if at all , from the cold war concept of strategic deterrence and how it might alter the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy .

moreover , as it completes its own nuclear posture review early in 2010 , the obama administration may further refine and revise the rationale for u.s. nuclear weapons and the concepts it uses to describe u.s. deterrence strategy and nuclear policy .

this report highlights the differences between the construct of tailored deterrence and the more general concept of strategic deterrence that guided u.s. nuclear policy during the cold war .

it then identifies a number of issues that congress might address when it reviews these differences , including the question of whether detailed and tailored attack plans are more likely to enhance deterrence or more likely to lead to the early use of nuclear weapons , and the question of whether tailored deterrence provides any guidance about the future size and structure of u.s. nuclear forces .

many national security and defense documents produced in the last few years emphasize how much the national security environment for the united states has changed since the demise of the soviet union in 1991 and the terrorist attacks in 2001 .

the report of the 2006 quadrennial review , for example , noted that the united states now faces an international security environment "characterized by uncertainty and surprise," and that it must transform its national security strategy in response to this new environment .

specifically , and of interest for this report , the defense department identified the need to shift "from 'one size fits all' deterrence to tailored deterrence for rogue powers , terrorist networks , and near - peer competitors. .

the pentagon's emphasis on the distinction between "one size fits all" deterrence and tailored deterrence was designed to evoke an understanding of just how much the nature of the threat and the number of u.s. adversaries have changed since the end of the cold war .

but , even during the cold war , the united states tailored its nuclear targeting doctrine , its nuclear weapons employment policy , and its nuclear force structure to enhance or maintain the credibility of its nuclear deterrent posture .

therefore , this shift raises questions about the ways in which "tailored deterrence" differs from classic , cold war - era strategic deterrence .

this section discusses the differences between these two concepts in an effort to clarify how tailored deterrence might alter u.s. nuclear weapons employment policy and targeting doctrine .

congress has the opportunity to review u.s. nuclear weapons programs and policies during the annual authorization and appropriations process .

each year , the administration's budget contains funding requests for programs that are designed to maintain both the warheads and the delivery vehicles that make up the u.s. nuclear arsenal .

during its debates about the funding levels for these programs as congress can , and often does , address broader discussions about the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy .

the 111 th congress may also address questions about the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy when it reviews the results of the obama administration's nuclear posture review , which is due to be completed early in 2010 .

this section reviews a number of topics that might be addressed in such a discussion .

there is no question that the bush administration changed the rhetoric about u.s. deterrent strategy and the role of nuclear weapons in that strategy substantially when it released the nuclear posture review in late 2001 .

the administration spoke often about how the united states no longer views russia as an enemy , and how the united states would now focus its nuclear deterrent on emerging threats in other nations .

the obama administration may alter this rhetoric further , placing an even greater emphasis on the need to address the risks of nuclear proliferation and the possible use of nuclear weapons by non - state actors .

but these changes in rhetoric may not have had much effect on u.s. nuclear strategy .

changes in u.s. war plans and nuclear weapons employment policy have evolved since the end of the cold war , with few sharp distinctions unique to the policies that appeared under the bush administration .

u.s. military planners began to include nations other than russia in the siop , and to consider the siop to be a "family of plans," in the early 1990s , as the united states adjusted to the post - cold war security environment .

it also began to emphasize adaptive planning and to focus on the need to deter nations armed with weapons of mass destruction during that same time period .

further , in spite of the changing rhetoric about the russian threat , russia probably still holds a unique position in the u.s. war plans .

many analysts believe it is the only contingency that can account for the u.s. plan to retain 2,200 nuclear warheads in its arsenal ; contingencies with other nations are likely to require a far smaller number of warheads .

moreover , there are similarities between tailored deterrence and cold war deterrence strategy .

for example , both are based on the precept that it is necessary to know what your adversary values and to maintain the weapons and attack plans needed to target those valued assets .

during the cold war , the united states developed a number of attack plans that were tailored to address the values , interests , and capabilities of its primary adversary , and some smaller plans to address threats from other adversaries , such as china and the warsaw pact nations .

as was noted above , ryan henry and keith payne have both noted the need for this kind of analysis in support of tailored deterrence .

further , just as u.s. war plans evolved during the cold war to accommodate changes in weapons capabilities and threat assessments , the bush administration's supporters argued that tailored deterrence would allow for similar , ongoing modifications to u.s. war plans .

the key difference in the current security environment , however , is the fact that the united states may now face a longer list of potential adversaries .

when planning its nuclear policy and force structure , the bush administration argued that the united states now faces threats from "multiple potential opponents , sources of conflict , and unprecedented challenges. .

considering both these similarities and differences , it seems , then , that the change from strategic deterrence to tailored deterrence under the bush administration was less of a change in "how to deter" then there was in "whom to deter. .

there is , however , one element of strategic deterrence missing from the bush administration's description of tailored deterrence .

a deterrent relationship , where one nation seeks to stop another from pursuing actions by threatening to impose high costs if the action occurs , presumes that both sides are aware of the threats and possible responses .

this requires that the party making the deterrent threat communicate that threat to the other party , either explicitly or implicitly .

the existence of a workable attack plan does not necessarily translate into the communication of a credible deterrent threat .

in future crises , the united states may not have the time or the channels to inform a potential adversary of the types of actions that might result in a nuclear or conventional response from the united states .

further , the bush administration seemed to place a high priority on developing the capability to react promptly , with little or no warning , at the start of a conflict , either to preempt the adversary's use of weapons of mass destruction or to undermine the adversary's ability to prosecute the conflict on its own terms .

this presumes that the united states would act before the adversary had taken the actions that the united states had sought to deter .

there is no promise that the adversary would not suffer the consequences and costs of its attack if it refrained from action ; if anything , the adversary may feel pressured to act even more quickly , before the united states launched its preemptive attack .

officials from the bush administration argued that , by tailoring u.s. deterrent strategies to address the specific values and capabilities of a larger number of potential enemies , the united states could enhance the credibility of its deterrent posture and , therefore , increase the likelihood that deterrence would succeed in future contingencies .

they argued that a "one size fits all" set of war plans and a nuclear arsenal consisting of cold war - era weapons would not meet this need because the weapons have yields that are too large and the war plans presume the use of too many weapons .

therefore , the adversary would not believe that the united states would follow through on its deterrent threats and the united states would be self - deterred from implementing its war plans because it would know that an attack would be too large and cause too much collateral damage .

critics of the bush administration's nuclear policy , in contrast , argued that the concept of tailored deterrence was less likely to enhance deterrence than it was to make the use of nuclear weapons more likely in regional conflicts .

they viewed the expansion of the u.s. nuclear war plans to include a wider range of potential attack options against a growing number of potential adversaries to be an indication of the growing willingness of the united states to resort to nuclear weapons use before other means — including diplomacy and conventional force — have been employed and exhausted .

if such plans were not in place , the united states would be less likely to use them in a crisis .

this debate derives from the long - standing theoretical debate about what it takes to make a deterrent threat credible .

bush administration officials argued that , to be credible , deterrent threats must be precise , detailed , and specific , so that an adversary will accept that the united states is both willing and able to implement the plans .

some analysts have argued that such precision is not a key to credibility .

some have argued that no threats to use nuclear weapons , no matter how specific or limited , would be credible because such an attack would produce "disproportionate and unacceptable collateral destruction and severe political fallout. .

because such use would be so horrific , no adversary would believe the united states would be willing to launch a nuclear attack unless its very national survival were at stake .

others have argued that such precision is unnecessary because the mere existence of nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them could serve as a sufficient deterrent .

adversaries do not need to understand the specifics of u.s. nuclear policy to understand that they might be on the receiving end of an attack with nuclear weapons .

while u.s. military and civilian leaders might be more willing to use nuclear weapons if they believe the specific plans and weapons in the u.s. arsenal are less likely to produce catastrophic levels of destruction , it is not clear that this would be the only , or even primary , factor in their decision - making process .

some u.s. leaders might be deterred from launching such an attack because they feel constrained by a generally accepted "nuclear taboo. .

others may , in contrast , be more inclined to use nuclear weapons if , knowing not only that such use would not lead to global nuclear war , but also that the adversary could not retaliate against the u.s. with nuclear weapons , they believe the effects of an adversary's attack on the united states would be worse than the effects of the limited use of u.s. nuclear weapons .

therefore , the outcome , in any particular contingency , could depend not only on the specifics of the u.s. war plans and weapons characteristics , but also on the belief system of the leadership involved in making the decision .

officials speaking for the bush administration indicated that , as the united states tailored its nuclear attack plans and weapons capabilities to address the challenges and capabilities of potential adversaries , it would need a nuclear force structure that differed in many ways from the cold war - era arsenal .

they noted that the united states would need weapons with the capabilities to attack and destroy hardened or deeply buried targets and that it may need warheads that could produce tailored effects , perhaps to destroy stocks of chemical or biological weapons .

they also noted that the united states might need a greater number of lower - yield weapons , so that it could minimize collateral damage while destroying these types of targets .

but they offered few , if any descriptions of how a concept of tailored deterrence would affect the required numbers of warheads in the u.s. arsenal .

throughout the cold war , the united states determined the size and structure of its nuclear arsenal , in part , through an analysis of the numbers and types of weapons it would need to deter a soviet attack on the united states and its allies .

although a number of factors affected this determination , the numbers and types of weapons , along with the plans that would guide their use , reflected an assessment of the numbers and types of targets that would need to be destroyed in the former soviet union .

when the target base began to decline after the end of the cold war , the number of weapons needed in the u.s. arsenal began to decline , and the united states began to reduce the size of its deployed forces .

under the moscow treaty of 2002 , the united states pledged to reduce its strategic nuclear forces to no more than 2,200 operationally deployed warheads by the end of 2012 .

but many analysts have questioned why the united states needs to retain that many warheads , and why it cannot reduce its forces much further , if it is not sizing and structuring its forces to meet the "russian threat. .

few can imagine contingencies or conflicts that would require the united states employ more than a few , or even a few dozen nuclear weapons .

the only contingencies where the united states would need to employ thousands , or even hundreds , of weapons would be one where the united states sought to destroy large numbers of weapons and facilities in russia , or possibly in china .

the bush administration countered this calculation by noting that there are a number of objectives for u.s. nuclear forces that go beyond just deterring attacks by russia or other nations .

nuclear weapons , along with missile defenses and other elements of the u.s. military establishment , can also assure allies and friends of the u.s. commitment to their security by providing an extended deterrent , dissuade potential adversaries from challenging the united states with nuclear weapons or other "asymmetrical threats" by convincing them that they can never negate the u.s. nuclear deterrent , and defeat enemies by holding at risk those targets that could not be destroyed with other types of weapons .

according to the bush administration , the size and structure of the u.s. arsenal should reflect all of these goals , or a combination of these goals .

however , it never indicated which goal would required a force as large as 2,200 operationally deployed warheads .

moreover , these goals do not offer a formula that can be used to calculate the size of the u.s. arsenal .

for example , the u.s. ability to assure its allies of its commitment to their defense need not rest only on the size of the u.s. nuclear force .

other factors , such as the capabilities and reliability of u.s. warheads and delivery vehicles , the attention paid to maintaining the nuclear establishment , and u.s. conventional capabilities , might also affect the calculation .

it may also be difficult to quantify how many warheads are needed to achieve "dissuasion" because there is no way to know what , if any , relationship exists between the size of the u.s. nuclear arsenal and size and scope of other nations' nuclear programs .

for many , the apparent disconnect between the concept of tailored deterrence and the size and structure of the u.s. nuclear arsenal raises questions about the actual future role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security .

if the goal is simply to be able to threaten small numbers of targets in large numbers of countries , than a much smaller force may be sufficient .

at the same time , though , many analysts are wary of a posture that calls for the use of u.s. nuclear weapons against nations that do not have nuclear weapons themselves .

they believe that u.s. national security interests can be served well with a smaller number of nuclear weapons because they believe that the role of nuclear weapons can and should be sharply limited to deterring nuclear or other catastrophic attacks on the united states .

in recent years , the debate about the future role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy has become closely linked to the debates about the relationship between u.s. nuclear weapons programs and policy and u.s. nonproliferation policy .

there is widespread agreement both inside and outside government that the greatest threat to the united states comes not from the nuclear challenge posed by a single adversary , as it did in the cold war , but from the potential proliferation of nuclear weapons to an increasing number of nations , and possibly , terrorist groups .

but there is little agreement about whether the continued u.s. reliance on nuclear weapons stems proliferation by reminding nations of the risks they face if they challenge u.s. security with their own weapons of mass destruction , or spurs proliferation by demonstrating that nuclear weapons can play a significant role in enhancing a nation's security .

as a result , most discussions of u.s. nuclear policy now focus on the question of whether , or how , the size , structure , and role of the u.s. nuclear arsenal can affect the emergence of or deterrence of nuclear threats in other nations .

the bush administration identified tailored deterrence , along with the growing integration of missile defenses and conventional force capabilities into the u.s. deterrent posture , as a response to the potential proliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction .

it argued that the capabilities and attack plans generated under this strategy would enhance the u.s. ability to deter , and if necessary , defeat these emerging threats to u.s. national security .

further , the bush administration also argued that a robust u.s. nuclear deterrent could further u.s. nonproliferation objectives by strengthening the u.s. extended deterrent .

in response to questions submitted prior to his nomination hearing to be commander in chief of u.s. strategic command , general kevin chilton noted that "a credible u.s. nuclear deterrent ... assures allies that the u.s. will deter , prevent , or limit damage to them from adversary attacks .

this removes incentives for many of them to develop and deploy their own nuclear forces , thereby encouraging nonproliferation. .

further , those who support the bush administration's position argued that no amount of restraint in u.s. nuclear weapons policies — either through reductions in deployed warheads , restraints on modernization or maintenance plans , or restrictions in the declared role of nuclear weapons — is likely to deter or discourage the acquisition of nuclear weapons by nations who want them .

they noted that these nations generally seek nuclear weapon to meet their own regional security concerns , and not in response to u.s. nuclear weapons programs .

few analysts who disagree with the bush administration's approach would argue that reductions or the elimination of u.s. nuclear weapons programs would alter the decision to acquire nuclear weapons in nations seeking nuclear weapons to meet their own security concerns .

at the same time though , they argue that the continued pursuit of these programs , and the continued retention of thousands of deployed warheads , when combined with a doctrine that has a longer list of nations that might be targets of nuclear attack , can undermine u.s. nonproliferation goals .

they argue that the united states is likely to find it more difficult to persuade other countries to abandon or reject nuclear programs if the united states , through its own efforts , reinforces the view that nuclear weapons can play a critical role in a nation's security policies .

some have also noted that , by pursuing programs to maintain or expand its own nuclear arsenal , the united states could find it more difficult to persuade other countries to work with it and share its objectives when trying to constrain nuclear programs in "problem" countries .

several prominent current and former government officials have highlighted this linkage and proposed that the united states adopt a number of policies that , over time , may demonstrate that it has reduced its own reliance on nuclear weapons and strengthen its case against nations seeking nuclear weapons .

these include , among other things , the ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty , the reaffirmation of the pledge in article vi of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty that embraces the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons , and further deep reductions in the numbers of deployed nuclear weapons .

president obama echoed this linkage in his first major address on nuclear weapons and nonproliferation in april 2009 , when he stated that the united states would "reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy , and urge others to do the same" as a part of a broader agenda that included reducing u.s. and russian arsenals , strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation treaty , and , eventually , moving toward a world free of nuclear weapons .

a new national debate on the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security policy has been brewing since 2007 and grew louder in 2008 as the presidential election approached .

at the time , congress indicated that it wanted the next president to re - evaluate u.s. nuclear policy and posture and that future nuclear weapons initiatives could hinge on the results of this review .

it established , in the fy2008 defense authorization bill establishes a "congressional commission on the strategic posture of the united states" ( h.r .

1585 , sec .

1062 ) .

this commission , with 12 members appointed by the chairmen and ranking members of the house and senate armed services committees , was charged with assessing "the benefits and risks associated with the current strategic posture and nuclear weapons policies of the united states. .

this commission issued its final report in april 2009 .

congress also mandated that the secretary of defense , under the next administration , conduct a "comprehensive review of the nuclear posture of the united states for the next 5 to 10 years" ( h.r .

1585 , sec .

1070 ) .

this obama administration has indicated that it will submit the report from this study on march 1 , 2010 .

these studies , and many others conducted by organizations outside the u.s. government , may provide the framework for a broad - based debate on the future of u.s. nuclear strategy and doctrine .

