the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , in effect since january 1994 , plays a key role in the bilateral economic relationship between mexico and the united states .

the two countries are closely tied in bilateral trade and investment , and in areas of mutual interest such as migration , security , environmental , and health issues .

nafta's effect on mexico and the state of the mexican economy have implications for the overall relationship between the united states and mexico and for u.s. economic and political interests .

on may 19 , 2010 , mexican president felipe calderón met with president barack obama during an official state visit of the mexican president to the united states .

the two leaders discussed a wide range of bilateral , hemispheric , and global issues that affect the two countries and reaffirmed their shared values regarding the safety , social and economic well - being , and security of citizens in both countries .

the two presidents expressed a commitment to increase cooperation in enhancing economic competitiveness and noted progress in the building of a twenty - first century border , which includes three new border crossings that are opening in 2010 , initiation of three additional binational bridge projects , and significant modernization projects at existing border facilities .

the 111 th congress will likely maintain an active interest in mexico on issues related to counternarcotics , economic conditions , migration , trade , and border issues .

comprehensive immigration reform was debated early in the 110 th congress and immigration reform efforts could be considered once again in the 111 th congress .

this report provides an overview of mexico's motivations for entering nafta , the mexican economy , the economic effects and views of nafta in mexico , and possible policy options for members of congress .

it also provides information on nafta's effect on mexico's agricultural sector , one of the more controversial issues regarding the effects of nafta in mexico .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

in 1990 , the president of mexico at the time , carlos salinas de gortari , approached then u.s. president george h.w .

bush with the idea of forming a free trade agreement ( fta ) .

president salinas de gortari's motivations in pursuing an fta with the united states were to increase economic growth by attracting foreign direct investment ( fdi ) ; boosting exports ; creating industrial jobs ; and giving the mexican economy a growth stimulus .

the mexican economy had experienced many difficulties throughout most of the 1980s with a significant deepening of poverty .

mexico's intention in entering nafta was to increase export diversification by attracting fdi , which would help create jobs , increase wage rates , and reduce poverty .

at the time nafta went into effect , many studies predicted that the agreement would cause an overall positive impact on the mexican economy .

from the 1930s through part of the 1980s , mexico maintained a strong protectionist trade policy in an effort to be independent of any foreign power and as a means to industrialization .

mexico established a policy of import substitution in the 1930s , consisting of a broad , general protection of the entire industrial sector .

mexico placed high restrictions on foreign investment and controlled the exchange rate to encourage domestic industrial growth .

mexico also nationalized the oil industry during this time .

these protectionist economic policies remained in effect until the country began to experience a series of economic challenges caused by a number of factors .

the 1980s in mexico were marked by inflation and a declining standard of living .

the 1982 debt crisis in which the mexican government was unable to meet its foreign debt obligations was a primary cause of the economic challenges the country faced in the early to mid - 1980's .

much of the government's efforts in addressing the challenges were placed on privatizing state industries and moving toward trade liberalization .

in the late 1980s and early into the 1990s , the mexican government implemented a series of measures to restructure the economy that included steps toward unilateral trade liberalization .

mexican began to reverse its protectionist stance in the mid - 1980s when the government was forced to declare that it was unable to repay its debts and to default on its loans .

then president miguel de la madrid took steps to open and liberalize the mexican economy and initiated procedures to replace import substitution policies with policies aimed at attracting foreign investment , lowering trade barriers and making the country competitive in non - oil exports .

in 1986 , mexico acceded to the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , assuring further trade liberalization measures and closer ties with the united states .

in november 1987 , the united states and mexico entered into a bilateral understanding on trade and investment called the framework of principles and procedures for consultation regarding trade and investment relations .

prior to this agreement , there had been no legal framework to govern commercial relations between the two countries .

there were two parts to the agreement , one served as a mechanism to address trade issues , and the other established an agenda for the removal or reduction of trade barriers .

seven topics were listed in the agenda for possible future discussions: textiles , agriculture , steel , investment , technology transfer and intellectual property , electronics , and information on the service sector .

under this framework understanding , two sectoral agreements were reached which liberalized trade in steel , textiles , and alcoholic beverages .

in addition , working groups started meeting on agriculture , industry , services , tariffs , and intellectual property rights .

in october 1989 , the two countries entered into a second trade and investment understanding called the understanding regarding trade and investment facilitation talks .

this agreement built on the work of the 1987 agreement , establishing a negotiating process for expanding trade and investment opportunities .

these two agreements significantly improved trade relations between mexico and the united states and other improvements in trade relations followed .

marking the advances in trade relations between the two countries , mexico proposed negotiations for a free trade agreement with the united states .

in june 1990 , then president carlos salinas de gortari of mexico and then president george h.w .

bush issued a joint statement in support of negotiating a free trade agreement .

the mexican economy is strongly tied to economic conditions in the united states , making it very sensitive to economic developments in the united states .

mexico is highly reliant on exports and most of mexico's exports go to the united states .

in 2008 , mexico's exports as a percent of gdp equaled 31% , up from 10% twenty years ago , and over 80% of mexico's exports went to the united states .

the state of the mexican economy is important to the united states because of the close trade and investment ties between the two countries , and because of other social and political issues that could be affected by economic conditions , particularly poverty and how it relates to migration issues .

not all changes in economic growth or trade and investment patterns in mexico since 1994 can be attributed to nafta .

the economy has also been affected by other factors such as mexico's previous market - opening measures in mexico , financial crises , exchange rates , oil prices , and business cycles .

trade - related job gains and losses since nafta probably accelerated trends that were ongoing prior to nafta and are not totally attributable to the trade agreement .

isolating the economic effects of nafta from other economic or political factors is difficult .

mexico has experienced at least two major events outside of nafta that had significant economic consequences .

unilateral trade liberalization measures prior to nafta and the currency crisis of 1995 both affected economic growth , per capita gdp , and real wages in mexico .

in the mid - 1990s , mexico experienced a financial crisis caused by a number of complex financial , economic , and political factors .

the early 1990s in mexico were marked by a large increase in foreign investment as investor confidence in the mexican economy grew due to the prospect of nafta .

however , signs that mexico's economy was not as fundamentally strong as it appeared began to surface after the assassination of mexican presidential candidate luis donaldo colosio in march 1994 .

the shock of the assassination resulted in a subsequent outflow of foreign exchange reserves and growing concerns about a currency devaluation .

in response to these concerns , the mexican government issued short - term dollar - indexed notes to finance the growing current account deficit .

the mexican government expected investor confidence to be restored after the august 1994 presidential election .

foreign investment flows , however , did not recover to the level of expectation .

in the months following the election , the current account deficit widened as imports surged due to an overvalued peso .

the government began to experience a short - term liquidity crisis .

by december 1994 , the continued decrease in the inflows of foreign direct investment and foreign exchange reserves put pressure on the government to abandon its previous fixed exchange rate policy and adopt a floating exchange rate regime .

as a result , mexico's currency plunged by around 50% within six months , sending the country into a deep recession .

in the aftermath of the 1994 devaluation , the mexican government took several steps to restructure the economy and lessen the impact of the currency crisis among the more disadvantaged sectors of the economy .

the united states and the international monetary fund ( imf ) assisted the mexican government by putting together an emergency financial support package of up to $50 billion .

mexico adopted tight monetary and fiscal policies to reduce inflation and absorb some of the costs of the banking sector crisis .

the austerity plan also included an increase in the value - added tax , budget cuts , and increases in electricity and gasoline prices .

the peso steadily depreciated through the end of the 1990s , which led to greater exports and helped the country's exporting industries .

however , the peso devaluation also resulted in a decline in real income , hurting mostly the poorest segments of the population , but also the newly emerging middle class .

yet , nafta and the change in the mexican economy to an export - based economy may have helped to soften the impact of the currency devaluation .

nafta is a free trade agreement that eliminated trade and investment barriers among nafta trading partners .

upon implementation , almost 70% of u.s. imports from mexico and 50% of u.s. exports to mexico received duty - free treatment .

the remainder of duties were eliminated over a period of 15 years after the agreement was in effect .

the agreement also contained provisions for market access to u.s. firms in most services sectors ; protection of u.s. foreign direct investment in mexico ; and intellectual property rights protection for u.s. companies .

at the time that nafta went into effect , a number of economic studies predicted that the trade agreement would have a positive overall effect on the mexican economy , narrowing the u.s. - mexico gap in prices of goods and services and the differential in real wages .

one of the more controversial aspects of nafta has been its effect on the agricultural sector in mexico and the perception that nafta has caused a higher amount of worker displacement in the agricultural sector than in other sectors of the economy .

while some of the changes in the agricultural sector are a direct result of nafta , as mexico faced increasing import competition from the united states , many of the changes are also attributable to mexico's unilateral agricultural reform measures .

mexico began to reform its agricultural sector in the 1980s ; most domestic agricultural and trade policy reform measures included privatization and resulted in increased competition .

mexico's unilateral reform measures included eliminating state enterprises related to agriculture and removing staple price supports and subsidies .

with the reform of mexico's agrarian law , lands that had been distributed to ejidos or community rural groups following the 1910 revolution gained the right to privatize .

another major reform was the abolishment of conasupo , mexico's primary agency for government intervention in agriculture .

the agency bought staples from farmers at guaranteed prices and processed the products or sold them at low prices to processors and consumers .

by 1999 , the company was abolished .

many of mexico's domestic reforms in agriculture coincided with nafta negotiations , beginning in 1991 , and continued beyond the implementation of nafta in 1994 .

the unilateral reforms in the agricultural sector make it difficult to separate those effects from the effects of nafta .

views of nafta within mexico are mixed .

media reports tend to highlight the anti - nafta sentiment in the mexican agricultural sector , but according to an extensive non - partisan opinion survey conducted by two independent groups in mexico , the majority of the mexican population views nafta favorably .

a public opinion survey conducted in 2006 showed that the majority of the mexican population favors trade liberalization with the united states and canada .

the survey , conducted by the centro de investigación y docencia económicas ( cide ) and the consejo mexicano de asuntos internacionales ( mexican council on foreign relations , comexi ) , also showed that mexicans have a very positive view of globalization , though there is some division on whether nafta should be renegotiated and whether mexico should continue forming new trade agreements with other countries .

the survey examined the views of the general public and another group of individuals , labeled as "leaders" in the study , which comprises 259 representatives from five sectors ( government , politics , business , media and academic , and non - government organizations ) with an interest in international affairs or professional ties with other countries .

both groups ranked export promotion among mexico's two most important foreign - policy objectives and hold a largely favorable opinion of international trade .

the poll showed that both the general public and the "leaders" considered international trade to be beneficial for the country's economy , job creation , mexican businesses , poverty reduction , and their own living conditions .

ninety - six percent of the "leaders" and 79% of the general public favored increasing international trade ( see figure 4 ) .

the most vocal opponents of nafta in mexico have criticized the agreement because of its negative effect on mexico's agricultural sector .

labor and farmers' coalitions joined forces in early 2008 to protest the final tariff eliminations under nafta on corn .

tens of thousands marched on the streets of mexico city in february 2008 to protest the agreement .

many of these were farmers or peasants with farm plots of less than 12 acres and criticized the mexican government for not doing enough to help them adjust to increased competition from the united states .

they stated that most of the government aid to help farmers has gone to large agricultural businesses in northern states .

groups representing the small farmers argue that , in the long run , small farmers in mexico will not be able to compete with the "americans' heavily subsidized and mechanized farms. .

mexico's economic relationship with the united states is of mutual importance to both mexico and the united states .

economic studies on the effects on mexico and mexican views of nafta could provide a valuable perspective when evaluating the possibility of reopening parts of the agreement or alternative policy options .

some observers have suggested that one of the lessons from nafta for developing countries is that they negotiate trade agreements in a way that would be more beneficial to them .

this could take place by including provisions such as financial assistance from trading partners or new minimum wage requirements .

possible areas of consideration for u.s. and mexican policymakers may include furthering economic integration between mexico and the united states ; enhancing or strengthening institutions created under nafta side agreements ; or taking other measures to help resolve the issues related to income disparity between mexico and the united states .

some proponents of economic integration in north america have maintained that the emergence of china and india in the global marketplace may be putting north america at a competitive disadvantage with other countries and that nafta should go beyond a free trade agreement .

some observers have proposed that the u.s. government consider the possibility of forming a customs union or common market .

however , critics of this level of economic integration believe that nafta has already gone too far and that it has harmed the u.s. and mexican economies and undermined democratic control of domestic policy - making .

if the united states were to potentially consider the further economic integration in north america , it would require cooperation by the governments of mexico and canada , and approval by the u.s. congress .

expanding nafta to a customs union or common market is not likely to happen within the foreseeable future .

a possible option to address mexico's income disparities with the united states is to consider expanding the mandate of the north american development bank ( nadbank ) .

nadbank and its sister institution , the border environment cooperation commission ( becc ) , were created under a bilateral side agreement to nafta called the border environmental cooperation agreement .

the objective of nadbank and becc is to help u.s. - mexico border communities plan and finance environmental infrastructure projects .

some members of congress and elected officials from mexico have informally discussed the possibility of expanding the mission of the nadbank to go beyond environmental and border issues .

one possibility would be to expand nadbank projects to include transportation and other types of infrastructure projects .

another option would be to expand eligible projects to the entire region of mexico instead of just the border area .

some policymakers have suggested the possibility of creating an infrastructure fund that would be managed by nadbank to provide investment in infrastructure , communications , or education .

u.s. policymakers may also consider increased cooperation with mexico in its efforts to address the continuing problem of poverty and the difficulties being faced by farmers in the southern mexican states .

the mexican government has taken a number of measures to lessen the impact of nafta on farmers and to address on - going poverty issues but the results of these programs has been mixed .

although the programs are not nafta - related , they do benefit segments of the population and regions of mexico that have benefitted little from trade liberalization .

another policy option that has been mentioned is withdrawal from nafta .

legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress for the united states to withdraw from nafta ( h.r .

4759 ) .

the bill would require the president to give written notice to mexico and canada of the u.s. withdrawal , which would occur six months after the bill's enactment .

the bill had 27 co - sponsors and was referred to the house ways and means committee .

supporters of the bill believe that nafta did not live up to its promises and that it has resulted in large job losses in the united states and mexico .

opponents of the bill believe that nafta has had 'incredible' successes in all three countries of north america and that withdrawing from nafta would cause job losses in the united states to increase and that u.s. exports to mexico would be sharply impacted .

they point to the losses in exports that have occurred already from mexico's retaliatory tariffs due to the trucking dispute and those exports represent only a small percentage of total u.s. exports to mexico .

