on november 26 , 2007 , president george w. bush and iraqi prime minister nouri al maliki co - signed the declaration of principles for a long - term relationship of cooperation and friendship between the republic of iraq and the united states of america ( "declaration of principles" or , "declaration" ) .

it portended a bilateral agreement to address political , economic , and cultural issues , as well as the continued presence of u.s. forces in iraq after the december 31 , 2008 termination of the u.n. security council resolution currently authorizing the multinational force in iraq ( mnf - i ) .

the bush administration later announced that it would negotiate two agreements , an agreement providing the legal basis between the two countries for the continued presence and operation of u.s. armed forces in iraq , termed a status of forces agreement ( sofa ) , and a strategic framework agreement to cover the overall bilateral relationship .

the declaration of principles presaged u.s. "security assurances and commitments" to aid iraq in defending against external and internal threats .

shortly after the announcement of the declaration of principles , lieutenant general douglas lute , assistant to president bush for iraq and afghanistan , stated that the planned agreement would cover nearly every aspect of the future u.s. military role in iraq , including the overall mission , force levels , and basing arrangements .

he explained that the parties intended to conclude the agreement by july 31 , 2008 .

regarding congress's role in the creation of the agreement , general lute stated that the bush administration did not expect the agreement to rise to the level of a treaty , and that it did not foresee the need for "formal inputs" from congress .

congress , in response to the negotiation , execution , and implementation of the iraq agreements , has enacted legislation , proposed legislation , and held hearings .

the enacted and proposed legislation , designed to ensure a congressional role in the iraq agreements , contains combinations of four main types of provisions requiring ( 1 ) reports to congress , ( 2 ) consultations with congress , ( 3 ) formal congressional approval , or ( 4 ) funding prohibitions .

table 1 below shows the types of provisions included in each piece of pertinent legislation .

several hearings focused directly on the iraq agreements , their contents and scope , issues of congressional involvement , constitutional prerogatives of the president in their execution , the possible extension of the u.n. mandate for iraq in lieu of the iraq agreements , and the concerns and views of the iraqi parliament .

members and witnesses discussed many of the same issues concerning the iraq agreements at hearings held that regarded the defense and foreign affairs budgets , hearings on the bush administration's report on the result of the u.s. troop surge in iraq , and nomination hearings for certain obama administration officials .

congress has several options for further action to help shape its own involvement in the continued implementation of the iraq agreements .

members of congress could , among other things , hold additional hearings on the iraq agreements ; pass legislation already introduced ; or introduce legislation that seeks to further define both the authority of the president concerning the u.s. relationship with iraq and the role of congress in the approval and implementation of the iraq agreements .

many of these options are not mutually exclusive .

certain members may wish to take no further action as well .

a possible course is for congress to do nothing more at this point , if it is satisfied with the measures it took to shed light on the negotiating process and to send a message to both the bush and obama administrations that congress will continue to monitor these agreements .

indeed , as illustrated above , the hearings conducted by various congressional committees and subcommittees have produced a body of evidence concerning the agreements , including both the intentions of the bush and obama administrations and the general sentiment of the iraqi council of representatives ( cor ) .

executive branch officials have given sworn testimony regarding bases , security commitments , troop levels , scope of mission , legal immunity for u.s. forces , withdrawal timelines , and other issues .

the hearings may have therefore produced a useful result as an investigative device to pin down the bush and obama administrations' plans regarding the iraq agreements .

on the other hand , congress may wish to capitalize on some of the information gathered earlier by continuing to hold hearings on such an important issue as the future of the u.s. - iraq relationship and the ongoing u.s. presence in iraq .

congress received numerous promises that the executive branch would keep congress informed during the negotiation process for the iraq agreements , and that the agreements would be submitted in some form to the congress before they were finalized and implemented .

the bush administration made several statements to congress concerning the scope and contents of the iraq agreements , with many being direct responses to problems perceived by members of congress .

it may be useful for congress to continue its oversight activities , comparing previous assertions about the iraq agreements with the actual provisions of the final agreements and their present implementation , and asking current administration officials for their comment and explanation .

certain members of congress may wish to push forward with passage of one or more of the legislative approaches introduced in response to the iraq agreements .

the operative provisions of the legislation described above fall into four main categories: executive - branch reporting , consultations with congress , congressional approval requirements , and funding prohibitions .

the consultation provisions are no longer operative , as the iraq agreements have entered into force .

each of the remaining provision types has perceived benefits and drawbacks .

while a reporting requirement is useful for enlightening congress concerning the iraq agreements , it does not afford congress the opportunity to directly shape the implementation of the agreements .

with regard to passage of legislation containing a requirement that one or more of the iraq agreements be submitted to congress for approval , the obama administration might argue , as did the bush administration , that the president has the constitutional authority within article ii , apart from any need for congressional input , to conclude the iraq agreements as sole executive agreements .

although this position would conflict with the position president obama took as a senator when he co - sponsored a bill to require congressional approval for the iraq agreements , president obama may argue that such a requirement may damage the u.s. relationship with iraq as it might throw the status of the agreements into doubt .

any such legislation may face a veto , and could precipitate a constitutional confrontation concerning the respective powers of the legislature and the executive in determining the form of international agreements under u.s. law .

as an alternative to requiring congressional approval outright , provisions prohibiting the use of funds to implement the iraq agreements , while significant , would not present the same constitutional problems , as they fall squarely within congress's appropriations power .

some may question , however , whether it is in the interest of congress to cut off funds for the iraq agreements , as such a measure may be viewed by some to compromise u.s. interests as a whole in iraq and create new problems for the success of u.s. foreign policy in the middle east .

as recounted above , administration officials have at certain points cited the 2002 congressional authorization of the invasion of iraq , and the 2001 authorization to use force in response to the september 11 terrorist attacks , as important sources of the president's authority to enter into the iraq agreements .

the iraq agreements could be viewed as defining the parameters of the continued authorization for deployment of u.s. forces in iraq , those forces' legal status , and their ability to use force .

congress might consider legislation , therefore , delineating the president's authority to implement the iraq agreements by adding specific iraq - agreement language to the existing use - of - force authorizations .

amendments to the 2002 authorization of the use of force have already been introduced ; for example , legislation was proposed prior to the signing of the declaration of principles that would set time restrictions on the authorization to use force in iraq .

new amendatory language directly regarding the iraq agreements could include certain directives to the president that would redefine the authorization to use force and therefore shape the implementation of the iraq agreements .

such directives could include consultation and reporting requirements similar to legislation already proposed , but could also contain specific interpretations of or conditions on the implementation of provisions in the security agreement related to security commitments , joint operational command , scope of the mission of u.s. armed forces , withdrawal timelines , and other important issues .

in addition , congress might address issues concerning the termination of the u.n. mandate for iraq in amendments to the 2002 authorization of force .

because the 2002 joint resolution authorizing the use of force in iraq had as one of its two bases the enforcement of u.n. security council resolutions , which came to include the resolution authorizing the activities of the u.s. - led multinational force - iraq ( mnf - i ) , some members of congress might wish to require the executive branch to submit to congress for approval any agreement purporting to replace the u.n. mandate as the legal basis under international law for the continued presence and military activity of u.s. armed forces in iraq .

this would require the obama administration to submit either the security agreement or both iraq agreements to congress for approval .

the language of such an amendment could make clear that the submission and approval is required even if such action takes place after the agreements' entry into force , as would indeed be the case at this point in time .

such an amendment would renew the effectiveness of the 2002 authorization of the use of force and place the iraq agreements within an authorization framework that has already been deemed necessary by both the legislative and executive branches .

introducing and enacting legislation approving the iraq agreements might be a useful and relatively uncontroversial approach to asserting the role of congress in providing legal validity to the agreements , and encouraging a possible continuing role in the implementation of these agreements .

through such legislation , congress could approve the november 2008 conclusion of the agreements with the government of iraq , effectively transforming what are currently sole executive agreements into "ex - post congressional - executive agreements. .

a bill approving the agreements could reestablish congress's role in their execution and approval and bolster congress's overall constitutional role in creating international agreements , while at the same time avoiding a constitutional confrontation over the international agreement powers and responsibilities of the two branches .

such legislation would likely entail little downside for the obama administration , as it would not require any changes to the iraq agreements , the relationship with iraq overall , or the administration's own plans for the withdrawal of u.s. forces from iraq .

that said , legislation approving the iraq agreements could be straightforward , but need not be .

as with new legislation redefining the use of force authorization , such approval legislation would also provide an opportunity for congress to attach conditions and interpretations to the provisions of the iraq agreements , and to require consultation and reporting .

one of the areas of continuing concern for some members of congress is the broad language of both the security agreement and the strategic framework , and the provisions within each agreement requiring creation of organs for implementation , and contemplating the possibility of amendments and the negotiation and creation of further agreements .

these provisions provide congress with similar questions and concerns regarding the ongoing congressional role in these agreements .

legislation approving the iraq agreements could require that the president consult with or report to congress on some or all amendments , new agreements , or arrangements for implementation of the agreements , and to submit all such items to congress for approval .

congress may wish to codify a specific role for itself in the implementation of the iraq agreements or the negotiation of any amendments or new agreements related to the iraq agreements , creating a joint congressional - executive decision - making mechanism .

this may include mandating the direct inclusion of members of congress in the negotiation process of any amendments or new agreements regarding implementation of the iraq agreements .

such provisions would bear resemblance to provisions of the trade act of 1974 that include congress in various aspects of trade - agreement negotiations .

it may also entail creating a cross - branch monitoring body tasked with reviewing the implementation of the iraq agreements .

an example of this sort of implementation - review mechanism is the commission on security and cooperation in europe , created by congress to monitor the implementation of the final act of the conference on security and cooperation in europe ( "helsinki final act" ) .

instead of strictly approving or disapproving the president's actions concerning the proposed iraq agreements , legislative provisions such as these would position congress as a partner in the agreement process , either in negotiations or implementation .

codifying a role for congress in this manner , however , would raise issues related to congress's constitutional powers in foreign policy .

article i , section 8 of the constitution describes the scope of congressional powers .

in addition to the power to declare war , this section also lists the powers , among others , to raise and support armies ; to provide and maintain a navy ; to make rules to regulate such forces ; to provide for organizing , arming , and disciplining the militia , and governing such militia employed in the service of the united states ; and to make rules concerning captures on land and water .

these powers have been noted in some of the proposed legislation reacting to the iraq agreements .

some of these powers , it might be argued , are implicated in the terms and provisions of the agreements , and therefore a legislated congressional role in the iraq agreements could create conflict between the two branches concerning the proper apportionment of constitutional power regarding war and foreign policy .

appendix a .

proposed legislation in the 110 th congress provision requiring president to direct secretary of state to initiate negotiations on a status of forces agreement with iraq ( s.amdt .

2208 to h.r .

1585 ( 110 th congress ) ) on july 13 , 2007 , senator john warner , on behalf of himself and senator richard lugar , submitted s.amdt .

2208 , which was intended to be proposed for consideration .

the amendment included adding several provisions to h.r .

1585 ( 110 th congress ) , a version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 .

one of these provisions was a proposed section 1544 , which would have required the president to direct the secretary of state , in conjunction with the secretary of defense , to initiate negotiations with the government of iraq on a status of forces agreement , with a goal of completing such an agreement within 120 days of the enactment of the act .

although senator warner submitted the amendment , it was not formally proposed for consideration .

congress passed h.r .

1585 on december 14 , 2007 , but president bush vetoed the bill on december 28 of that year .

h.r .

4986 instead became the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) , without language similar to the warner - lugar amendment .

congressional oversight of iraq agreements act of 2007 ( s. 2426 ) on december 6 , 2007 , senator hillary clinton introduced the congressional oversight of iraq agreements act of 2007 .

the bill states several findings concerning the possible contents of a u.s. - iraq security agreement and the constitutional role of congress in approving international agreements .

section 3 contains the substance of the bill , with three main parts: first , section 3 ( a ) requires the "legal advisor to the secretary of state" to submit an unclassified report to congress explaining the justification , with legal analysis of the constitutional powers asserted by the president , for concluding the anticipated iraq sofa and strategic framework as executive agreements .

second , section 3 ( b ) states that it is the sense of the senate that any u.s. - iraq agreement including a sofa that involves "commitments or risks affecting the nation as a whole" and that is not approved as a treaty by the senate or through legislation by the congress does not have the force of law .

third , section 3 ( c ) bars funding for any such agreement between the united states and iraq if such senate or congressional approval is not obtained .

the bill was referred to the senate foreign relations committee on december 6 , 2007 , and no further action was taken .

iraq strategic agreement review act of 2008 ( h.r .

4959 ) representative rosa l. delauro introduced this bill on january 15 , 2008 .

section 2 of the bill defines the term "long - term security , economic , or political agreement with the government of iraq," which is used elsewhere in the legislation , as an agreement that has a term of more than one year , and that includes provisions concerning ( 1 ) u.s. bases in iraq ; ( 2 ) defense of iraq's government from internal and external threats ; ( 3 ) security commitments and assurances to deter foreign aggression against iraq ; ( 4 ) the training or equipping of iraq's security forces ; ( 5 ) economic , monetary , material and technical commerce and arrangements ; or ( 6 ) diplomatic and political understandings .

section 3 contains proposed findings , including certain constitutional powers of the president and the congress concerning the armed forces and international agreements ; past examples of security agreements submitted to the senate as treaties ; and recent administration comments concerning the declaration of principles and the execution of new u.s. - iraq agreements as executive agreements .

sections 4 , 5 , and 6 of the bill contain the substantive provisions: section 4 contains a consultation requirement that instructs the secretaries of state and defense as well as other "necessary" executive officers to commence consultations with certain "congressional committees and leadership" related to "any potential long - term security , economic , or political agreement" with iraq .

such consultation would require "full and complete transparency" and would continue throughout the negotiation period .

section 5 is a non - binding sense - of - congress provision , which asserts that any u.s. - iraq agreement falling within the definition provided in the bill must receive advice and consent from the senate to have the force and effect of law .

section 6 prohibits funding the implementation of any such agreement with iraq unless it is submitted to the senate for advice and consent as a treaty .

the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs and armed service committees on january 15 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

bill disapproving any agreement based on the declaration of principles without an act of congress ( h.r .

5128 ) representative barbara lee introduced this legislation on january 23 , 2008 .

the bill provides findings concerning congressional opposition to permanent u.s. bases and the administration's apparent intent to maintain the presence of u.s. forces in iraq .

section 3 asserts the sense of congress that any u.s. - iraq agreement emerging from the declaration of principles must be approved by an act of the iraqi legislature .

the two salient provisions for congressional involvement are stated in sections 2 and 4: section 2 states that any formal agreement emerging from the declaration of principles will not have the effect and force of law unless it is approved by an act of congress .

section 4 prohibits the use of funds appropriated or otherwise authorized to the department of defense or any other agency to enforce or implement such an agreement without approval through an act of congress .

the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs and armed service committees on january 23 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

protect our troops and our constitution act of 2008 ( h.r .

5626 ) representative bill delahunt introduced this bill on march 13 , 2008 .

section 2 of the bill presents proposed findings that seek to show inconsistencies between the far - reaching provisions of the declaration of principles and early statements by bush administration officials on the one hand , and on the other , later administration statements that describe a much more limited scope for the iraq agreements .

section 2 ( 9 ) states in conclusion , "the inconsistencies between the various statements and pledges ... raise significant questions about the administration's objectives in seeking new agreements with iraq. .

section 3 denies the use of any funds appropriated or otherwise authorized to any u.s. agency for the purpose of establishing or maintaining any permanent or long - term u.s. military base or facility in iraq ; or implementing any agreement consistent with the security commitments contained in the declaration of principles , or any agreement that provides u.s. forces with "authority to fight," unless the senate has provided advice and consent for such agreement as a treaty , or congress has authorized such agreement through legislation .

section 4 provides the sense of congress that long - term u.s. - iraq relations should be decided by the next u.s. administration ; the next administration should consult fully with congress , the government of iraq , coalition partners , and iraq's neighbors in determining policy toward iraq ; and the bush administration should encourage the government of iraq to request the renewal of the u.n. mandate for iraq beyond december 31 , 2008 , in order to ensure the international legal authority for the u.s. presence in iraq , and the legal immunity for u.s. armed forces .

this bill was referred to the house foreign affairs and armed services committees on march 13 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

sections 1212 and 1220 of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( h.r .

5658 ) introduced on march 31 , 2008 , and passed by the house on may 22 , 2008 , this bill contains certain provisions concerning the iraq agreements .

section 1212 requires a report from the president to the house foreign affairs and armed services committees , and the senate foreign relations and armed services committees , on each u.s. - iraq agreement relating to the legal status of u.s. military personnel , civilian personnel , and contractor personnel ; establishment of or access to military bases ; rules of engagement for u.s. armed forces ; and any security commitment , arrangement , or assurance that obligates the united states to respond to internal or external threats against iraq .

updates are required whenever further agreements are executed or when an agreement is substantially revised .

section 1212 ( b ) provides a list of 13 matters to be included in such reports: limits placed on u.s. combat operations by the government of iraq , including coordination requirements ; assessment of whether conditions placed on u.s. combat operations in such agreements are greater than conditions prior to such agreement ; discussion of legal immunities of u.s. personnel ; assessment of legal protection of third - country nationals ; assessment of authority of u.s. and coalition forces to detain and interrogate prisoners ; description of any security commitment , arrangement , or assurance to respond to internal or external threats against iraq , including manner of such commitment's implementation ; assessment of any requirements for payments to the government of iraq for use of bases ; assessment of any requirements for payments for claims of death or damages caused by u.s. personnel ; assessment of any other provisions that would restrict the performance of u.s. personnel ; discussion of how the agreement or modification thereof was approved by the government of iraq , and whether the process was consistent with the iraq constitution ; description of arrangements for resolving disputes arising under the agreement ; discussion of application of the agreement to coalition partners ; and description of termination of the agreement by either party .

section 1220 of the h.r .

5658 states that no provision of an agreement containing a security commitment , arrangement , or assurance that obligates the united states to respond to internal or external threats against iraq will be in force with respect to the united states unless it is given senate advice and consent as a treaty or is specifically authorized by an act of congress .

h.r .

5658 was placed on the senate legislative calendar on june 3 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

iraq security agreement act of 2008 ( s. 3433 / h.r .

6846 ( 110 th congress ) ) senator joseph biden introduced s. 3433 in the senate on august 1 , 2008 , and representative barbara lee introduced an identical companion bill in the house , h.r .

6846 , on september 9 , 2008 .

section 2 sets out findings concerning u.s. - iraq negotiations for agreements based on the declaration of principles , as well as the definitions of "security commitment" and "security arrangement," based on a 1992 department of defense report to congress: a "security commitment" is described as an "obligation binding under international law , of the united states to act in the common defense in the event of an armed attack on that country," such obligation being embodied in treaty form .

a "security arrangement" is a "pledge by the united states to take some action in the event of a threat to [another] country's security," located in treaties or executive agreements , or in political documents , such as policy declarations .

section 3 provides the sense of congress that any u.s. - iraq security commitment or arrangement would result in serious obligations and should involve joint executive - legislative decision - making ; and a short - term extension of the u.n. mandate for the multi - national force in iraq ( mnf - i ) , along with iraqi law , would provide u.s. forces with the authorities , privileges , and immunities necessary for their mission .

section 4 requires a annual report on agreements containing security commitments or security arrangements , with the first report due not later than 180 days after enactment of the act , and then each february 1 thereafter .

the report would include: text and a description of each agreement , whether such agreement is based on a formal document or a policy expressed orally or in writing ; and an assessment of the need to continue , modify , or discontinue each agreement based on national security grounds .

section 5 requires the secretaries of state and defense to consult with the senate armed services and foreign relations committees , and the house armed services and foreign relations committees , on the negotiations pursuant to the declaration of principles , not later than 30 days after enactment of the act .

the section also requires these officials to keep such committees fully and currently informed of the negotiations , and states that the secretary of state "should" provide the text of any agreement with iraq containing a security commitment or arrangement to these committees prior to finalizing any such agreement .

section 6 contains two prohibitions concerning any security commitment or arrangement with iraq , each with prominent exceptions: no u.s. - iraq agreement containing a security commitment or arrangement may enter into force except pursuant to article ii , section 2 , clause 2 ( treaty making ) or article i , section 7 , clause 2 ( enactment of laws ) of the u.s. constitution ; and no funds may be obligated or expended to implement such an agreement unless it enters into force by the same constitutional treaty - making or law - making powers .

section 6 also states that it shall not be in order for either house of congress to consider any bill , resolution , amendment , or conference report that provides budget authority for implementation of any such agreement .

s. 3433 was referred to the senate foreign relations committee on august 1 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

h.r .

6846 was referred to the house foreign affairs , armed services , and rules committees on september 9 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

sense of congress provision concerning extension of the mandate of the multinational force in iraq and congressional role in a u.s. - iraq strategic framework agreement and status of forces agreement ( s.amdt .

5499 to s. 3001 ( 110 th congress ) ) on september 12 , 2008 , senator jim webb submitted s.amdt .

5499 , which was intended to be proposed for consideration .

this amendment would have added a new section 1222 to s. 3001 ( 110 th congress ) , the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 , stating the sense of congress that the u.s. special representative to the united nations should seek an extension of the mandate for the mnf - i past december 31 , 2008 ; the extension should expire upon the earlier of a period of one year , or the entry into force of a u.s. - iraq strategic framework agreement and status of forces agreement ; the two agreements being negotiated pose significant long - term national security implications for the united states ; the bush administration should provide full texts of the two agreements prior to their entry into force to the senate armed services and foreign relations committees , and the house armed services and foreign affairs committees ; and any finalized strategic framework agreement should cease to have effect unless approved by congress within 180 days of the entry into force of such agreement .

the amendment was not considered prior to enactment of s. 3001 into law ( duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 , p.l .

110-417 ; 122 stat .

4356 ) .

resolution reasserting congressional prerogatives in foreign policy ( h.res .

1028 ) on march 6 , 2008 , representative barbara lee introduced h.res .

1028 , which encourages development of a convention of legislative approval over certain types of international agreements .

preambulary clauses regard the constitutional roles of the president and the congress in u.s. foreign policy , the nature and scope of status of forces agreements , and the bush administration's actions surrounding the declaration of principles and the negotiation of the iraq agreements .

the resolution , framed as the sense of the house , states that three types of international agreements should be approved by an act of congress: any agreement , other than a treaty , entered into by the executive branch which purports to bind the united states to use the armed forces to assist another country , government , or people , either immediately or upon the occurrence of future events ; any international agreement , other than a treaty , that requires the use of u.s. financial resources ; or any agreement , other than a treaty , between iraq and the united states that imposes burdens in excess of those customarily included in status of forces agreements .

the last provision of the resolution explicitly states that , without legislative approval , a status of forces agreement signed by the administration and the government of iraq would have no legal effect .

the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee on march 6 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

resolution calling for iraq to agree to pay costs of continued u.s .

presence in provisions of any bilateral agreement with iraq ( h.res .

1123 ) h.res .

1123 , introduced by representative dana rohrabacher on april 17 , 2008 , concerns the costs of the continued u.s. presence in iraq .

the language preceding the resolution notes several figures related to past and future costs of maintaining u.s. forces in iraq , as well as iraq's oil reserves and the rising global price for oil .

the resolution itself calls on the president to refrain from entering any agreement with iraq that involves the presence of the u.s. armed forces in iraq unless the agreement includes a provision under which the republic of iraq agrees to reimburse the united states for all costs incurred by the united states related to the presence of united states armed forces in iraq after the effective date of the agreement , including the costs of pay and allowances for members of the united states armed forces serving in iraq .

the bill was referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on april 17 , 2008 , and no further action was taken .

appendix b .

hearings concerning the iraq agreements in the 110 th congress hearings pertinent to the iraq agreements are listed chronologically below .

for each hearing , the summary includes information pertinent to congress's role in the agreement - making process for the strategic framework and sofa , as well as information that may inform further congressional action regarding the iraq agreements .

concerns of members and opinions of expert witnesses included in these summaries represent all salient issues identified that concern the iraq agreements and congressional involvement in their creation .

these concerns and opinions are not included as representations of positions held by all or a group of members and / or witnesses participating in the hearings , nor as indications of any consensus reached by members or experts during the hearings or otherwise .

the summaries also do not purport to include all policy positions of members concerning the iraq agreements , as many members did not choose to participate actively .

the extension of the united nations mandate for iraq: is the iraqi parliament being ignored ? .

the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight held this hearing on december 19 , 2007 .

the hearing dealt primarily with the u.n. security council's adoption of resolution 1790 on december 18 , 2007 , which extended the u.n. mandate authorizing coalition forces in iraq for one year from december 31 , 2007 , until december 31 , 2008 .

witnesses testified on the ramifications of this extension on political relations and disputes between prime minister nouri al maliki and the iraqi council of representatives ( cor ) .

the hearing also afforded the chance to introduce issues concerning the declaration of principles signed by president bush and prime minister al maliki that set the stage for negotiating the iraq agreements .

[author name scrubbed] of the congressional research service testified at the hearing , setting out the main issues for negotiation of these agreements , based on the declaration and the comments of general lute: in the sofa , provisions for legal jurisdiction over u.s. personnel ( including security contractors ) and facilities where they are based , as well as administrative issues such as tax liabilities and postal services ; freedom of action for u.s. forces in iraq , including rules of engagement and authority to detain prisoners ; troop strength , duration , and scope of mission ; permanent u.s. bases ; and political , diplomatic , economic , and cultural issues .

some committee members expressed concern that statements by general lute indicated no requirement for congressional approval of the proposed agreements .

the proposed u.s. security commitment to iraq: what will be in it and should it be a treaty ? .

the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights and oversight and the house subcommittee on the middle east and south asia held this joint hearing on january 23 , 2008 .

at this hearing , some members questioned the contents of the declaration of principles , and the bush administration's decision to negotiate agreements pursuant to the declaration without seeking consultation or approval from congress .

legal scholars testified concerning possible legal requirements for congressional approval of the iraq agreements and opportunities for congress to increase its role in the negotiation and execution of such agreements .

committee members voiced the following concerns and assertions , among others: the bush administration is violating the state department's circular 175 regulations concerning congressional consultation on important international agreements , as well as constitutional requirements to involve congress in the making of such agreements ; the new agreements will bind a future president to a certain course in iraq , practically if not legally ; the decision to negotiate the iraq agreements at this time is politically unwise , as a new president may wish to abrogate or alter such agreements , which could result in weakening of the reputation of the united states as a trustworthy partner in international agreements ; congress is left with the power of the purse as its only recourse if it seeks to stop implementation of the agreements or challenge the president's power to make executive agreements , perhaps precipitating a constitutional crisis ; and congress must make clear to the iraqi government that without congressional support , especially on funding , these agreements with the bush administration will not be implemented .

although most comments from committee members supported some form of congressional involvement in the agreement - making process with iraq , certain members made it clear that they believe the president has the authority to enter into the iraq agreements as sole executive agreements and that congressional attempts to limit that power may be unconstitutional .

the legal scholars who participated provided certain separate opinions with regard to the need for congressional approval of the iraq agreements , including the following: while a "security assurance," such as an agreement to consult with iraq on its defense in an emergency , could be executed by the president without congressional approval , a "security commitment" obligating the united states to defend iraq would require a treaty that would need senate approval ; an agreement for u.s. bases in iraq may be executed as an executive agreement , but only if it does not conflict with earlier legislation passed by congress ; the administration should adhere to the state department's circular 175 regulations requiring congressional consultations , as the iraq agreements represent significant new international agreements ; and implementation of the iraq agreements , even if executed as executive agreements , would still have to work within the parameters of congressional authorizations and appropriations .

hearings on the fy2009 defense budget the house and senate armed services committees convened separate hearings concerning the fy2009 budget request of the department of defense on february 6 , 2008 .

during the hearings , several members took the opportunity to ask secretary gates about the proposed iraq agreements .

under questioning , secretary gates did not rule out submitting an agreement with iraq to the senate for advice and consent as a treaty , but stated that the decision would be based on the contents of the agreement .

he explained that it has been practice to execute status of forces agreements as executive agreements without seeking congressional approval .

in his testimony during both hearings , secretary gates made several important statements concerning the iraq agreements and the ongoing negotiations , including the following: the iraq agreements will not contain a u.s. commitment to defend iraq and the sofa will not contain a "security component" ; the declaration of principles in itself also does not constitute a u.s. security commitment to iraq ; the administration does not want permanent bases in iraq ; the sofa will contain "rules of the road" on how u.s. forces are able to operate after expiration of the u.n. security council resolution , including rules on u.s. authority to detain individuals , and legal immunity for u.s. contractors ; nothing in any agreement being negotiated with iraq would bind a future administration ; and there should be openness and transparency in the negotiation process so that congress can make informed decisions concerning the iraq agreements , and the senate will be afforded a chance to review the sofa before it is implemented .

the november 26 declaration of principles: implications for u.n .

resolutions on iraq and for congressional oversight this hearing took place on february 8 , 2008 , before the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight .

four questions were to be considered: ( 1 ) whether a status of forces agreement can authorize u.s. forces to engage in combat in or on behalf of another country ; ( 2 ) whether an agreement containing a u.s. commitment to defend another country must be submitted for some form of congressional approval ; ( 3 ) what consultation with congress is required on the form of the iraq agreements and the issues to be negotiated ; and ( 4 ) what procedures must be followed within the executive to determine the form of the iraq agreements and the organization of negotiations .

building on the sentiments of the subcommittee's january 23 hearing , members made the following statements , among others: the authority for u.s. forces to remain in iraq past the end of the u.n. mandate on december 31 , 2008 , must be approved by both the congress and the iraqi cor ; and the declaration of principles has been used by the administration to send misleading political signals to both congress and iraq .

the expert panel provided extensive testimony on the four questions posed by the subcommittee , including these assertions: a commitment to defend another country cannot be included in a status of forces agreement as that term is commonly used ; the type of security commitment spelled out in the declaration of principles would contain a greater obligation for the united states than u.s. mutual defense treaties include , as the commitment involves defending against internal threats and an automatic requirement to use force in iraq's defense ; the declaration itself , however , may not be intended as binding , and likely represents only a statement of shared interests , not a preview of the contents of the actual iraq agreements ; any provisions in the proposed sofa concerning immunity for security contractors from iraq's legal process might represent an expansion of recognized presidential prerogatives regarding these types of agreements , although providing for such immunity may be within the president's constitutionally granted powers ; and because the conditions of the specific 2002 authorization of the use of force against iraq no longer adhere , the proposed iraq agreements represent a new national commitment of the u.s. armed forces and as such require congressional approval .

hearings on the fy2009 foreign affairs budget the senate foreign relations committee and house foreign affairs committee held separate hearings concerning the fy2009 foreign affairs budget on february 13 , 2008 .

during secretary of state condoleezza rice's testimony in the two hearings , she was questioned about the provisions of the proposed iraq agreements .

she stated the following on the issue: the administration is not seeking permanent bases in iraq ; the united states is not taking on an obligation to defend iraq against its neighbors , or provide any security guarantees ; the agreements do not contain a "commitment to combat forces" or required u.s. troop levels ; the sofa is intended to allow u.s. forces to operate there in a legal fashion after the u.n. mandate ; the administration will consult with congress as the negotiations progress ; and the sofa will not bind the hands of the next president .

secretary rice maintained the administration's position that the proposed sofa , while tailored to the specific situation in iraq , still fell under the customary form of a sofa and therefore could be concluded without congressional approval .

status of forces agreements and u.n. mandates: what authorities and protections do they provide to u.s .

personnel ? .

continuing its series on the future of the u.s. relationship with iraq , the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight held this hearing on february 28 , 2008 .

focusing on the purpose and scope of sofas in general , the hearing produced statements from committee members that congress needs to play a significant role in reviewing and approving the iraq sofa , even if it does not include a commitment to defend iraq , due to the importance of iraq to u.s. foreign policy overall .

professor michael j. matheson , one of the experts on the hearing panel , suggested that congress should engage in defining the scope of authority for military operations in iraq going forward .

declaration and principles: future u.s. commitments to iraq this hearing took place before a joint session of the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight and the subcommittee on the middle east and south asia on march 4 , 2008 .

the fourth hearing in a series , it was the first that collected testimony from administration officials .

ambassador david satterfield , who leads the negotiations with iraq , answered numerous questions from members concerning the iraq agreements , making the following statements , among others: the iraq agreements will not include a binding commitment to defend iraq or any other security commitment that would warrant senate advice and consent ; the iraq agreements will not create permanent u.s. bases in iraq , and will not specify numbers of u.s. troops to be stationed there ; any arrangement fulfilling the pledges of the declaration of principles between the administration and iraq will be made public and will not remain secret ; the administration does not contemplate the strategic framework as a legally binding agreement ; the administration has made clear to prime minister al maliki and other iraqi officials that the agreements will not include an obligation to enter into combat if iraq is attacked ; the iraq agreements will not contain a commitment for u.s. forces to remain present in iraq ; and the administration relies on the congressional authority in the 2002 authorization to invade iraq as the basis for maintaining u.s. forces in iraq past the end of the u.n. mandate .

when asked whether the administration would present the iraq agreements to congress for approval , ambassador satterfield held to the administration's position that the agreements did not need congressional approval , but stated that the administration would comply with all constitutional requirements .

he stated that background briefings had already taken place between the administration and members of congress , and that they would continue , but that the administration would not publicly disclose its negotiating positions .

international affairs budget for fiscal year 2009 the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations and related programs held this hearing on march 12 , 2008 .

secretary rice appeared before the subcommittee during this hearing and was asked several questions concerning the iraq agreements .

she reiterated her comments from earlier hearings , stating that the administration was not seeking permanent bases , and that the sofa being negotiated does not set troop levels , and does not make commitments to specific kinds of operations .

answering a question concerning the submission of the iraq sofa to congress for approval , secretary rice responded that sofas are not submitted to congress .

when pressed on the source of the president's authority to continue the u.s. presence in iraq , secretary rice did not cite the 2002 authorization to invade iraq or the 2001 authorization to use military force in response to the september 11 terrorist attacks , instead stating , "the president has the authority , we believe , to continue the operations," without reference to the basis for that authority .

hearings on the iraq report regarding the u.s. troop surge the senate foreign relations committee , on april 8 , 2008 , and the house foreign affairs committee , on april 9 , 2008 , each held a hearing to discuss the results of the u.s. troop surge in iraq .

ambassador ryan crocker testified before both committees , making several statements and answering questions concerning the iraq agreements .

while much of his testimony was similar to that of other administration officials in previous hearings , he did explain the motivation for the agreements , stating that the principal leaders of iraq requested a long - term bilateral relationship with the united states in august 2007 , and that the agreements represent to the iraqis an affirmation of their sovereignty .

he also explained that the agreements do not contain provisions for permanent u.s. bases in iraq , and that he anticipated the united states would explicitly forswear such bases in the agreements .

as other administration officials had done , ambassador crocker stated the administration's intention was to conclude the sofa as a sole executive agreement .

he also made comments that indicated the strategic framework would not be a legally enforceable international agreement , but merely a political agreement between the administration and the al maliki government .

negotiating a long - term relationship with iraq this hearing was held before the senate foreign relations committee on april 10 , 2008 .

ambassador david satterfield appeared before the committee and gave testimony concerning the two proposed iraq agreements that was similar to his earlier testimony on march 4 , outlined above: no permanent u.s. bases , no requirement for troop levels or the nature of the u.s. mission , no binding commitment to defend iraq , and no provisions that will limit the policy options of the next president .

he repeated the administration's position that the sofa would be concluded as an executive agreement rather than a treaty , but that the administration intended to consult with congress throughout the process .

he explained that the strategic framework would not contain legally binding commitments that would trigger senate advice - and - consent procedures .

when questioned about the authority for the u.s. presence in iraq after the expiration of the u.n. mandate on december 31 , 2008 , ambassador satterfield cited the president's authorities as commander - in - chief as well as the 2002 authorization to invade iraq and the 2001 authorization to use force after the september 11 terrorist attacks .

the future of u.s. - iraqi relations: the perspective of the iraqi parliament the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight held this hearing on june 4 , 2008 .

the subcommittee took testimony from two members of the iraqi cor , sheikh khalaf al - ulayyan and professor nadeem al - jaberi , concerning the continuing u.s. presence in iraq and the two proposed iraq agreements .

they asserted that as a whole the cor had several ongoing concerns: the agreements should not be concluded at this time , because iraq does not enjoy full sovereignty and as such cannot enter any agreement with the united states as an equal party ; iraq should not enter into the agreements until the new u.s. president comes into office ; any agreement between the al maliki government and the united states will not be implemented without approval by the cor ; no provision for permanent u.s. bases in the iraq agreements will be acceptable to the iraqi populace ; and the presence of u.s. forces in iraq is no longer needed , and a timetable for withdrawal of u.s. forces is desired .

at the hearing , chairman delahunt announced a plan to create a formalized interparliamentary dialogue mechanism between the legislatures of the united states and iraq that would "allow us to continue these conversations and better inform ourselves , because legislative bodies in a democracy are absolutely essential and particularly in terms of oversight of the executive branches. .

professor al - jaberi indicated that the cor will pursue this idea .

hearing to receive a briefing on the status of negotiations with iraq on a strategic framework agreement and a status of forces agreement this hearing was held on july 16 , 2008 in a closed session of the senate armed services committee .

possible extension of the u.n .

mandate for iraq: options the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight held this hearing on july 23 , 2008 .

the hearing focused on the continued negotiation of the iraq agreements and the possible need for extension of the u.n. mandate if the agreements were not finalized by december 31 , 2008 .

at the hearing , members of congress expressed their continued concerns over whether the bush administration and the al maliki government could execute the iraq agreements before expiration of the u.n. mandate .

several continued to argue that the bush administration must consult with congress on the negotiation of the agreements and must submit the agreements to congress for approval .

some stressed their view as well that review and approval of the iraq agreements by the iraqi cor was legally required .

several witnesses gave their testimony on these and other issues concerning the iraq agreements , and made statements demonstrating a number of points of view: execution of the security agreement and strategic framework will better ensure u.s. national security interests than an extension of the u.n. mandate .

continuation of the u.n. mandate will harm iraq's sovereignty in the eyes of the international community and of the iraqis themselves .

extension of the u.n. mandate under chapter vi , which would allow iraq to voluntarily allow the presence of u.s. troops , may be a middle way between the contemplated iraq agreements and the extension of the chapter vii mandate .

a majority of the iraqi cor and the iraqi population welcome non - military u.s. assistance , but desire a timetable for withdrawal of u.s. troops in any bilateral agreement for a continued u.s. military presence .

given the reported difficulties in the negotiations over the iraq agreements and the short time frame for finalizing the agreements , an extension of the u.n. mandate is the only avenue to ensuring the legality of the u.s. mission in iraq under domestic and international law , and the legal protections and immunities of u.s. troops in iraq .

going forward , congress can strengthen its role in the execution of the iraq agreements by working directly with the iraqi cor and coordinating efforts for including the two legislatures in the process , making its oversight activities as visible as possible to both the u.s. and iraqi populations , and to continue to conduct oversight through hearings and other means as the negotiations continue .

the last witness at the hearing was dr. ayad allawi , the former prime minister of iraq , and current member of the cor .

dr. allawi expressed his opinion that the iraq agreements should be transparent , and that the prime minister al maliki's government should consult with the cor about these agreements and submit them to the cor for formal approval , in compliance with the requirements of the iraqi constitution .

he stated that the general opposition of a majority of cor members to the iraq agreement stemmed from the fact that the cor had not been kept apprised of the contents of the agreements and the status of the negotiations .

the agreements may receive the two - thirds majority vote for ratification , he explained , if the cor had an opportunity to review the agreements beforehand .

with regard to an extension of the u.n. mandate , dr. allawi stated that a chapter vi mandate would be more appropriate to the current state of iraq's status as a sovereign nation .

hearing on the iraq progress report the house armed services committee held this hearing on july 23 , 2008 .

the committee received testimony from mr. gene dodaro , acting comptroller general of the united states .

during his testimony , mr. dodaro made several statements and answered questions concerning the iraq agreements and the termination of the u.n. mandate as it pertained to the benchmarks set out in the iraq progress report .

mr. dodaro stated that the iraq agreements should address the issues of continued development of various capacities in iraq , and that the continuing framework for iraq's progress must take into account issues of the imminent u.s. presidential transition .

the situation in iraq and afghanistan during this hearing held by the senate armed services committee on september 23 , 2008 , senator john warner questioned secretary of defense robert gates on the status of negotiations over the iraq agreements , and the bush administration's intentions to involve congress in the overall process of executing the agreements .

secretary gates explained that the negotiations had been difficult , and that the iraqi government had strong views about the country's sovereignty .

he stated that it was his understanding that all relevant committees had been briefed on the negotiations , and that the agreements would not be signed before consultation with members of congress .

senator warner expressed his belief that full and open consultation with congress was required , not briefings for "just one or two chairmen here or a ranking [member] there.... " secretary gates stated that if the agreements reach final form during a recess the administration would make significant effort to "reach out to members. .

chairman carl levin then asked secretary gates to confirm his understanding , stating , "there's a commitment from this administration that before the agreements are finalized that there be consultation with the leadership of the congress. .

 ( emphasis added. ) .

secretary gates answered , "yes , sir. .

renewing the united nations mandate for iraq ( and analysis of finalized iraq agreements ) this hearing took place before the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight on november 19 , 2008 .

the topic for the hearing was to center on renewing the u.n. mandate for iraq , but the participants focused extensively on the bilateral u.s. - iraq agreements signed on november 17 .

the cor had not yet voted to approve the agreements , however , making the extension of the un mandate a possibility if the iraqi cor disapproved the security agreement .

chairman delahunt commented that he hoped the series of hearings conducted by the subcommittee had a role in shaping the discussion and formation of the iraq agreements , especially the inclusion of withdrawal deadlines in the security agreement .

he expressed continued frustration with the bush administration's unwillingness to conduct open consultation with congress and to submit the iraq agreements to congress for formal approval .

in addition , he noted his surprise at the opposition of the administration to an extension of the un mandate and insistence on finalizing the bilateral security agreement before december 31 , 2008 .

members participating in the hearing also stated a number of concerns about the provisions of the security agreement itself , including the lack of provision in the agreements for iraqi reimbursement of u.s. costs incurred as a result of a continued u.s. presence in iraq through 2011 ; the agreements' inattention to the role of multilateral cooperation in the continuing reconstruction of iraq ; the lack of legal immunity from prosecution in iraqi courts for private security contractors not employed under dod contract ; and the vagueness of several of the provisions .

the iraq agreements in the context of u.s .

interests and the mission in iraq thomas donnelly of the american enterprise institute gave testimony concerning the security agreement's relationship to u.s. interests in iraq .

he stated that the congress should approve the security agreement if possible , because it would aid the president by removing doubts about the legal status of u.s. troops , and because the security agreement would bolster the developing stability of iraq .

he claimed that passage of the security agreement would weaken the supporters of moqtada al sadr , represent a rejection of iran's influence in iraq , and improve iraq's self - image as a sovereign nation .

he also expressed his concerns about the requirement for u.s. forces to withdraw from iraqi cities and towns by june 30 , 2009 , citing the possibility of a return to ethnic cleansing , and the lack of certainty about u.s. operations in iraq that may be necessary past the december 31 , 2011 termination of the security agreement .

he stated that while the security agreement did not require iraq to reimburse the united states for its expenditures in iraq , the united states should ensure that iraq budgetary process and execution be strengthened in order to increase iraq's ability to take over security and other activities from the united states .

the members of the subcommittee and the witnesses also engaged in a discussion concerning the iraqi courts' jurisdiction over u.s. forces , dod contractors , and non - dod contractors .

u.s .

constitutional issues concerning the iraq agreements professor oona hathaway provided testimony to the subcommittee concerning u.s. constitutional issues and the security agreement , making the argument that the security agreement contained provisions that fell outside the president's independent constitutional powers .

first , she considered the provision requiring u.s. commanders in iraq to receive approval from the iraqi government through the jmocc before engaging in military activities .

professor hathaway stated that the executive branch's partial ceding of operational decisional control without prior congressional approval was unprecedented .

second , she argued that the security agreement contained many provisions that had never been included in a u.s. sofa , including the provision granting u.s. forces the ability to fight in iraq , the jmocc provision requiring iraqi approval of u.s. military operations , and the timetables for withdrawal of u.s. troops from iraqi cities and from iraq itself .

professor hathaway explained that such agreements have in the past been concluded as treaties requiring senate approval .

last , professor hathaway argued that the war in iraq would become illegal under u.s. law because congress authorized the use of force against iraq for two purposes: ( 1 ) to defend u.s. national security against the continuing threat posed by iraq ; and ( 2 ) to enforce all relevant u.n. security council resolutions regarding iraq .

because iraq is no longer a threat , as stated in the security agreement itself , and because the un mandate expires on december 31 , 2008 , she asserted that there would be no congressional approval for the war as of january 1 , 2009 .

professor hathaway argued that only an extension of the un mandate , or congressional approval of the security agreement , would give legal authority for the continuation of the war in iraq .

when asked by members of the subcommittee about the legality of the security agreement if congress does not approve it , professor hathaway stated that it would be unconstitutional in her view .

she stated that a challenge in the courts is possible but unlikely to be effective , but legislation from congress stating that the security agreement must be approved by congress to be legal might be effective in protecting congressional powers against a harmful precedent .

she also explained that the president may wish to submit the security agreement to congress for approval , making it a so - called "ex post congressional - executive agreement. .

in response to questions concerning congress's ability to pass legislation that changes , reinterprets , or rejects provisions of the security agreement , professor hathaway stated that the president must agree to any changes to the security agreement before they could be effective .

iraqi constitutional requirements for ratification of the iraq agreements testimony entered into the record from issam m. saliba of the law library of congress explained the requirements in the iraq constitution for ratification of international agreements: article 80 , section 6 authorizes the council of ministers or its designee to negotiate and sign international treaties and agreements .

article 73 , section 2 requires international treaties and agreements to be ratified by the cor and confirmed by the president .

article 61 , section 4 authorizes passage of a law by a two - thirds majority regulating ratification of international treaties and agreements .

mr. saliba stated that the ratification law required by article 64 could contain different requirements for different types of agreements .

he stated , however , that the cor has not yet passed the ratification law , and therefore there is no legal basis for asserting that the iraq agreements may be ratified by a simple majority of the cor .

he argued that a two - thirds majority vote of the cor approving either of the iraq agreements would be legally valid under the constitution , as the number of cor members approving the individual agreements would equal the number required to pass the law of ratification .

chairman delahunt stated that the speaker of the cor at the time , dr. mahmoud al - mashhadani , agreed with this legal assessment .

raed jarrar , iraq consultant to the american friends service committee , testified that many political factions within the cor oppose entering into the iraq agreements at this time , arguing that the cor has not been adequately involved in the negotiation of the iraq agreements , and that it needed more than a few days to consider the agreement .

members of the cor had also expressed concerns about article 29 of the security agreement , mr. jarrar stated , as that article permits the parties to enter into additional implementation agreements , presumably without additional parliamentary approval .

recently , mr. jarrar explained , political parties aligned with the prime minister began to assert that the agreement could be passed by a simple majority in the cor .

he expressed his opinion that this argument was politically motivated , because ( 1 ) the proposed law on ratifications would call for a two - thirds vote on the agreements , support the government did not have , and ( 2 ) ayatollah ali al - sistani insisted that the agreements be presented to the cor for approval at this time .

he was of the opinion that a bare - majority vote in the cor on the iraq agreements may be cause for renewed splits among different groups in iraq .

mr. jarrar also mentioned that the iraqi constitutional court , which would rule on constitutional issues such as these , has not yet been created .

he stated it is possible that the court , once in operation , would judge the security agreement invalid due to the cor's possible circumvention of constitutional requirements for ratification .

international law issues concerning the iraq agreements and extension of the un mandate professor michael matheson testified on the u.n. security council's resolution procedures and their possible use to extend the u.n. mandate for iraq .

he stated that a new security council resolution could be passed as it exists now , as a chapter vii mandate requiring a threat to international peace and security , or as a chapter vi mandate , which requires the invitation of foreign troops into the host country .

a chapter vi mandate , he explained , would not have any derogatory effect on iraqi sovereignty , and would allow u.s. forces to continue to operate in iraq with the same legal status and protections .

professor matheson stated that certain chapter vii resolutions would remain in effect , however , including those concerning protection of iraqi oil assets and the u.n. regime on compensation of kuwaiti victims of the first gulf war .

