climate change is generally viewed as a global issue , but proposed responses typically require action at the national level .

with the 1997 kyoto protocol now in force and setting emissions objectives for 2008-2012 , countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing their emissions of greenhouse gases .

in particular , the european union ( eu ) has decided to use an emissions trading scheme ( called a "cap - and - trade" program ) , along with other market - oriented mechanisms permitted under the protocol , to help it achieve compliance at least cost .

the decision to use emission trading to implement the kyoto protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions trading program used by the united states to implement its sulfur dioxide ( acid rain ) control program contained in title iv of the 1990 clean act amendments .

the eu's emissions trading system ( ets ) covers more than 10,000 energy intensive facilities across the 27 eu member countries , including oil refineries , powerplants over 20 megawatts ( mw ) in capacity , coke ovens , and iron and steel plants , along with cement , glass , lime , brick , ceramics , and pulp and paper installations .

covered entities emit about 45% of the eu's carbon dioxide emissions .

the trading program covers neither co 2 emissions from the transportation sector , which account for about 25% of the eu's total greenhouse gas emissions , nor emissions of non - co 2 greenhouse gases , which account for about 20% of the eu's total greenhouse gas emissions .

a "phase 1" trading period began january 1 , 2005 .

a second , phase 2 , trading period began january 1 , 2008 , covering the period of the kyoto protocol , with a phase 3 planned to begin in 2013 .

under the kyoto protocol , the then - existing 15 nations of the eu agreed to reduce their aggregate annual average emissions for 2008-2012 by 8% from the protocol's baseline level ( mostly 1990 levels ) under a collective arrangement called a "bubble. .

by 2006 , collective greenhouse gas emissions in the eu were 2.7% below kyoto baseline levels ( 2.2% below 1990 levels ) , mostly the result of a structural shift from coal to natural gas in the united kingdom and the incorporation of east germany into west germany .

in light of the kyoto protocol targets , the eu adopted a directive establishing the eu - ets that entered into force october 13 , 2003 .

the importance of emissions trading was elevated by the accession of 12 additional central and eastern europe countries to eu membership from may 2004 through january 2007 .

collectively , the 27 members of the expanded eu's greenhouse gas emissions dropped 7.7% from 1990 to 2006 .

the ec believes that the phase 1 "learning by doing" exercise prepared the community for the difficult task of achieving the reduction requirements of the kyoto protocol .

several positives resulted from the phase 1 experience that assisted the ets in making the phase 2 process run smoothly , at least so far .

first , phase 1 established much of the critical infrastructure necessary for a functional emission market , including emissions monitoring , registries , and inventories .

much of the publicized difficulties the ets experienced in the first phase can be traced to inadequate emission data .

phase 1 significantly improved those data in preparation for phase 2 implementation .

second , the ets helped jump - start the project - based mechanisms — clean development mechanism ( cdm ) and joint implementation ( ji ) — created under the kyoto protocol .

as stated by ellerman and buchner: the access to external credits provided by the linking directive has had an invigorating effect on the cdm and more generally on co 2 reduction projects in developing countries , especially in china and india , the two major countries that will eventually have to become part of a global climate regime if there is to be one .

third , according to the ec , a key result of phase 1 was its effect on corporate behavior .

an ec survey of stakeholders indicated that many participants are incorporating the value of allowances in making decisions , particularly in the electric utility sector where 70% of firms stated they were pricing in the value of allowances into their daily operations , and 87% into future marginal pricing decisions .

all industries stated that it was a factor in long - term decision - making .

however , several issues that arose during the first phase remain contentious as the ets implements phase 2 , including allocation ( including use of auctions and reliance on model projections ) , shutdown credits and new entrant reserves , and others .

in addition , the expansion of the eu and the implementation of the linking directives create new issues to which phase 2 has had to respond .

these new and continuing challenges for phase 2 implementation are discussed below .

national allocation plans ( naps ) are central to the eu's effort to achieve its kyoto obligations .

each member of the eu must submit a nap that lays out its allocation scheme under the ets , including individual allocations to each affected unit .

for the second trading period , these naps were assessed by the ec to determine compliance with 12 criteria delineated in an annex to the emissions trading directive .

criteria included requirements that the emissions caps and other measures proposed by the member state were sufficient to put it on the path toward its kyoto target , protections against discrimination between companies and sectors , delineation of intended use of cdm and ji credits for compliance , along with provisions for new entrants , clean technology , and early reduction credits .

for the second trading period , the nap must guarantee kyoto compliance .

naps for the second trading period were due june 30 , 2006 .

by october 26 , 2007 , the ec had reviewed and approved ( sometimes conditionally ) all 27 member states' naps .

as indicated by table 1 , the ec reduced the proposed allocations of individual member states by an average of 10.5% to increase the probability that the eu will achieve its target under the kyoto protocol .

the need to reduce the requested allocations reflects both the structure of the ets and the lessons the ec learned during the first phase .

the european union is committed to achieving a 20% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 from 1990 levels .

a strategic component of the effort to achieve this target is a revised ets .

table 4 indicates the proposed eu - wide ets cap for the next phase of eu greenhouse gas program ( phase 3 ) .

as indicated , the ec envisions a linear reduction in the ets cap to match the reductions target under the overall 20% reduction program .

these numbers will change as individual countries decide to include more facilities under the ets and as the ec expands ets coverage to include other sectors and non - co 2 greenhouse gases .

the following discusses some of the major changes the eu envisions for the ets in responding to this aggressive target .

the united states is not a party to the kyoto protocol and no legislative proposal before the congress would impose as stringent or rapid an emission reduction regime on the united states as kyoto would have .

however , through almost four years of carbon emissions trading the eu has gained valuable experience .

this experience , along with the process of developing phase 3 , may provide some insight into current cap - and - trade design issues in the united states .

the ets experience with market trading and target setting confirms once again the central importance of a credible emissions inventory to a functioning cap - and - trade program .

the lack of credible eu - wide data on emissions was a direct cause of the ets phase 1 allowance market collapse in 2006 .

arguably , the most important result of phase 1 was the development of a credible inventory on which to base future targets and allocations .

in the united states , section 821 of the 1990 clean air act amendments requires electric generating facilities affected by the acid rain provisions of title iv to monitor carbon dioxide in accordance with epa regulations .

this provision was enacted for the stated purpose of establishing a national carbon dioxide monitoring system .

as promulgated by epa , regulations permit owners and operators of affected facilities to monitor their carbon dioxide emissions through either continuous emission monitoring ( cem ) or fuel analysis .

the cem regulations for carbon dioxide are similar to those for the acid rain program's sulfur dioxide cem regulations .

those choosing fuel analysis must calculate mass emissions on a daily , quarterly , and annual basis , based on amounts and types of fuel used .

as suggested by the eu - ets experience , expanding equivalent data requirements to all facilities covered under a cap - and - trade program would be the foundation for developing the allocation systems , reduction targets , and enforcement provisions .

despite economic analysis to the contrary , the eu decided to restrict ets coverage to six sectors that represent about 45% of the eu's co 2 emissions .

this restriction was estimated to raise the cost of complying with kyoto from 6 billion euro annually to 6.9 billion euro ( 1999 euro ) compared with a comprehensive trading program .

a variety of practical , political , and scientific reasons were given by the ec for the decision .

the experience of the ets up to now suggests that adding new sectors to an existing trading program is a difficult process .

as noted above , a stated goal of the ec is to expand the coverage of the ets .

however , the experience of phase 1 did not result in the addition of any new sector until the last year of phase 2 when aviation will be included .

the eu is attempting to expand its coverage with phase 3 , but the ets will still cover fewer sectors emitting greenhouse gases than provided under most u.s. proposals .

u.s. cap - and - trade proposals generally fall into one of two categories .

most bills are more comprehensive than the ets , covering 80% to 100% of the country's greenhouse gas emissions .

at a minimum , they include the electric utility , transportation , and industrial sectors ; disagreement among the bills center on the agricultural sector and smaller commercial and residential sources .

in some cases discretion is provided epa to exempt sources if serious data , economic , or other considerations dictate such a resolution .

a second category of bills focuses on the electric utility industry , representing about 33% of u.s. greenhouse gases and therefore less comprehensive than the ets .

sometimes including additional controls on non - greenhouse gas pollutants , such as mercury , these bills focus on the sources with the most experience with emission trading and the best emissions data .

other sources could be added as circumstances dictate .

as noted , the eu's experience with the ets suggests that adding sectors to an emission trading scheme can be a slow and contentious process .

if one believes that the electric utility sector is a cost - effective place to start addressing greenhouse gas emissions and that there is sufficient time to do the necessary groundwork to eventually add other sectors , then a phased - in approach may be reasonable .

if one believes that the economy as a whole needs to begin adjusting to a carbon - constrained environment to meet long term goals , then a more comprehensive approach may be justified .

the ets experience suggests the process doesn't necessarily get any easier if you wait .

setting up a tradeable allowance system is a lot like setting up a new currency .

allocating allowances is essentially allocating money with the marketplace determining the exchange rate .

as noted above , the free allocation scheme used in the ets has resulted in "windfall profits" being received by allowance recipients .

as stated quite forcefully by deutsche bank research: the most striking market outcome of emissions trading to date has been the power industry's windfall profits , which have sparked controversy .

we are all familiar with the background: emissions allowances were handed out free of charge to those plant operators participating in the emissions trading scheme .

nevertheless , in particular the producers of electricity succeeded in marking up the market price of electricity to include the opportunity - cost value of the allowances .

this is correct from an accounting point of view , since the allowances do have a value and could otherwise be sold .

moreover , emissions trading cannot work without price signals .

the free allocation of allowances in the ets incorporates two other mechanisms that create perverse incentives and significant distortions in the emissions markets: new entrant reserves and closure policy .

combined with an uncoordinated and spotty benchmarking approach for both new and existing sources , the result is a greenhouse gas reduction scheme that is influenced as much or more by national policy than by the emissions marketplace .

the proposed expansion of auctions for phase 3 of the ets could simplify allocations and permit market forces to influence compliance strategies more fully .

most countries did not employ auctions at all during phase 1 and auctions continue to be limited under phase 2 .

no country combined an auction with a reserve price to encourage development of new technology .

the ec limited the amount of auctioned allowances to 10% in phase 2: a limit no country chose to meet .

efforts to expand auctions met opposition from industry groups , but attracted support from environmental groups and economists .

the ec proposed increase of auctioning to two - thirds of total allowances for phase 3 would represent a major development for the scheme .

currently , all u.s. cap - and - trade proposals have some provisions for auctions , although the amount involved is sometimes left to epa discretion .

most specify a schedule that provides increasing use of auctions from 2012 through the mid - 2030s with a final target of 66% - 100% of total allowances auctioned .

funds would be used for a variety of purposes , including programs to encourage new technologies .

a couple of proposals include a reserve price on some auctions to create a price floor for new technology .

like the situation in the ets , most u.s. industry groups either oppose auctions outright or want them to be supplemental to a base free allocation .

given the experience with the ets where the ec and individual governments have been unwilling or unable to move away from free allocation , the congress , like the ec , may ultimately be asked to consider specifying any auction requirement if it wishes to incorporate market economics more fully into compliance decisions .

despite eu rhetoric during the kyoto protocol negotiations , it moved into phase 2 without a significant restriction on the use of cdm and ji credits .

this embracing of project credits will significantly increase the flexibility facilities have in meeting their reduction targets .

in addition , phase 2 includes the use of banking to increase flexibility across time by allowing banked allowances to be used in phase 3 .

each of these market mechanisms is projected to reduce both the eu's kyoto compliance costs and allowance price volatility .

as a further defense against price volatility , the european emission exchanges are creating financial instruments , such as futures contracts and options , to permit entities to hedge against price changes .

unfortunately , phase 1 experience with the ets does not provide much useful information on the value of market mechanisms or financial instruments in reducing costs or price volatility .

the combination of poor emissions inventories , non - use of project credits , and time - limited allowances with effectively no banking resulted in extreme price volatility in spring 2006 , and virtually worthless allowances by mid - 2007 .

the real test for the mechanisms employed by the ets to create a stable allowance market is phase 2 .

initial indications are that a mature market for allowances appears to be developing , like the ets , u.s. cap - and - trade proposals would employ a combination of devices to create a stable allowance market and encourage flexible , cost - effective compliance strategies by participating entities .

all include banking .

all include use of offsets , although some would place substantial restrictions on their use .

one proposal incorporates a "safety valve" that would effectively place a ceiling on allowance prices .

other proposals would create a carbon market efficiency board to observe the allowance market and implement cost - relief measures if necessary .

some see this as a more flexible response with the potential for avoiding or mitigating the environmental impacts of a safety valve ( i.e. , increased emissions ) .

additionally , concern has been expressed in the united states about the regulation of allowance markets and instruments .

based on experience with the ets , the potential for speculation and manipulation could extend beyond the emission markets .

analysis of ets allowance prices during phase 1 suggests the most important variables in determining allowance price changes were oil and natural gas price changes .

this apparent linkage between allowance price changes and price changes in two commodities markets raises the possibility of market manipulation , particularly with the inclusion of financial instruments such as options and futures contracts .

congress may ultimately be asked to consider whether the securities and exchange commission , federal energy regulatory commission , the commodities futures trading commission , or other body should have enhanced regulatory and oversight authority over such instruments .

