the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ) as amended , authorizes the federal government's major federal student aid programs ( title iv ) , as well as other programs which provide institutional aid and support ( titles ii , iii and v ) .

in addition , the hea authorizes services and support to less - advantaged students ( select title iv programs ) , and to students pursuing international education and certain graduate and professional degrees ( titles vi and vii ) .

the programs authorized by the hea are administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , and made available an estimated 70% ( $94 billion ) of all federal , state , and institutional aid awarded to postsecondary students in 2005-2006 ( excluding tax benefits ) .

the hea was last comprehensively reauthorized by the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) , which expired september 30 , 2003 .

since the initial expiration of the authorization , there have been several temporary extensions , which authorize the programs and activities of the hea through march 31 , 2008 .

most recently , p.l .

110-198 , the higher education extension act of 2008 , extends the hea authorization to april 30 , 2008 .

this report provides a brief overview of major provisions of the hea .

it is organized by title and part of the act .

other crs reports provide much more detailed discussions and analyses of major hea provisions .

this report will be updated following reauthorization of the hea .

the hea was initially authorized in 1965 ( p.l .

89-329 ) .

since that time , comprehensive amendment and reauthorization of the hea has occurred seven additional times .

the principal objective of the hea is to expand postsecondary education opportunity , particularly for low - income individuals , and to increase affordability for moderate income families as well .

the heart of the legislation is its student aid programs authorized under title iv , which provide student aid in the form of grants , loans , and work - study assistance .

there are seven titles of the hea that authorize numerous programs and provisions designed to provide assistance to postsecondary students and institutions .

the seven titles of the hea are: title i — general provisions title ii — teacher quality enhancement title iii — institutional aid title iv — student assistance title v — developing institutions title vi — international education programs ; and title vii — graduate and postsecondary improvement programs each of these titles and the major programs under each are discussed in greater detail .

title i of the hea includes four parts , which establish the general provisions for the remainder of the hea .

many of the provisions affect institutions' participation in the title iv student aid programs .

title ii authorizes grants for improving teacher education programs , strengthening teacher recruitment efforts , and training prospective teachers .

this title also includes the reporting requirements for states and ihes regarding the quality of teacher education programs .

title iii is intended to provide support for less - advantaged institutions serving students from low - income or racial minority backgrounds .

there are six parts authorizing programs for ihes that serve select groups of students , including historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , alaska native and native hawaiian - serving institutions , and tribally controlled colleges and universities ( tccus ) .

additionally , title iii , part a authorizes funding for less - advantaged institutions and those serving low - income students .

title iv of the hea contains eight parts which authorize a broad range of programs and provisions .

as the most notable title of the hea , the programs authorized under title iv are the primary sources of federal aid to support postsecondary education .

in 1998 congress authorized the inclusion of grants to hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) under title v of the hea .

prior to 1998 , the hsi program was a section of title iii , part a .

title v of the hea is solely dedicated to authorizing grants for hsis .

title vi contains four parts that authorize an array of international and foreign language studies programs and business and international education programs to strengthen domestic ihes in foreign languages and in area and international studies .

title vii authorizes several graduate education programs , as well as a grant program designed to support innovation and improvement in postsecondary education .

it also authorizes grants for urban community service and demonstration programs to enable ihes to better serve disabled students .

title vii , part a authorizes several graduate education programs .

the jacob k. javits fellowships program provides financial support to students of "superior ability" in the arts , humanities , and social sciences .

the graduate assistance in areas of national need ( gaan ) provides competitive grants to postbaccalaureate students in areas of national need .

the thurgood marshall legal educational opportunity program authorizes a grant or contract to the council on legal education opportunity for services and activities to help low - income , minority , or disadvantaged college students prepare for , gain access to , and complete law school .

part a also includes general provisions that affect the administration and evaluation of these programs and the provision of continuation awards .

title vii , part b authorizes the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education ( fipse ) awards to ihes and other nonprofit entities for projects that model innovative reform and improvement of postsecondary education .

also included are provisions establishing the national board of the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education , which provides guidance on priorities for the improvement of postsecondary education .

part b also includes administrative provisions and the authority to make grants for special projects in areas of national need .

the urban community service program has not been funded since fy1999 and therefore will not be discussed .

title vii , part d authorizes demonstration projects that support technical assistance and professional development for faculty and administrators at ihes to enable them to better serve postsecondary education students with disabilities .

title vii , part e authorizes the college access challenge grant program , which makes funds available to states and philanthropic organizations to provide students and families with information about the benefits of college , outreach activities , career preparation and need - based grant aid among other things .

