the united states has been party to multilateral and bilateral agreements addressing the status of u.s. armed forces while present in a foreign country .

these agreements , commonly referred to as status of forces agreements ( sofas ) , generally establish the framework under which u.s. military personnel operate in a foreign country .

sofas provide for rights and privileges of covered individuals while in a foreign jurisdiction and address how the domestic laws of the foreign jurisdiction apply to u.s. personnel .

sofas may include many provisions , but the most common issue addressed is which country may exercise criminal jurisdiction over u.s. personnel .

the united states has agreements where it maintains exclusive jurisdiction over its personnel , but more often the agreement calls for shared jurisdiction with the receiving country .

a sofa is not a mutual defense agreement or a security agreement , and generally does not authorize specific exercises , activities , or missions .

sofas are peacetime documents and therefore do not address the rules of war , the laws of armed conflict , or the laws of the sea .

the existence of a sofa does not affect or diminish the parties' inherent right of self - defense under the law of war .

in the event of armed conflict between parties to a sofa , the terms of the agreement would no longer be applicable .

the united states is currently party to more than 100 agreements that may be considered sofas .

while a sofa as a stand - alone document may not exist with a particular country , that does not necessarily mean that the status of u.s. personnel in that country has not been addressed .

terms commonly found in sofas may be contained in other agreements with a partner country and a separate sofa not utilized .

as contracts , sofas may be subject to amendment or cancellation .

with the exception of the multilateral sofa among the united states and north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) countries , a sofa is specific to an individual country and is in the form of an executive agreement .

the department of state and the department of defense , working together , identify the need for a sofa with a particular country and negotiate the terms of the agreement .

the nato sofa is the only sofa that was concluded as part of a treaty .

the senate approved ratification of the nato sofa on march 19 , 1970 , subject to reservations .

the resolution included a statement that nothing in the agreement diminishes , abridges , or alters the right of the united states to safeguard its own security by excluding or removing persons whose presence in the united states is deemed prejudicial to its safety or security , and that no person whose presence in the united states is deemed prejudicial to its safety or security shall be permitted to enter or remain in the united states .

the senate reservations to the nato sofa include four conditions: ( 1 ) the criminal jurisdiction provisions contained in article vii of the agreement do not constitute a precedent for future agreements ; ( 2 ) when a servicemember is to be tried by authorities in a receiving state , the commanding officer of the u.s. armed forces in that state shall review the laws of the receiving state with reference to the procedural safeguards of the u.s. constitution ; ( 3 ) if the commanding officer believes there is danger that the servicemember will not be protected because of the absence or denial of constitutional rights the accused would receive in the united states , the commanding officer shall request that the receiving state waive its jurisdiction ; and , ( 4 ) a representative of the united states be appointed to attend the trial of any servicemember being tried by the receiving state and act to protect the constitutional rights of the servicemember .

the nato sofa is a multilateral agreement that has applicability among all the member countries of nato .

as of june 2007 , 26 countries , including the united states , have either ratified the agreement or acceded to it by their accession into nato .

additionally , another 24 countries are subject to the nato sofa through their participation in the nato partnership for peace ( pfp ) program .

the program consists of bilateral cooperation between individual countries and nato in order to increase stability , diminish threats to peace , and build strengthened security relationships .

the individual countries that participate in the pfp agree to adhere to the terms of the nato sofa .

through the nato sofa and the nato pfp , the united states has a common sofa with approximately 58 countries .

then - secretary rice and secretary gates stated that the united states has agreements in more than 115 countries around the world .

the nato sofa and nato pfp sofa account for roughly half of the sofas to which the united states is party .

department of defense directive 5525.1 provides policy and information specific to sofas .

the department of defense policy is "to protect , to the maximum extent possible , the rights of u.s. personnel who may be subject to criminal trial by foreign courts and imprisonment in foreign prisons. .

the directive addresses the senate reservations to the nato sofa by stating even though the reservations accompanying its ratification only apply to nato member countries where it is applicable , comparable reservations shall be applied to future sofas .

specifically , the policy states that "the same procedures for safeguarding the interests of u.s. personnel subject to foreign jurisdiction" be applied when practicable in overseas areas where u.s. forces are stationed .

there are no formal requirements governing the content , detail , and length of a sofa .

a sofa may address , but is not limited to , criminal and civil jurisdiction , the wearing of uniforms , taxes and fees , carrying of weapons , use of radio frequencies , license requirements , and customs regulations .

the united states has concluded sofas as short as one page and in excess of 200 pages .

for example , the united states and bangladesh exchanged notes providing for the status of u.s. armed forces in advance of a joint exercise in 1998 .

the agreement is specific to one activity / exercise , consists of five clauses , and is contained in one page .

the united states and botswana exchanged notes providing for the status of forces "who may be temporarily present in botswana in conjunction with exercises , training , humanitarian assistance , or other activities which may be agreed upon by our two governments. .

the agreement is similar in its scope to the agreement with bangladesh and is contained in one page .

in contrast , in documents exceeding 200 pages , the united states and germany entered into a supplemental agreement to the nato sofa , as well as additional agreements and exchange of notes related to specific issues .

in support of u.s. foreign policy , the united states has concluded agreements with foreign nations related to security commitments and assurances .

these agreements may be concluded in various forms including as a collective defense agreement ( obligating parties to the agreement to assist in the defense of any party to the agreement in the event of an attack upon it ) , an agreement containing a consultation requirement ( a party to the agreement pledges to take some action in the event the other country's security is threatened ) , an agreement granting the legal right to military intervention ( granting one party the right , but not the duty , to militarily intervene within the territory of another party to defend it against internal or external threats ) , or other non - binding arrangements ( unilateral pledge or policy statement ) .

sofas are often included , along with other types of military agreements ( i.e. , basing , access , and pre - positioning ) , as part of a comprehensive security arrangement .

a sofa may be based on the authority found in previous treaties , congressional action , or sole executive agreements comprising the security arrangement .

the following sections provide a historical perspective on the inclusion of a sofa as part of comprehensive bilateral security arrangements by the united states with afghanistan , germany , japan , south korea , and the philippines .

the arrangements may include a stand - alone sofa or other agreements including protections commonly associated with a sofa .

the charts below provide a list of current agreements according to the underlying source of authority , if any , for each of the sofas .

within each category the agreements are arranged alphabetically by partner country .

the categories are defined as follows .

the nato sofa is a multilateral agreement that has applicability among all the member countries of nato .

as of june 2007 , 26 countries , including the united states , have either ratified the agreement or acceded to it by their accession into nato .

the nato sofa is the only sofa that was concluded as part of a treaty .

there are currently 24 countries , non - members of nato , subject to the nato sofa through their participation in the nato partnership for peace ( pfp ) program .

the program consists of bilateral cooperation between individual countries and nato in order to increase stability , diminish threats to peace , and build strengthened security relationships .

the individual countries that participate in pfp agree to adhere to the terms of the nato sofa .

the united states has concluded sofas where the underlying authority for the agreement is a treaty ratified by the u.s. senate .

the united states entered into a sofa with japan in 1960 under the authority contained in article vi of the treaty of mutual cooperation and security previously concluded between the countries .

additionally , the united states entered into a sofa with korea in 1967 under the authority in article v of the mutual defense treaty previously concluded between the two countries .

the united states entered into sofas with australia and the philippines after concluding treaties with the respective countries .

in the case of australia , the u.s. senate advised ratification of the anzus pact in 1952 .

in 1963 , nine years after ratification of the pact , australia and the united states entered into an agreement concerning the status of u.s. forces in australia .

the united states entered into a sofa with the philippines in 1993 after concluding a mutual defense treaty with the country in 1952 .

the agreements with australia and the philippines can be distinguished from the agreements with japan and korea in that they cite general obligations under the previously concluded treaty , while the agreements with japan and korea cite to a specific authority ( i.e. , article vi and article v , respectively ) contained in the underlying treaty .

the united states is a party to the inter - american treaty of reciprocal assistance ( rio treaty ) , for which the u.s. senate advised ratification december 8 , 1947 .

the united states then entered into military assistance agreements with guatemala , haiti , and honduras .

the agreements cite obligations created under the rio treaty and address status of u.s. personnel in each of the countries .

the united states expanded on the status protections contained in the military assistance agreements by later concluding sofas with each of the countries .

in all three , the military assistance agreements were cited as the basis of the new agreement .

as previously discussed , congress approved compacts changing the status of the marshall islands , micronesia , and palau from former territories and possessions to that of being freely associated states ( fas ) .

the language of the compacts calls for a sofa to be concluded between the respective parties .

the marshall islands and micronesia entered into sofas with the united states in 2004 .

palau entered into a sofa with united states in 1986 .

in 1941 , the united states entered into an agreement with the united kingdom regarding the lease of naval and air bases in newfoundland , bermuda , jamaica , st. lucia , antigua , trinidad , and british guiana .

the agreement not only described the physical location being leased , but provided for status of u.s. personnel present in the leased location .

the lease agreement , while not a stand - alone sofa , served the purpose of a sofa in the specified locations .

the united states and the united kingdom concluded additional lease agreements in the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s that contained status protection provisions in the leased locations .

the united states has entered into sofas with countries in support of specific activities or exercises .

generally , these agreements are entered in order to support a joint military exercise or a humanitarian initiative .

the sofa will contain language limiting the scope of the agreement to the specific activity , but sometimes language is present expanding the agreement to cover other activities as agreed upon by the two countries .

the agreements are not based upon a treaty or congressional action ; rather , they are sole executive agreements .

for example , the african crisis response initiative ( acri ) was a bilateral training program introduced by the clinton administration in 1997 .

the united states entered into sofas with many african countries specifically addressing the acri .

each of the sofas contained language limiting the agreements to u.s. personnel temporarily in the country in connection with acri activities or other activities as agreed upon by the countries .

while the agreement may have been entered as a result of the acri , language allowing for other activities , as agreed between the two countries , allows for the sofa remain in force even though the acri does not currently exist .

the last group of sofas discussed are agreements entered as sole executive agreements without a specified activity or exercise .

these agreements contain broad language of applicability .

some of the agreements apply to u.s. personnel "present" in a country , others apply to u.s. personnel "temporarily present" in a country .

in addition to time limitations , most of the agreements contain language which attempts to frame the scope of activities .

the activities described may be as broad as "official duties" or specific to a particular class of activities ( i.e. , humanitarian , exercises , and / or training ) .

