this report examines the department of defense ( dod ) use of aviation fuel and possibilities to reduce that use by examining related issues and presenting options congress may choose to consider .

dod , the largest single consumer of energy in the united states , recognizes the need to reduce its reliance on fossil fuel .

for a number of years , the department has been making steady progress at decreasing their use of fossil fuels on their installations and in their facilities but following the sharp rise in oil prices after hurricane katrina in august 2005 , dod stepped - up its examination of fuel use in weapon systems .

the largest portion of fossil fuel used by dod is in the form of aviation fuel .

although formulated for use in aircraft , aviation fuel is also used in other , land - based , platforms such as tanks and generators to reduce dod's logistics requirements .

reducing dod's consumption of aviation fuel could , by itself , significantly reduce the department's overall use of and reliance on fossil fuel .

in fiscal year 2005 , dod consumed roughly 125 million barrels of oil — approximately 1.2% of the nation's total .

about 74% of dod's energy powers its mobility vehicles — air force aircraft , navy ships , and army ground vehicles .

over half — roughly 52% — is aviation fuel .

there are several options available to dod for reducing its use of fossil - based aviation fuel .

each has advantages and disadvantages and no single option provides the perfect solution .

advanced technologies such as synthetic fuels offer potential sources of alternate fuel but further development and study are required before dod can employ them on a large scale .

dod can also take measures to decrease its use of fuel .

possible options include upgrading aircraft engines and modifying operational procedures .

many of these measures , however , are costly and must compete for funding with other operational priorities .

the department of defense has a unique fuel - use pattern .

approximately 74% of its energy powers its mobility vehicles and over half — roughly 52% of the total — is comprised of aviation fuel .

by comparison , aviation accounts for only about 4% of the energy used in the united states .

fuel costs , although less than 3% of the total dod budget , have a significant impact on the department's operating costs .

for every $10 increase in the price of a barrel of oil , dod's operating costs increase by approximately $1.3 billion .

dod budgets for fuel a year or more in advance of its purchase , therefore and sudden large increases in fuel costs must be paid for with emergency funds or by shifting funds from other programs .

the air force , which operates most of dod's fixed - wing aircraft , spends the largest share of dod's fuel budget .

every $10 increase in a barrel of oil increases the air forces' already sizable annual fuel costs by $600 million .

fuel use varies significantly among the different types of aircraft .

for example , the b - 52h , one of the oldest aircraft in the service's inventory , has a maximum takeoff weight of 488,000 pounds , runs on eight tf - 33 turbine engines , and burns approximately 3500 gallons per flight hour .

that is 138 pounds of aircraft for each gallon per hour .

by contrast , the c - 5b , designed with 1980s technology , is a larger aircraft with four engines , has a maximum takeoff weight of 769,000 pounds , and also burns about 3500 gallons per flight hour .

that is 219 pounds of aircraft for each gallon per hour - an increase of 59% over the b - 52 capabilities .

the t - 38 , a high - performance jet - engine aircraft used for training , has a maximum takeoff weight of 12,000 pounds and burns only about 395 gallons per flight hour .

that is only 30 pounds of aircraft for each gallon per hour - much less than either of the above .

the lower fuel efficiency of the t - 38 compared to either the b - 52h or the c - 5b is a reflection of the smaller aircraft's aerodynamic design , afterburning engines , and much shorter sortie length rather than the efficiency of its engines .

fuel consumption rates for a representative selection of air force aircraft is provided in table 1 .

delivering fuel to the operational user can add substantially to its cost .

the "fully burdened" cost of fuel refers to the price of fuel with the costs of delivery added in .

costs of delivery include the acquisition , maintenance , and operating costs of an aerial refueling tanker and the crew that flies it .

the cost of a gallon of fuel delivered to an aircraft on a flight line is a relatively straight - forward computation and generally ranges between $2 and $3 per gallon .

on the other hand , the fully burdened cost of a gallon of fuel delivered to an aircraft in flight is estimated to be around $20 per gallon .

 / the complexity of measuring fuel use and costs for aircraft is one of the many challenges dod has to becoming a more efficient user or making other changes in its fuel use , such as using alternative fuels .

as fuel costs rose , dod recognized the need to understand factors that contribute to the department's heavy usage and examine ways to mitigate them .

consequently , dod has conducted or sponsored a number of studies in recent years to examine dod's fuel use , determine the extent to which that use is problematic , and recommend actions to decrease its use .

two general conclusions seem to emerge from various government studies .

the first is that there does not appear to be one ideal alternative fuel with which to replace or augment the fossil fuel already although different technologies are being pursued to varying degrees .

the second is that there appears to be several methods currently available to dod with which it can decrease fuel consumption .

the earliest comprehensive dod study on fuel use , conducted by the defense science board in 2001 , focused on the fuel efficiency of weapon systems and was the first to suggest that the true cost of fuel — the fully burdened rate — was not sufficiently understood by decision - makers .

two other comprehensive studies were completed more recently , in september 2006 .

the jason report , reducing dod fossil fuel dependence , asserted that an energy shortage was unlikely in the near term to hinder dod operations and emphasized the value of optimizing the energy efficiency of weapon systems over pursuing alternative fuels at this time .

the defense task force on energy security was an internal cross - functional group that looked at energy use throughout the department .

it presented three recommendations: 1 ) increase the energy efficiency of weapon systems , 2 ) accelerate energy - saving initiatives for facilities , and 3 ) establish an alternative fuels programs .

the most recent government sponsored report , completed in april 2007 by lmi government consulting , inc. ( lmi ) , identified areas in which dod's energy goals are not synchronized with their current practices and recommended actions to address the misalignment .

each of these studies is more fully examined below .

the government sponsored reports seem to indicate , with limited exceptions , that dod should consider various options for reducing its reliance on fossil fuels .

aviation fuel in particular is viewed as a primary target of that reduction as it accounts for the largest share of fuel consumed by the department .

generally , dod has several available methods for decreasing its use of petroleum - based aviation fuel .

they can be placed in two categories: 1 ) increasing the use and supply of alternative fuels and 2 ) decreasing the demand for petroleum - based fuel .

in the first category , options include producing synthetic fuel from coal , natural gas , and biomass , as well as hydrogen fuel cells .

in the second category , dod can use various existing technologies to increase the fuel - efficiency of weapon systems and modify operating procedures and polices to use less fuel .

all the options have limitations and none provide a perfect solution .

whether it is more prudent to aggressively pursue alternative fuels or concentrate resources on decreasing the department's fuel demand is a matter of debate .

there are many who suggest that dod can spur the development of a viable domestic coal - to - liquid industry .

others suggest that developing such an industry would contribute to carbon emissions and divert funds from the development of alternative fuels produced from renewable sources as well as from efforts to increase the fuel - efficiency of weapon systems .

the following is a discussion of the most frequently cited options .

dod's efforts to explore greater use of alternative aviation fuel and to reduce its overall consumption of petroleum - based fuel have been lauded by many .

however , the department's ability to follow through with its initiatives may be adversely affected by a number of factors .

they include dod organizational structure , funding , and external expectations for dod in the nation's search for alternative fuel sources .

considering the issues discussed , there appear to be at least six options for congress .

these potential options may be mutually reinforcing and not "either / or" options .

dod's progress in energy security may be enhanced with clearer lines of authority .

currently , different offices within dod share responsibility for the department's various energy related initiatives .

the office of the director , defense research and engineering seems to have taken on something of a leadership role but , notwithstanding its leadership of the dod task force on energy security , ddr&e's mission is to "ensure that the warfighters today and tomorrow have superior and affordable technology to support their missions , and to give them revolutionary war - winning capabilities. .

it's mission does not encompass many other possible aspects of energy strategy such as acquisitions , installations , finances , and operations .

on the other hand , it may be argued that adding another layer of "bureaucracy" is unnecessary when functions are already in place to handle individual issues .

there are also those who express concern that enthusiasm for recent energy initiatives will wane once a sense of urgency regarding energy availability and prices has subsided .

without a dedicated dod focal point to ensure consistent progress of the various energy related activities within the department , this concern may have some merit .

in light of the financial demands put on dod by ongoing operations , it is possible that without a dedicated advocate , funding for energy related initiatives may be discontinued or postponed indefinitely .

conversely , others argue that the nature of today's energy "crisis" is unlike that which faced the nation in the 1970s and 1980s .

information available today regarding the contributions to greenhouse gas emissions made by fossil fuels and concerns about when world oil reserves may "peak," may keep attention focused on improving the energy efficiency of weapons and alternative energy .

a second option for congress would be to mandate improvements in energy efficiency for existing dod aircraft .

precedent for this exists in requirements established for dod facilities and that have existed for many years and were recently made more stringent with president bush's 2005 energy policy act .

furthermore , language in the senate passed version of the fy2007 defense authorization bill ( s. 2766 ) and conference report ( h.rept .

109-702 of september 29 , 2006 .

see appendix for relevant legislative language. ) .

calls for a dod policy to improve the fuel efficiency of weapons systems and established the requirement for a report to congress on the department's progress toward that goal .

guidance concerning specific weapon systems was not provided allowing dod to implement the language at their discretion .

a possible complication to this may be the continual deliberations over the most cost - effective way to spread a finite defense acquisition budget .

some contend that updating the oldest and largest of the air force inventory , such as the b - 52 , would save the most fuel .

according to the rocky mountain institute , re - engining one of the bombers would make it 35% more efficient .

others assert that modernizing more heavily used aircraft such as the c - 5 transporters makes more sense .

in reality , neither the b - 52 nor the c - 5 are likely to be upgraded soon .

pratt&whitney , manufacturer of the b - 52h's tf33 engines , has proposed engine upgrades to the air force but the service has thus far declined the offer .

c - 5 aircraft are currently the center of a debate over the relative cost - effectiveness of upgrading the large transporter versus purchasing smaller but more versatile c - 17s .

the air force has expressed a desire to retire some older c - 5s while others feel that the need for a large transporter compels the service to modernize the aircraft and maintain it in the inventory .

modernization of the c - 5 centers on overall aircraft reliability and not specifically energy efficiency .

a third option for congress is to mandate fuel efficiency as a key performance parameter ( kpp )  in all new dod acquisitions .

as discussed earlier in this report , a review of the contract proposal for dod's most recent large new aircraft , the kc - x , disclosed a relatively non - specific requirement for "maximum fuel efficiency using current aviation technology. .

there are some reports that dod has already altered its acquisition policies to include energy efficiency .

according to dod officials , a modified policy has not yet been created , but is in the planning stages .

on april 10 , 2007 , the honorable kenneth krieg , usd ( at&l ) , signed a memo directing the evaluation of fuel costs in the designs of three new dod weapon systems: the air force's new long - range strike aircraft , the army and marine corps joint light tactical vehicle , and the navy's cg - x , its newest cruiser .

in keeping with the recommendations of the defense science board and the department's energy security task force , dod will consider the "fully burdened" cost of fuel on the design of these systems figuring the costs of the entire fuel delivery system .

this may be a first step to modifying acquisition guidelines .

if dod modifies its acquisition policies in such a manner , future evaluations of aircraft proposals could be based on the "fully burdened" cost of fuel leading to a closer examination of aspects of the aircraft , e.g .

maintenance costs , weight , in addition to engine efficiency .

a sixth option for congress is to pass legislation that would grant dod the authority to enter into a contract for fuel for more than five years .

recent proposed congressional legislation ( s. 154 , s. 155 , and h.r .

370 ) would allow dod to enter into contracts for synthetic fuels for up to 25 years .

this option may make it possible for dod , through lengthy contracts , to provide potential synthetic fuel developers an incentive to invest in this capital intensive venture .

on the other hand , the proposed legislation would not mandate that dod use this contracting option and the department may not elect to do so .

solar powered aircraft are in the early stages of development .

dod through darpa and the air force research laboratory at wright - patterson air force base , dayton , oh , has some solar - related research ongoing but , observers note , more could be done .

hydrogen fuel and fuel cells are two other areas where , observers suggest , dod could fund further research .

and finally , another option for congress may be to mandate some amount of alternative aviation fuel that dod will buy and the fuel's origin .

the air force has already expressed the goal of using 50% synthetic fuel by 2016 but the service has not specified what kind of synthetic fuel it intends to use .

recent tests with fischer - tropsch gas - to - liquid ( gtl ) fuel might lead one to believe dod is targeting coal - or gas - based synthetic fuel for its future purchases , an approach that would likely invite opposition from those who object to ctl and gtl plants because of their carbon emissions .

however , dod has also awarded a contract for the development of a synthetic aviation biofuel , which may eventually prove successful enough to make a mandate for the use of fuel from renewable sources a viable option .

a possible drawback to a synthetic fuel mandate is that domestically produced alternative fuels may not be available for several years .

the high cost of constructing the plants and the unresolved issue of how to address carbon emissions from them are two possible limitations .

the fact that biofuels are not currently compatible with jet aircraft engines is another issue .

further , it is unclear that sufficient quantities of biofuel could be produced .

the following is a list of provisions in fy2007 dod authorization and appropriation legislation which contribute to dod efforts to increase its efficient use of petroleum - based fuels and increases funding for dod to develop possibilities for using alternative forms of energy .

john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 ( p.l .

109-364 ) senate section 354 of the senate - passed version of the fy2007 defense authorization bill ( s. 2766 ) stated: sec .

354 .

report on actions to reduce department of defense consumption of petroleum - based fuel .

 ( a ) report required - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives a report on the actions taken , and to be taken , by the department of defense to reduce the consumption by the department of petroleum - based fuel .

 ( b ) elements - the report shall include the status of implementation by the department of the requirements of the following: ( 1 ) the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

 ( 2 ) the energy policy act of 1992 .

 ( p.l .

102-486 ) ( 3 ) executive order 13123 .

 ( 4 ) executive order 13149 .

 ( 5 ) any other law , regulation , or directive relating to the consumption by the department of petroleum - based fuel .

section 375 of the senate - passed version of s. 2766 stated: sec .

375 .

energy efficiency in weapons platforms .

 ( a ) policy - it shall be the policy of the department of defense to improve the fuel efficiency of weapons platforms , consistent with mission requirements , in order to — ( 1 ) enhance platform performance ; ( 2 ) reduce the size of the fuel logistics systems ; ( 3 ) reduce the burden high fuel consumption places on agility ; ( 4 ) reduce operating costs ; and ( 5 ) dampen the financial impact of volatile oil prices .

 ( b ) report required - ( 1 ) in general - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the progress of the department of defense in implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) elements - the report shall include the following: ( a ) an assessment of the feasibility of designating a senior department of defense official to be responsible for implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( b ) a summary of the recommendations made as of the time of the report by ( i ) the energy security integrated product team established by the secretary of defense in april 2006 ; ( ii ) the defense science board task force on department of defense energy strategy established by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics on may 2 , 2006 ; and ( iii ) the january 2001 defense science board task force report on improving fuel efficiency of weapons platforms .

 ( c ) for each recommendation summarized under subparagraph ( b ) — ( i ) the steps that the department has taken to implement such recommendation ; ( ii ) any additional steps the department plans to take to implement such recommendation ; and ( iii ) for any recommendation that the department does not plan to implement , the reasons for the decision not to implement such recommendation .

 ( d ) an assessment of the extent to which the research , development , acquisition , and logistics guidance and directives of the department for weapons platforms are appropriately designed to address the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( e ) an assessment of the extent to which such guidance and directives are being carried out in the research , development , acquisition , and logistics programs of the department .

 ( f ) a description of any additional actions that , in the view of the secretary , may be needed to implement the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

conference report section 358 ( p.l .

109-364 , conference report of september 29 , 2006 ) states: sec .

358 .

utilization of fuel cells as back - up power systems in department of defense operations .

the secretary of defense shall consider the utilization of fuel cells as replacements for current back - up power systems in a variety of department of defense operations and activities , including in telecommunications networks , perimeter security , individual equipment items , and remote facilities , in order to increase the operational longevity of back - up power systems and stand - by power systems in such operations and activities .

section 360 states: sec .

360 .

energy efficiency in weapons platforms .

 ( a ) policy - it shall be the policy of the department of defense to improve the fuel efficiency of weapons platforms , consistent with mission requirements , in order to — ( 1 ) enhance platform performance ; ( 2 ) reduce the size of the fuel logistics systems ; ( 3 ) reduce the burden high fuel consumption places on agility ; ( 4 ) reduce operating costs ; and ( 5 ) dampen the financial impact of volatile oil prices .

 ( b ) report required - ( 1 ) in general - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the progress of the department of defense in implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) elements - the report shall include the following: ( a ) an assessment of the feasibility of designating a senior department of defense official to be responsible for implementing the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( b ) a summary of the recommendations made as of the time of the report by ( i ) the energy security integrated product team established by the secretary of defense in april 2006 ; ( ii ) the defense science board task force on department of defense energy strategy established by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics on may 2 , 2006 ; and ( iii ) the january 2001 defense science board task force report on improving fuel efficiency of weapons platforms .

 ( c ) for each recommendation summarized under subparagraph ( b ) — ( i ) the steps that the department has taken to implement such recommendation ; ( ii ) any additional steps the department plans to take to implement such recommendation ; and ( iii ) for any recommendation that the department does not plan to implement , the reasons for the decision not to implement such recommendation .

 ( d ) an assessment of the extent to which the research , development , acquisition , and logistics guidance and directives of the department for weapons platforms are appropriately designed to address the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( e ) an assessment of the extent to which such guidance and directives are being carried out in the research , development , acquisition , and logistics programs of the department .

 ( f ) a description of any additional actions that , in the view of the secretary , may be needed to implement the policy established by subsection ( a ) .

the conference report stated: report on actions to reduce department of defense consumption of petroleum - based fuel the senate amendment contained a provision ( sec .

354 ) that would require the secretary of defense to report on the actions taken , and to be taken , by the department of defense to reduce the consumption of petroleum - based fuels .

the house bill contained no similar provision .

the senate recedes .

the conferees note that the implementation of current legislation and regulatory guidance should facilitate reduction of petroleum - based fuels by the department .

therefore , the conferees direct the secretary to submit a report , not later than september 1 , 2007 , to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives on the status of implementation by the department of the requirements contained in the following: ( 1 ) energy policy act of 2005 ( public law 109 — 58 ) ; ( 2 ) energy policy act of 1992 ( public law 102 — 486 ) ; ( 3 ) executive order 13123 ; ( 4 ) executive order 13149 ; and ( 5 ) other regulations or directions relating to the department's consumption of petroleum - based fuels .

furthermore , the conferees are concerned that although flexible fuel vehicles ( ffvs ) are being introduced into the department's vehicle inventory , little reduction in petroleum - based fuel is being realized because operators continue to fuel the ffvs with gasoline rather than e85 ( 85 percent ethanol with 15 percent gasoline ) or m85 ( 85 percent methanol and 15 percent gasoline ) .

therefore , the conferees direct the secretary to include in the report an analysis of the reduction of petroleum - based fuels since introduction of ffvs into the inventory and an assessment of how the department might increase the consumption of e85 or m85 in ffvs .

the house committee on armed services , in its report ( h.rept .

109-452 of may 5 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5122 states: winglets for in - service aircraft the committee commends the air force in its efforts to increase aircraft fuel efficiency and decrease fuel consumption .

the committee notes that initiatives such as re - engining aircraft , modifying in - flight profiles , and revising aircraft ground operations contribute to decreased fuel consumption and increased life - cycle savings .

the committee is aware that winglet technology exists for aircraft to increase fuel efficiency , improve take - off performance , increase cruise altitudes , and increase payload and range capability .

the committee notes that winglets are currently used on commercial aircraft and result in a five to seven percent increase in fuel efficiency .

on september 16 , 1981 , the national aeronautics and space administration released the kc - 135 winglet program review on the incorporation of winglets for kc - 135 aerial refueling aircraft .

however , the air force concluded that the cost of adding winglets to the kc - 135 did not provide sufficient payback in fuel savings or increased range to justify modification .

although the air force did conclude that modifying aircraft with winglets could increase fuel efficiency , the air force determined that re - engining the kc - 135 aircraft produced a greater return on investment .

the committee believes that incorporating winglets on military aircraft could increase fuel efficiency on certain platforms and that the air force should reexamine incorporating this technology onto its platforms .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the air force to provide a report to the congressional defense committees by march 1 , 2007 , examining the feasibility of modifying air force aircraft with winglets .

the report shall include a cost comparison analysis of the cost of winglet modification compared to the return on investment realized over time for each airlift , aerial refueling , and intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance aircraft in the air force inventory ; the market price of aviation fuel at which incorporating winglets would be beneficial for each air force platform ; all positive and negative impacts to aircraft maintenance and flight operations ; and investment strategies the air force could implement with commercial partners to minimize air force capital investment and maximize investment return .

fy2007 defense appropriations act ( h.r .

5631 / p.l .

109-289 ) the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

109-292 of july 25 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5631 states: the committee notes the recent developments relating to the conversion of coal to liquid fuels .

demonstration projects in the united states have produced high - quality , ultra clean synthetic diesel fuels that provide improved efficiency and improved emissions compared to traditionally produced diesel fuel .

the committee encourages the department of defense to continue to explore the use of fischer - tropsch fuels as alternative sources for dod's fuel requirements .

further , the committee requests that the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics prepare a report for the congressional defense committees on the defense department's assessment , use , and plans to continue to explore the potential of synthetic fuels , to include fuels produced through the fischer - tropsch process .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

109-504 of june 16 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5631 states: c - 32 winglet modification the committee recommends $5,198,000 for c - 32 modifications , which is $5,006,000 more than the amount provided in fiscal year 2006 , and $5,000,000 more than the request for fiscal year 2007 .

these funds shall be used to install blended winglets on the 4 c - 32 aircraft operated by the united states air force to demonstrate potential fuel savings , and / or increased operating range .

not more than one year after the modification of the first c - 32 aircraft , the secretary of the air force shall submit a report to the congressional defense committees assessing the utility of the winglet and making a recommendation if the program should be expanded to other types of aircraft .

coal - to - liquid fuel energy act of 2007 ( s. 154 ) section 5 of senate bill s. 154 of january 4 , 2007 states: sec .

5 .

location of coal - to - liquid manufacturing facilities .

the secretary , in coordination with the head of any affected agency , shall promulgate such regulations as the secretary determines to be necessary to support the development on federal land ( including land of the department of energy , military bases , and military installations closed or realigned under the defense base closure and realignment ) of coal - to - liquid manufacturing facilities and associated infrastructure , including the capture , transportation , or sequestration of carbon dioxide .

section 7 states: sec .

7 .

authorization to conduct research , development , testing , and evaluation of assured domestic fuels .

of the amount authorized to be appropriated for the air force for research , development , testing , and evaluation , $10,000,000 may be made available for the air force research laboratory to continue support efforts to test , qualify , and procure synthetic fuels developed from coal for aviation jet use .

section 8 states: sec .

8 .

coal - to - liquid long - term fuel procurement and department of defense development .

section 2398a of title 10 , united states code is amended — ( 1 ) in subsection ( b ) — ( a ) by striking 'the secretary' and inserting the following: ( 1 ) in general - the secretary' ; and ( b ) by adding at the end the following: ( 2 ) coal - to - liquid production facilities - ( a ) in general - the secretary of defense may enter into contracts or other agreements with private companies or other entities to develop and operate coal - to - liquid facilities ( as defined in section 2 of the coal - to - liquid fuel energy act of 2007 ) on or near military installations .

 ( b ) considerations - in entering into contracts and other agreements under subparagraph ( a ) , the secretary shall consider land availability , testing opportunities , and proximity to raw materials .

' ; ( 2 ) in subsection ( d ) — ( a ) by striking 'subject to applicable provisions of law , any' and inserting any' ; and ( b ) by striking '1 or more years' and inserting 'up to 25 years' ; and ( 3 ) by adding at the end the following: ( f ) authorization of appropriations - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section .

section 9 states: sec .

9 .

report on emissions of fischer - tropsch products used as transportation fuels .

 ( a ) in general - in cooperation with the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the secretary of defense , the administrator of the federal aviation administration , and the secretary of health and human services , the secretary shall — ( 1 ) carry out a research and demonstration program to evaluate the emissions of the use of fischer - tropsch fuel for transportation , including diesel and jet fuel ; ( 2 ) evaluate the effect of using fischer - tropsch transportation fuel on land and air engine exhaust emissions ; and ( 3 ) in accordance with subsection ( e ) , submit to congress a report on the effect on air quality and public health of using fischer - tropsch fuel in the transportation sector .

 ( b ) guidance and technical support - the secretary shall issue any guidance or technical support documents necessary to facilitate the effective use of fischer - tropsch fuel and blends under this section .

 ( c ) facilities - for the purpose of evaluating the emissions of fischer - tropsch transportation fuels , the secretary shall — ( 1 ) support the use and capital modification of existing facilities and the construction of new facilities at the research centers designated in section 417 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c .

15977 ) ; and ( 2 ) engage those research centers in the evaluation and preparation of the report required under subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) .

 ( d ) requirements - the program described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) shall consider — ( 1 ) the use of neat ( 100 percent ) fischer - tropsch fuel and blends of fischer - tropsch fuels with conventional crude oil - derived fuel for heavy - duty and light - duty diesel engines and the aviation sector ; and ( 2 ) the production costs associated with domestic production of those fuels and prices for consumers .

 ( e ) reports - the secretary shall submit to the committee on energy and natural resources of the senate and the committee on energy and commerce of the house of representatives — ( 1 ) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this act , an interim report on actions taken to carry out this section ; and ( 2 ) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this act , a final report on actions taken to carry out this section .

 ( f ) authorization of appropriations - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section .

coal - to - liquid fuel act of 2007 ( s. 155 ) section 104 of senate bill s. 155 of january 4 , 2007 states: sec .

104 .

location of coal - to - liquid manufacturing facilities .

the secretary , in coordination with the head of any affected agency , shall promulgate such regulations as the secretary determines to be necessary to support the development on federal land ( including land of the department of energy , military bases , and military installations closed or realigned under the defense base closure and realignment ) of coal - to - liquid manufacturing facilities and associated infrastructure , including the capture , transportation , or sequestration of carbon dioxide .

section 106 states: sec .

106 .

authorization to conduct research , development , testing , and evaluation of assured domestic fuels .

of the amount authorized to be appropriated for the air force for research , development , testing , and evaluation , $10,000,000 may be made available for the air force research laboratory to continue support efforts to test , qualify , and procure synthetic fuels developed from coal for aviation jet use .

section 107 states: sec .

107 .

coal - to - liquid long - term fuel procurement and department of defense development .

section 2398a of title 10 , united states code is amended — ( 1 ) in subsection ( b ) — ( a ) by striking 'the secretary' and inserting the following: ( 1 ) in general - the secretary' ; and ( b ) by adding at the end the following: ( 2 ) coal - to - liquid production facilities - ( a ) in general - the secretary of defense may enter into contracts or other agreements with private companies or other entities to develop and operate coal - to - liquid facilities ( as defined in section 101 of the coal - to - liquid fuel promotion act of 2007 ) on or near military installations .

 ( b ) considerations - in entering into contracts and other agreements under subparagraph ( a ) , the secretary shall consider land availability , testing opportunities , and proximity to raw materials .

' ; ( 2 ) in subsection ( d ) — ( a ) by striking 'subject to applicable provisions of law , any' and inserting any' ; and ( b ) by striking '1 or more years' and inserting 'up to 25 years' ; and ( 3 ) by adding at the end the following: ( f ) authorization of appropriations - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.' .

section 108 states: sec .

108 .

report on emissions of fischer - tropsch products used as transportation fuels .

 ( a ) in general - in cooperation with the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the secretary of defense , the administrator of the federal aviation administration , and the secretary of health and human services , the secretary shall — ( 1 ) carry out a research and demonstration program to evaluate the emissions of the use of fischer - tropsch fuel for transportation , including diesel and jet fuel ; ( 2 ) evaluate the effect of using fischer - tropsch transportation fuel on land and air engine exhaust emissions ; and ( 3 ) in accordance with subsection ( e ) , submit to congress a report on the effect on air quality and public health of using fischer - tropsch fuel in the transportation sector .

 ( b ) guidance and technical support - the secretary shall issue any guidance or technical support documents necessary to facilitate the effective use of fischer - tropsch fuel and blends under this section .

 ( c ) facilities - for the purpose of evaluating the emissions of fischer - tropsch transportation fuels , the secretary shall — ( 1 ) support the use and capital modification of existing facilities and the construction of new facilities at the research centers designated in section 417 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c .

15977 ) ; and ( 2 ) engage those research centers in the evaluation and preparation of the report required under subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) .

 ( d ) requirements - the program described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) shall consider — ( 1 ) the use of neat ( 100 percent ) fischer - tropsch fuel and blends of fischer - tropsch fuels with conventional crude oil - derived fuel for heavy - duty and light - duty diesel engines and the aviation sector ; and ( 2 ) the production costs associated with domestic production of those fuels and prices for consumers .

 ( e ) reports - the secretary shall submit to the committee on energy and natural resources of the senate and the committee on energy and commerce of the house of representatives — ( 1 ) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this act , an interim report on actions taken to carry out this section ; and ( 2 ) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this act , a final report on actions taken to carry out this section .

 ( f ) authorization of appropriations - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section .

coal - to - liquid fuel promotion act of 2007 ( h.r .

370 ) section 104 of house bill h.r .

370 of january 10 , 2007 states: sec .

104 .

location of coal - to - liquid manufacturing facilities .

the secretary , in coordination with the head of any affected agency , shall promulgate such regulations as the secretary determines to be necessary to support the development on federal land ( including land of the department of energy , military bases , and military installations closed or realigned under the defense base closure and realignment ) of coal - to - liquid manufacturing facilities and associated infrastructure , including the capture , transportation , or sequestration of carbon dioxide .

section 105 states: section 106 states: sec .

106 .

authorization to conduct research , development , testing , and evaluation of assured domestic fuels .

of the amount authorized to be appropriated for the air force for research , development , testing , and evaluation , $10,000,000 may be made available for the air force research laboratory to continue support efforts to test , qualify , and procure synthetic fuels developed from coal for aviation jet use .

section 107 states: section 107 states: sec .

107 .

coal - to - liquid long - term fuel procurement and department of defense development .

section 2398a of title 10 , united states code is amended — ( 1 ) in subsection ( b ) — ( a ) by striking 'the secretary' and inserting the following: ( 1 ) in general - the secretary' ; and ( b ) by adding at the end the following: ( 2 ) coal - to - liquid production facilities - ( a ) in general - the secretary of defense may enter into contracts or other agreements with private companies or other entities to develop and operate coal - to - liquid facilities ( as defined in section 101 of the coal - to - liquid fuel promotion act of 2007 ) on or near military installations .

 ( b ) considerations - in entering into contracts and other agreements under subparagraph ( a ) , the secretary shall consider land availability , testing opportunities , and proximity to raw materials .

' ; ( 2 ) in subsection ( d ) — ( a ) by striking 'subject to applicable provisions of law , any' and inserting any' ; and ( b ) by striking '1 or more years' and inserting 'up to 25 years' ; and ( 3 ) by adding at the end the following: ( f ) authorization of appropriations - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.' .

section 108 states: section 108 states: sec .

108 .

report on emissions of fischer - tropsch products used as transportation fuels .

 ( a ) in general - in cooperation with the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the secretary of defense , the administrator of the federal aviation administration , and the secretary of health and human services , the secretary shall — ( 1 ) carry out a research and demonstration program to evaluate the emissions of the use of fischer - tropsch fuel for transportation , including diesel and jet fuel ; ( 2 ) evaluate the effect of using fischer - tropsch transportation fuel on land and air engine exhaust emissions ; and ( 3 ) in accordance with subsection ( e ) , submit to congress a report on the effect on air quality and public health of using fischer - tropsch fuel in the transportation sector .

 ( b ) guidance and technical support - the secretary shall issue any guidance or technical support documents necessary to facilitate the effective use of fischer - tropsch fuel and blends under this section .

 ( c ) facilities - for the purpose of evaluating the emissions of fischer - tropsch transportation fuels , the secretary shall — ( 1 ) support the use and capital modification of existing facilities and the construction of new facilities at the research centers designated in section 417 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c .

15977 ) ; and ( 2 ) engage those research centers in the evaluation and preparation of the report required under subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) .

 ( d ) requirements - the program described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) shall consider — ( 1 ) the use of neat ( 100 percent ) fischer - tropsch fuel and blends of fischer - tropsch fuels with conventional crude oil - derived fuel for heavy - duty and light - duty diesel engines and the aviation sector ; and ( 2 ) the production costs associated with domestic production of those fuels and prices for consumers .

 ( e ) reports - the secretary shall submit to the committee on energy and natural resources of the senate and the committee on energy and commerce of the house of representatives — ( 1 ) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this act , an interim report on actions taken to carry out this section ; and ( 2 ) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this act , a final report on actions taken to carry out this section .

 ( f ) authorization of appropriations - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section .

