the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , prompted an increased federal focus on protecting the united states against terrorist nuclear or radiological attack .

since that time , the federal government has expanded existing programs , developed new programs , and deployed new equipment at u.s. borders and elsewhere .

the global nuclear detection architecture has multiple facets , including source security to make acquiring threat material more difficult , intelligence activities , law enforcement activities , and deployment of radiation detection equipment .

new technologies have been proposed to replace or augment existing radiation detection equipment and enhance its effectiveness .

primary among these new systems is an improved type of radiation detection device known as the advanced spectroscopic portal ( asp ) .

this report provides an overview of the asp program's history and outlines issues for congress as the program moves forward .

the asp program is an effort by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to develop , procure , and deploy a successor to the existing radiation detection portals .

radiation detection portals , also known as radiation portal monitors , are designed to detect the emission of radiation from objects that pass by them .

the current portals are generally deployed at the u.s. land and sea borders by dhs's domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) and operated by dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) .

current dhs procedures generally include the following steps: when entering the united states , cargo conveyances , such as trucks , pass through a radiation detection portal .

this process is called primary screening .

if radiation is present , a cbp officer is alerted .

the conveyance is directed to a second radiation detection portal , which confirms the presence of radiation .

additional equipment can be used to identify the origin of the radiation and determine whether it comes from a potential threat .

this process is called secondary screening .

the current approach to radiation detection at the border is thus a two - step process using two different types of equipment .

in contrast , the asp is designed to both detect radiation and identify its source .

an increase in system efficacy might provide both security and economic benefits .

more effective detection could increase the likelihood of preventing a nuclear threat from entering the united states .

more effective source identification could reduce the costs and delays associated with "nuisance alarms" from innocuous radiation sources , such as cat litter or ceramic tiles .

the asp program was begun in 2004 by the dhs directorate of science and technology , which funded initial research and development through two broad agency announcements ( baas ) .

when dndo was established in april 2005 , responsibility for the asp program was transferred to dndo .

in 2005 , under dndo auspices , asp advanced technology prototypes were tested at the nevada test site .

subsequent to this testing , dndo issued a request for proposals regarding procurement of asp systems .

in march 2006 , the government accountability office ( gao ) expressed concern that "in tests performed during 2005 , the detection capabilities of the advanced technology prototypes demonstrated mixed results — in some cases they worked better , but in other cases , they worked about the same as already deployed systems. .

the gao recommended that the secretary of homeland security work with the director of dndo to prepare a cost - benefit analysis for the deployment of asps .

in may 2006 , dndo reported on a cost - benefit analysis that it said supported the proposed asp procurement .

in july 2006 , it awarded contracts to three companies — raytheon company , thermo electron corporation ( now known as thermo fisher scientific ) , and canberra industries — to further develop and manufacture asp systems .

the raytheon and thermo systems used medium - resolution detectors made of sodium iodide ( nai ) ; the high - resolution canberra system used high - purity germanium ( hpge ) .

the dhs stated that it planned to procure and deploy 80 systems quickly and ultimately to deploy a total of about 1,400 at land and sea ports of entry .

in october 2006 , gao reported that the dndo cost - benefit analysis did "not provide a sound analytical basis for dndo's decision to purchase and deploy new portal monitor technology. .

the gao's concerns involved both the cost of asps and their performance relative to existing radiation detection systems .

in the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2007 ( p.l .

109-295 , signed october 4 , 2006 ) , congress prohibited dhs from obligating fy2007 funds for full - scale procurement of asps "until the secretary of homeland security has certified ... that a significant increase in operational effectiveness will be achieved. .

the act did not define or explain the phrase "significant increase in operational effectiveness. .

faced with criticism of its test results and cost - benefit analysis , dndo engaged in a further round of asp testing in 2007 .

these tests were to generate the data needed to support secretarial certification and to provide additional information regarding the capabilities of the asp systems .

the gao reviewed the 2007 asp tests and criticized them as being methodologically flawed .

the aspects that gao criticized included the use of the same radiation sources and shielding material for both calibration and performance testing and the inclusion of test results that might not have statistical significance .

in september 2008 , gao issued another report critical of dndo's ongoing asp testing .

it found that further testing by dndo "provide[d] little information about the actual performance capabilities of the asps," and that the resulting test report should not be used in determining whether asps are a significant improvement over currently deployed equipment .

the dndo strongly disputed these criticisms .

in response to gao's initial critique , dhs convened an independent review team to address the criticisms and determine their validity .

the purpose of this review was described as "to assist the secretary in determining whether he should certify that there will be a significant increase in operational effectiveness with the procurement of the asp system. .

the independent review team found no bias in the test results , but it concluded that some aspects of the testing process were "not ideal. .

the independent review team also concluded that the test results and measures of effectiveness were not properly linked to operational outcomes , that the testing up to that point was properly characterized as developmental , and that no independent operational testing and evaluation had been conducted .

following the independent review team review , dndo undertook another round of asp system testing .

the dndo agreed to perform computer simulation of certain combinations of threat objects and masking materials in response to feedback from department of energy personnel .

these computer simulations , known as injection studies , used synthesized signals created by combining the spectrum of a threat object with non - threat data taken from the stream of commerce .

the asp system was then tested with these combined signals to determine whether the system could detect the threat object even in the presence of other material .

the dndo intended these injection studies to address a limited number of scenarios , and dndo asserted that any certification would not be solely dependent on the results of the injection studies .

at the time of the independent review team report , these injection studies were under way .

in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 , signed december 26 , 2007 ) , congress prohibited the obligation of fy2008 funds for full - scale asp procurement until the secretary of homeland security certified a "significant increase in operational effectiveness" — the same language as in the fy2007 act .

this time , the act also directed the secretary to consult with the national academy of sciences ( nas ) before issuing the certification and to submit separate certifications for asp's use in primary and secondary screening .

 ( if primary screening detects a potential threat , secondary screening is undertaken to confirm the detection and identify the source. ) .

the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 , signed september 30 , 2008 ) , continued the requirements for secretarial certification before obligation of fy2009 funds for full - scale asp procurement , consultation with the nas before making such certification , and submission of separate certifications for primary and secondary screening .

again , the phrase "significant increase in operational effectiveness" was neither defined nor explained in these acts .

the national academies issued an interim report on the asp program in 2009 .

although generally supportive of how the most recent asp system testing was performed , the national academies report identified several shortcomings in the asp test campaigns .

these included too limited a range of configurations of test objects and masking materials , not enough operational testing , and no plan for incremental deployment of asp systems to allow for further refinement of the systems based on field operation .

the report recommended that dndo expand its computer modeling to allow simulation of asp performance for combinations of threat and shielding materials beyond those already tested or available .

the report also suggested different metrics to assess the performance of the existing radiation portal monitors and asp systems and provided guidance to dndo for future cost - benefit assessment of the asp systems .

the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-83 , signed october 28 , 2009 ) expanded the prohibition on obligation of funds .

the act prohibited the obligation of "funds appropriated under [the systems acquisition] heading in this act or any other act" for full - scale asp procurement until the secretary of homeland security certifies a "significant increase in operational effectiveness" will be achieved .

the act continued the requirements to consult with the nas before making a certification and to submit separate certifications for primary and secondary screening .

in addition , the conference report accompanying the act directed dndo to implement nas recommendations to incorporate computer modeling in addition to testing so that the results of one can be used to validate the other ; use available low - rate initial production asps for primary and secondary inspection at various sites to assess capabilities in multiple environments ; and complete a more rigorous cost benefit analysis that takes a broader approach to assessing the cost of reducing risk in one area versus another .

in 2009 , gao again reviewed the most recent test campaign and , like the national academies , reported improvement in the rigor of the tests .

the gao stated that the preliminary results from the testing were mixed and that the difference in sensitivity between the asp and existing systems varied depending on the amount of shielding .

it recommended that dndo continue testing the asp systems against modified versions of the existing radiation portal monitors .

the gao also recommended that dndo complete the injection studies before a secretarial certification decision is made .

the dndo continues to engage in additional operational testing and evaluation , which it expects will lead to a secretarial decision regarding certification in late fy2011 .

dndo officials have stated that they will move forward with the certification decision only when the available test results and other information are sufficient to support it , but they have not committed to waiting for the completion of other efforts .

the dndo has asserted that existing test results are sufficient for asps to demonstrate a significant increase in operational effectiveness .

the fy2010 homeland security appropriations act and accompanying conference report permit the deployment of a limited number of asp systems acquired through low rate initial production ( lrip ) to gain data regarding capabilities in different fielded locations .

the dhs has not yet decided whether to deploy any of these systems and is instead "working through the logistics of completing operational testing to get to secretarial certification before making an lrip deployment decision. .

the dhs has established an asp governance board to oversee the future use of the asp system if secretarial certification occurs .

the asp governance board has recommended , based on system performance to date and cost estimates , that the asp program no longer be considered for use in a primary screening capacity , but instead only in a secondary screening capacity .

the secretary of homeland security has agreed with the asp governance board recommendations .

if the secretary of homeland security certifies that a "significant increase in operational effectiveness" has been achieved , dndo may be able to obligate fy2009 and fy2010 funds that have already been appropriated for asp procurement , if they have not expired or been reprogrammed for another purpose .

following secretarial certification , dndo may choose to begin immediate acquisition and deployment of asps at ports of entry , conduct further asp system testing , or take some other course .

the most recent asp project execution plan , which describes the number of asps to be procured and how they would be deployed , reportedly no longer reflects dndo's current plans .

the dndo asserts that the asp program does not require additional appropriated funds for asp procurement ; the administration requested and received no fy2010 acquisition funds for asp procurement .

the administration also requested no new asp procurement funding for fy2011 .

under the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( as amended by p.l .

111-322 ) funding for dhs in fy2011 is at fy2010 levels ( i.e .

no new funding for asp procurement ) through march 4 , 2011 .

through hearings , letters , legislation , and report language , members of congress have expressed both concern about the asp program and support for it .

congress faces policy issues in several areas: the effectiveness of asp technology at detecting and identifying threats , the asp program's costs relative to its benefits , the secretary's criteria for determining whether asps will provide a "significant increase in operational effectiveness," and future actions following secretarial certification .

congress has several options for addressing the asp program .

these options include awaiting further departmental action ; providing legislative guidance to dhs regarding certification of the asp systems ; increasing congressional oversight ; reviewing any secretarial decisions regarding testing , certification , and procurement ; assessing funding needs ; and changing the direction of the asp program .

the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-83 ) prohibits the obligation of "funds appropriated under [the systems acquisition] heading in this act or any other act" for full - scale asp procurement until the secretary of homeland security certifies a "significant increase in operational effectiveness. .

separate certifications are required for primary and secondary deployment .

the secretary is required to consult with the national academies before certifying .

the conference report accompanying p.l .

111-83 provided additional direction regarding the asp program .

the conference report stated that dhs should ensure that certification decisions are made with the best possible test information , that nas recommendations related to development and certification should be followed as discussed in the senate report ( see below ) , that these nas recommendations should be implemented prior to the certification decision or asp procurement ; and that dhs should brief the appropriations committees if the nas recommendations are not followed .

the conference report also advocated an independent cost - benefit analysis and supported the language of the house and senate reports regarding the deployment of low rate initial production asp systems to obtain data and inform future decisions .

the house and senate appropriations committee reports on fy2010 appropriations both contained limitations on the expenditure of funds for full - scale procurement of asp systems .

the house report directed dhs to submit a reprogramming proposal for the procurement of existing radiation portal monitors to meet any remaining requirements if the secretarial certification was delayed beyond the first quarter of fy2010 ( as it was ) .

the house report also urged the department to base its decision on adequate test information , including modeling , and robust cost - benefit analysis .

finally , the house report allowed the deployment of existing asp systems to generate data to inform the secretarial certification decision .

the senate report on fy2010 appropriations directed dndo to implement three national academies recommendations prior to making a secretarial certification or procurement decision .

the three recommendations are ( 1 ) incorporate computer modeling in addition to testing ; ( 2 ) use available asps in operational environments to assess their capabilities ; and ( 3 ) complete a more rigorous cost - benefit analysis that takes a broader approach to assessing the cost of reducing risk in one area versus another .

the report directed dhs to brief the senate appropriations committee if these recommendations are not followed .

in addition , the senate report asserted that an independent cost - benefit analysis would be beneficial .

finally , the senate report encouraged dhs to review its decision to place acquisition of the asps with dndo rather than within an operational component and suggested that placing currently unobligated and any future requested funds within u.s. coast guard , customs and border protection , and transportation security administration might be more appropriate .

the continuing appropriation act , 2011 ( as amended by p.l .

111-322 ) provides dhs with fy2011 funds at the fy2010 level through march 4 , 2011 .

as there is no special mention of the asp program in this act , the statutory provisions in the fy2010 act carry over into fy2011 through march 4 , 2011 .

the homeland security science and technology authorization act of 2010 ( h.r .

4842 , 111th congress ) also contained provisions addressing the asp program .

the bill would have expressed the sense of congress that viable alternatives to existing primary screening technology must be identified .

it would have required the director of dndo to analyze and report to congress on "existing and developmental alternatives to existing radiation portal monitors and advanced spectroscopic portal monitors that would provide the department with a significant increase in operational effectiveness for primary screening for radioactive materials. .

