a presidential transition — the period from campaigning through placement of new administration personnel — is a unique time in american politics and holds the promise of opportunity as well as a real or perceived vulnerability to our nation's security interests .

on a given day the outgoing administration has the ability to change the policies of a nation and possibly affect the international security environment , yet the following day the president and the national security leadership team are replaced by a new set of leaders who may have very different strategy and policy goals .

this political dynamic , coupled with the inherent uncertainty accompanying a presidential transfer of power , may provide a target of opportunity that may be too enticing to resist by those who wish to harm u.s. security interests .

unlike other man - made incidents that may occur with little warning , the presidential transition offers a broadly defined time frame in which an enemy of the united states may decide to undertake an incident of national security significance with the hope of manipulating the electoral process or changing the nation's foreign and domestic policies .

presidential transitions during times of u.s. involvement in military operations and national security - related activities are not unique to the 2008-2009 presidential transition period ( see appendix a ) .

however , based on the current international security environment and recent attempts to disrupt transfers of power in other countries , many observers see the united states as lurching toward a period of uncertainty and increased risk ( see appendix b ) .

while the mere presence of a upcoming presidential transition does not ensure an incident of national security significance will occur , security experts argue that this window of potential risk is not lost on the enemies of the united states .

at present , the intelligence community assesses that "al - qaida will increase the frequency , sophistication , timeliness and western targeting of its propaganda statements as the united states advances toward the presidential election. .

while many terrorism experts are concerned about the internal and external threats to the united states during the presidential transition period , the intelligence community is "uncertain what impact [terrorist propaganda] statements will have on the western muslim community and other individuals who are al - qaeda's primary target audience. .

according to a presidential transition - related report provided to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) by the homeland security advisory committee ( hsac ) , "briefings , research , and recent history have provided an appreciation of the potential vulnerabilities during transition periods .

not only are we [united states] aware that vulnerabilities exist , but our enemies are as well. .

as observed by frances townsend , former homeland security and counterterrorism advisor to president george w. bush , i worry about the period of vulnerability between the time we have nominees for each party through and just after the inauguration of a new president .

i think that's a particular period of vulnerability , because of what we know about al qaeda's attempts to influence the elections in spain .

we've seen the attacks after [author name scrubbed] took over as prime minister in the u.k. we see in the 2004 election where they were issuing videos days before the [united states] election , including bin laden talking about the streets in the united states running with blood .

we know from their history that al qaeda wants to influence elections and have political influence .

the executive branch is not alone in attempting to ensure the country passes power from one administration to the next in a safe and thoughtful manner .

however , the outgoing and incoming administrations are viewed as primarily responsible for addressing risks to the nation and taking actions to prevent and respond to any incident that may affect the electoral process .

whether the enemies of the united states choose to undertake action that may harm national security interests during this period of transition or the new president experiences a relative peaceful period shortly after entering office , many national security issues will be awaiting the new administration .

how the newly elected president recognizes and responds to these challenges will "depend heavily upon the planning and learning that takes place during the transition from one administration to another. .

during recent presidential transitions , the current and incoming administrations and congress have traditionally undertaken numerous activities to facilitate a smooth transfer of executive branch power .

some of the actions often taken during presidential transitions include consulting with government and private sector experts who have presidential transition expertise , providing information to the president - elect after the election and prior to the inauguration , offering operational briefings on ongoing national security matters to prospective presidential nominees and their staff , preparing briefings books and policy memos detailing the issues of most concern to the current administration , and expediting security clearances for president - elect transition team members .

other activities that the current and incoming administrations and congress may wish to consider undertaking during the presidential transition period include undertaking public outreach efforts to discuss possible risks to the nation , involving the national security representatives of presidential hopefuls in all transition - related discussions , establishing joint advisory councils responsible for addressing all transition - related risks , requiring the director of national intelligence ( dni ) to undertake efforts to support the nation's awareness of risks , reflecting the national security priorities of the new administration in the 2009 budget , passing the fy2009 appropriations without undue delay ; quickly assigning newly elected and existing members of congress to committees focused on national security , holding hearings comprised of national security experts to gather ideas on prospective u.s. national security policies and goals , and holding hearings soon after the inauguration of the new president to determine the administration's national security - related priorities .

the next administration is likely to face many national security challenges on taking office .

some security experts suggest that the presidential transition period of 2008-2009 may be unique given the quantity , diversity , and breadth of security risks confronting the nation .

the incoming administration is likely to face three distinct types of national security challenges that could translate into short - and long - term national security risks .

for purposes of this report , the national security challenges the next administration might face include the following: current u.s. military engagements : iraq , afghanistan , and other military support or training activities related to the global war on terrorism and counter - proliferation efforts .

risks posed in countries and regions of concern : iran , north korea , russia , china , republic of serbia , venezuela , cuba , and the middle east ; and risks associated with contemporary issues : the role of u.s. foreign policy in international security matters , the role of the military in nation - building activities and diplomatic endeavors , international terrorism , non - proliferation , and homeland security .

while the issues are not exhaustive and may not require the same level of attention and priority based on the new administration's foreign and domestic security objectives , time devoted to understanding these and other challenges prior to the inauguration to may better prepare the newly elected president to make well - reasoned decisions on assuming office .

many presidential historians argue that during the early days of the new administration the knowledge and decision - making activities will , in part , be based on information provided by the outgoing administration .

with the presidential transition period running from the formal announcement of candidates for the office of the presidency to long past the inauguration , members of the current administration and potential incoming administration may wish to initiate substantive transition activities in an efficient and productive manner as soon as possible .

specifically , some scholars state that "enhanced cooperation and communication between the two administrations is demanded by national security and foreign policy concerns. .

it is further observed that , "as the world becomes more dangerous and the risks to harm more immediate , the need for effective and seamless transitions becomes correspondingly greater. .

thus , with respect to national security issues in particular , the need for outgoing and incoming presidents to work together is no longer an option , but an unavoidable demand of the contemporary world .

while the first presidential transition in the post 9 / 11 era is of concern to many national security observers , risks during the transition period may be minimized with proactive executive branch and congressional actions .

it is likely the new president will face many national security - related challenges upon taking office .

whether the enemies of the united states choose to undertake action counter to the nation's security interests or the new president experiences a relatively peaceful period during the transition , the new administration's recognition and response to these challenges will depend heavily on the preparation and education activities that have occurred prior to the inauguration .

while it may be impossible to stop an incident of national security significance during the presidential election process , there are steps that can be taken during all phases of the transition to lessen the risks to the nation .

such actions may be helpful in preparing the nation for possible risks to the presidential election period and mitigating the effects of acts taken by those that wish to cause confusion during the transfer of presidential power .

the transition - related actions or inactions of the outgoing and incoming administration may have a long - lasting affect on new president's ability to effectively safeguard united state's interests and may also effect the legacy of the outgoing president .

appendix a .

recent military operations occurring during united states presidential transition periods appendix b .

representative examples of incidents of national security interest occurring during periods of governmental transition appendix b provides a representative listing of incidents of terrorism that have occurred during times of transitions of heads of state .

the criteria for inclusion in this chart was based on the aggressor's real or perceived intent to change the course of an election or affect future policy of the country during a time of transfer of presidential authority .

it should be noted that , barring relatively few examples , there is little evidence that incidents of national security significance were planned for a specific date prior to an election .

while varying levels of planning occur prior to an incident , as with most criminal acts , the leader directs , or the individuals act , when opportunity for the best possible outcome is presented .

with respect to times of presidential transition , the most optimal time for an attack , for a variety of reasons , may not present the best opportunity for the aggressors to attempt an incident .

as such , the potential time frame for risk is present during any phase of the transition , with the effects of an incident differing based on the location of the event , the proximity to the election date , and the reaction and actions of the u.s. national security enterprise .

many security experts believe that some of the incidences noted below had a significant impact on the outcome of the country's national election or subsequent policies .

national security observers are fearful that terrorists groups may see some of the incidences as successes and feel embolden to attempt to affect future national transfers of power by launching attack just before the election .

these groups may see the timing of such an action as a viable strategic opportunity to further the goals of their cause .

however , it should be noted , other security experts suggest that incidences of national significance taken prior to a national election could produce a reaction that is counter to the long - term goals of the terrorist group .

appendix c. congressional legislation addressing various aspects of national security considerations during presidential transitions , in chronological order ( 1963-2008 ) .

