a variety of legislative issues have raised interest in the first amendment implications of mandatory public health programs , such as the minimum coverage requirements enacted in the patient protection and affordable care act or considerations of vaccination programs to prevent an outbreak of serious illness that may arise from potential acts of bioterrorism .

because some religious denominations believe that certain health care measures would violate their first amendment right to religious freedom , congressional action related to mandatory health care programs must be considered in light of the first amendment's establishment and free exercise clauses .

this report will discuss the legal issues that arise in the context of religious exemptions for mandatory health care programs .

it will discuss constitutional and statutory provisions relating to religious protection and how such laws have been applied in the medical context .

the report will also briefly address examples of health care programs that have included religious exemptions .

it will analyze whether the u.s. constitution requires religious exemptions for mandatory health care programs and whether , if not required , the constitution allows religious exemptions for such programs .

religious exemption provisions in mandatory health care programs often raise constitutional issues of religious freedom and equal protection .

any religious exemption must meet the requirements of the first amendment's religion clauses , which serve as guarantees that individuals will neither be required to act under a prescribed religious belief ( the establishment clause ) nor be prohibited from acting under their chosen religious beliefs ( the free exercise clause ) .

thus , constitutional analysis of religious exemptions in mandatory health care programs must address two questions: ( 1 ) whether the constitution requires a religious exemption to ensure the free exercise rights of citizens who may have religious objections to a mandatory program , and ( 2 ) if a religious exemption is not constitutionally required , but included nonetheless , whether it would be constitutional .

any congressional enactment regarding mandatory health care programs would be subject to constitutional rules and would qualify for review under rfra as a federal action that potentially burdens religious exercise .

thus , any legislation that would mandate a health care program would be subject to strict scrutiny analysis .

generally , it does not appear that the u.s. constitution requires a religious exemption with respect to legislation that creates mandatory health care programs , but the details of that legislation may impact the analysis .

under strict scrutiny , an exemption would be required only if the government does not have a compelling state interest that is achieved by the least restrictive means possible .

the u.s. supreme court and other lower courts generally have allowed federal mandates that relate to public health , but nonetheless interfere with religious beliefs , to continue without exemptions .

in addressing the issue of religious objections to generally applicable public health requirements , the supreme court has upheld legislative acts that promote public policies relating to public health as a valid exercise of protecting the welfare of the people .

the government's interest in protecting public health has been held to outweigh individuals' religious interests .

according to the court , "the right to practice religion freely does not include liberty to expose the community or the child to communicable disease or the latter to ill health or death. .

the court's decision to hold the interest of public health above the interest of individuals to freely exercise their religious belief was made before the court applied strict scrutiny to religious exercise cases , but nonetheless provides an indication of the nature of the government's interest in public health regulation .

the court has also held that the government's interest in tax programs used to fund health care programs outweighs individuals' interests in exercising their religion freely .

the court's treatment of public health as an interest paramount to individual religious practice appears to open the door to recognition of public health as a compelling state interest under strict scrutiny analysis .

a mere connection to public health is not necessarily enough to find a compelling interest .

some courts have addressed the issues of religious exemptions in the context of certain mandatory health care programs , but the nature of other programs may lead to different outcomes .

laws that require an affirmative participation in a medical procedure ( eg , vaccination ) differ from laws that require a more indirect participation in medical programs ( eg , funding for insurance programs ) .

one factor that might affect the outcome of the constitutional analysis is the role the federal government plays in the objective of the program .

public health has historically been a matter of state regulation .

the vaccination laws were enacted under states' authority to regulate the public health of their citizens .

the federal government , however , does have some authority to act in the realm of public health .

also , the actual connection to public health might affect whether the government's interest is compelling .

for example , although courts have recognized a compelling state interest in statutes preventing the spread of disease , it may be more difficult to find a compelling state interest in requiring individuals to have health insurance .

thus , the government's interest may vary depending on the specific requirements imposed by the legislation .

if the legislation does further a compelling governmental interest , it must also use the least restrictive means .

that is , the government must make the burden as narrow as possible .

this test may be met by providing alternative means of compliance with the legislation .

in the context of the vaccination laws , for example , the government might allow individuals with religious objections to vaccination requirements to be quarantined or isolated to avoid infecting others , rather than receive the vaccination .

in the context of universal health care insurance , the government might allow an exemption for individuals with religious objections and also allow individuals who objected without qualifying religious reasons to pay into a state fund rather than receive insurance coverage .

these types of accommodations may be deemed the least restrictive means of advancing the government's interest if a court determines that they satisfy both the individual's free exercise of religion and the government's interest in protecting public health .

there may be other accommodations that would satisfy the requirement of tailoring the legislation narrowly to meet strict scrutiny requirements .

thus , when determining whether a mandatory health care program would require a religious exemption , two factors are critical to the outcome of the analysis .

first , the constitutionality may depend on the nature of the mandatory health care program ( eg , whether it is a required medical procedure or a required payment for an insurance program ) .

second , the constitutionality may depend on the structure of the program ( eg , whether the program provides the required participants options with which to comply in order to meet the program objectives ) .

these factors would affect the extent of the burden placed on an individual's religious exercise and significantly impact the strict scrutiny analysis .

because legislation that mandates participating in health care programs may conflict with religious beliefs , congress may choose to include an exemption for relevant religious objections even if it is not required .

the exemption would provide an alternative for certain people based on their religious belief that would not be available to other people who do not share that religious belief .

thus , some individuals may claim that the exemption violates the establishment clause ( by providing a benefit to groups based on religion ) .

the establishment clause prohibits preferential treatment of one religion over another or preferential treatment of religion generally over nonreligion .

providing an exemption based on religion may be construed as favoring a particular religion or religion generally because only individuals with religious affiliation would be eligible for the exemption .

however , the mere fact that a law addresses religion does not automatically make that law unconstitutional .

under establishment clause analysis , a government action must meet a three - part test known as the lemon test .

to meet the lemon test , a law must ( 1 ) have a secular purpose , ( 2 ) have a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion , and ( 3 ) not lead to excessive entanglement with religion .

the supreme court has upheld religious exemptions for government programs , in which the exemptions were enacted to prevent government interference with religious exercise .

like the analysis under the free exercise clause , the constitutionality of a religious exemption under the lemon test would depend on the language of the exemption .

exemptions that are specifically available only to certain religions have been construed in some cases as a violation of the establishment clause .

however , providing an exemption that does not specify certain religions as eligible may not pass the lemon test either .

a generally available religious exemption may be construed as a violation of the establishment clause because it provides preferential treatment to individuals with religious beliefs , but does not provide individuals who might object on philosophical grounds to claim the exemption .

the supreme court has upheld several exemptions generally available to religious objectors as constitutional under the first amendment .

