for centuries , wolf populations have been under pressure by humans .

wolves are carnivores , feeding not only on a variety of animal species smaller than themselves , but also on very large mammals such as bison , elk , and even moose .

wolves are able to prey on large mammals by hunting cooperatively in packs .

however , these large species are also favorite game animals for human hunters .

in addition to game animals , their prey may include livestock such as cattle and sheep ; some people perceive them as a direct threat to humans as well .

these habits led to an effort to reduce or eliminate the species .

wolves were eventually eliminated in most states in an effort supported by the science community at the time .

but coinciding roughly with the forester aldo leopold's essay , "killing the wolf," in a sand county almanac in 1948 , the view that wolves must be eliminated began to change .

leopold wrote the following: i was young then , and full of trigger - itch ; i thought that because fewer wolves meant more deer , that no wolves would mean hunters' paradise .

but after seeing the green fire die , i sensed that neither the wolf nor the mountain agreed with such a view... .

since then i have lived to see state after state extirpate its wolves .

i have watched the face of many a newly wolfless mountain , and seen the south - facing slopes wrinkle with a maze of new deer trails .

i have seen every edible bush and seedling browsed , first to anaemic desuetude , and then to death .

leopold's somewhat poetic understanding of predator - prey interactions marked the beginning of a new scientific view of the role of predators in ecosystems .

scientists came to agree that , in the absence of major predators , prey populations would expand until some other factor ( usually food ) limited their population growth .

as seen in a variety of ecosystems , the elimination of major predators devastated plant populations and led to serious reductions in the other species depending on those plants for food , nesting , migration habitat , or concealment or in any species dependent on the undisturbed ecosystem .

the disappearance of wolves , eagles and other hawks , bears , and other top carnivores in much of their former ranges contributed to the passage of the endangered species act ( esa ) in 1973 , and ultimately , to the re - introduction of wolves into parts of their former range .

and predictably , the conflicts over livestock and game that led to the wolf's near extinction a century ago re - emerged .

the ensuing conflicts over wolf management are the topic of this report .

to protect gray wolves under the esa , there needs to be some agreement on what a gray wolf is scientifically .

like many large mammals , such as bears ( ursus arctos ) , mountain lions ( felis concolor ) , and white - tailed deer ( odocoileus virginianus ) , gray wolves ( canis lupus ) have a complicated , even convoluted , taxonomic history .

variations in color , size , and bone structure have led some mammalogists to designate wolves in different areas as different subspecies or populations , whereas other experts would recognize only a single species with variability .

a few key terms are central to the taxonomic debate discussed below: a population is a group of "organisms of the same species that inhabit a specific area. .

a species is a "naturally [occurring] population or a group of potentially interbreeding populations that is reproductively isolated ( i.e. , cannot exchange genetic material ) from other such populations or groups. .

a subspecies is a "taxonomic category that subdivides species into morphologically distinct groups of individuals representing a step toward the production of a new species , although they are still fully capable of interbreeding .

subspecies are usually geographically isolated. .

taxon , or the plural taxa , is defined as "a grouping of organisms given a formal taxonomic name at any rank: species , genus , family , order , class , division , phylum , or kingdom. .

these terms may appear clear ; however , there are no simple measures to draw unequivocal distinctions .

biologists commonly describe their colleagues as lumpers or splitters , based on their inclinations in classifying organisms .

as the names suggest , lumpers are those who tend to minimize differences , and see one or a few species , perhaps with some variations , while splitters tend to emphasize those differences , dividing a species into many subspecies , or populations .

as one well - known mammalogist once stated , "splitters make very small units — their opponents say that if they can tell two animals apart , they place them in different genera , and if they cannot tell them apart , they place them in different species .

lumpers make large units — their opponents say that if a carnivore is neither a dog nor a bear they call it a cat. .

for wolves , which are ( or were ) found in temperate and polar areas throughout the northern hemisphere , some observers ( splitters ) would argue that there are as many as 24 subspecies in north america and 8 in europe and asia .

more recently , lumpers have had the upper hand in the scientific community .

however , that tide may be changing .

in may 2011 , the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) proposed recognizing a third species of wolf , the eastern wolf ( canis lycaon ) , in addition to the gray and red wolf .

 ( see "2011 regulatory and legislative activity" below , for more on this announcement. ) .

this muddled state of taxonomic affairs is entirely predictable for several reasons .

first , wolves are extremely wide - ranging , both as a species and as individuals , so occasional interbreeding among them could certainly confuse the picture .

second , the consistency of variations over time is hard to determine , since long - range studies of long - lived species are rare .

third , evolutionary change does not stop , and wolves are an adaptable species , as shown by their behavior and by their presence in a tremendous variety of ecosystems .

the debate among academic scientists also has an air of informed judgment — and there is no reason to predict that the scientific debate will end any time soon .

the endangered species act ( esa or the act ) provides for the protection and conservation of species that the fws or the national marine fisheries service identifies as threatened or endangered .

the history of gray wolf protection is interconnected with the history of the esa .

wolf protection began at the nascency of the esa , when it was one of the first mammals covered under the precursor to the esa , the endangered species pr eservation act of 1966 .

at the start , the esa protected four subspecies of gray wolf: the mexican wolf , the northern rocky mountain wolf , the eastern timber wolf , and the texas gray wolf .

in 1978 , the gray wolf was relisted at the species level as endangered throughout the lower 48 states , except for minnesota , where it was listed as threatened .

as a result of regulatory listings and court nullifications described below , wolves in the united states have been listed in all of the available categories for a vertebrate species: ( 1 ) never listed ( alaska ) ; ( 2 ) delisted ( in certain dpss ) ; ( 3 )  experimental populations ( southwest ; yellowstone and central idaho ) ; ( 4 ) threatened ( minnesota ) ; and ( 5 ) endangered ( every wolf in the lower 48 states that was not in a dps , experimental population , or in minnesota ) .

despite near - eradication of the wolf in the lower 48 states , some suitable habitat in the wolf's historic range survived , though in a highly modified form .

at the end of the 20 th century , fws planned to reintroduce the wolf to parts of its historic range , using the ex pop provisions of the esa .

the gray wolf was originally listed at the species level as threatened in minnesota , and endangered in the remainder of the lower 48 states .

since the issuance of the dps policy , fws has pursued dividing the gray wolf into dpss .

dpss supplant ex pops , but when a dps has been nullified , fws returns the population to its ex pop status .

all dps designations were challenged in federal court , and each court rejected fws's action , leading to each rule being withdrawn .

following successive court orders invalidating fws's delisting rules , and in light of increasing populations of wolves in some parts of the country , the 111 th congress began to consider legislative options to exclude the wolf from the protections of the esa .

the 112 th congress passed the first law to delist a species .

the full - year appropriations act of 2011 , p.l .

112-10 , §1713 , directs fws to delist the gray wolf in montana , idaho , eastern washington , eastern oregon , and north - central utah , but leaves the wolves in the remaining lower 48 states federally protected as either threatened or endangered .

enactment of p.l .

112-10 , §1713 was significant because legislation to delist species rarely had been proposed and never had been successful .

some have argued that p.l .

112-10 is a tipping point in species protection — that politics and not science will dictate species protection in the future .

however , section 1713 is not a blanket delisting , but a direction to re - release the april 2009 rule in which fws determined that the best available science supported delisting those wolves .

as referenced above , however , a federal court found fws had violated the esa in making this determination .

p.l .

112-10 bars judicial review of the rule , but still allows regulatory actions , such as delisting in wyoming , or relisting of the dps , should the wolf's status change .

section 1713 states that it does not alter the november 2010 wyoming district court ruling that remanded wyoming's management plan to fws .

fws reissued the 2009 rule on may 5 , 2011 .

a challenge to section 1713 argued that it violated the separation of powers doctrine under the constitution by trying "to affect the outcome of a case , without amending the underlying statute. .

the district court of montana rejected the claim , and an appeal is pending .

other bills still pending in the 112 th congress would restrict federal protection of the gray wolf .

those addressing the wolves of the west may not be advanced in light of p.l .

112-10 .

for example , congress apparently chose p.l .

112-10 , §1713 over the nearly identical version in s. 321 ( baucus ) , which would have given the 2009 rule the force of law rather than regulation .

additionally , h.r .

510 ( rehberg ) , which allows state regulation of wolves in idaho and montana , appears mooted by that law .

other bills do not appear moot .

for example , h.r .

838 ( kline ) would eliminate federal protection of wolves in the western great lakes area , proposing: "any wolf in minnesota , wisconsin , or michigan shall not be treated under any status of the endangered species act of 1973 ( 16 u.s.c .

§§1531 et seq .

 ) , including as an endangered species , a threatened species , an essential experimental population , or a nonessential experimental population. .

h.r .

509 ( rehberg ) and s. 249 ( hatch ) would amend the esa so the act would not apply to the gray wolf .

those two bills would affect all gray wolves , including the populations in the southwest as well as the western great lakes and northern rocky mountain areas .

after the delisting directed by p.l .

112-10 went into effect , representative candice s. miller introduced h.r .

1819 which would give states management authority over wolves provided that specified population levels were maintained .

h.r .

1819 addresses all three gray wolf population centers , the northern rockies , the western great lakes , and the southwest .

for each population , if the numbers of wolves dip below a statutorily protected amount , the secretary of the interior would be authorized to treat wolves as protected for at least two years after reestablishing the targeted number of wolves .

under h.r .

1819 , population goals would not be based on breeding pairs but on individuals .

this criterion is not as clearly related to adequate genetic diversity and reproductive capacity , and arguably might be more difficult to measure than the number of breeding pairs .

the proposed department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act for fy2012 ( h.r .

2584 ) addresses gray wolf delistings .

section 119 of that bill would prohibit judicial challenge of any fws final rule delisting a wolf population in wyoming or within the western great lakes area if "such state has entered into an agreement with the secretary of the interior that authorizes the state to manage gray wolves in that state. .

on may 5 , 2011 , in addition to reissuing the northern rocky mountain dps rule , fws proposed changes to gray wolf protection .

fws proposed to do the following: designate the western great lakes as a dps and delist that dps ; revise the gray wolves' historic range by eliminating parts or all of 29 eastern states ; initiate a five - year review for the gray wolf ; initiate a status review of the gray wolf in the pacific northwest ; initiate a status review of the mexican wolf in the southwest and mexico ; and recognize a new species of wolf , the eastern wolf ( canis lycaon ) .

some of the proposed actions could lead to further differentiated protection of wolves depending on location .

wolf protection under the proposed rule would be as shown in figure 5 .

almost two months after the comment period for the proposed rulemaking was closed , fws reopened it for additional comment on the eastern wolf and revision of the historic range .

the eastern dps designation of the gray wolf was rejected by courts in 2005 and has not been proposed by fws since then .

however , fws proposed recognizing a new species of wolf , the eastern wolf ( canis lycaon ) , using newer methodology in distinguishing among species , which relies in part on dna .

the proposed eastern wolves' historic range would include portions of eastern canada , the western great lakes , and the northeastern united states .

from a scientific point of view , designating wolves found in the eastern united states as a separate species is not assured .

for example , the encyclopedic mammal species of the world discusses the validity of canis lycaon as a distinct species and concludes that evidence for separation is equivocal .

however , it does not currently consider this wolf in the east to be a distinct species .

moreover , the north american consortium of national professionals who manage the integrated taxonomic information system ( itis , the source considered authoritative on taxonomy and taxonomic validity in the united states and its territories , mexico , and canada ) currently considers this wolf as a subspecies ( canis lupus lycaon ) .

the validity debate considers evidence related to mitochondrial dna , morphology , evidence of hybridization with coyotes , the natural variability of widely distributed species , and the extremely low population densities that make conclusive evidence difficult to obtain .

designating a new wolf species is likely to be controversial .

based on the results of the status review , petitions to list the species could be filed .

however , lawsuits are unlikely until a listing determination is made , or a dps designated .

subspecies designation has been controversial in other cases , but typically it is fws resisting the change , not making it .

for example , multiple petitions have been filed to designate two subspecies of the greater sage grouse , with fws ultimately rejecting those petitions , finding the science did not support the distinctions .

legal challenges to the science behind the subspecies classifications or dps designations are not uncommon and can be successful .

however , they are fact - specific cases in which the court's view of the agency's scientific basis determines the outcome of the case .

the agency is initiating a review of the eastern wolves' status , which could result in listing the eastern wolf under the esa , either on the fws's initiative or by petition .

given its status as a proposed new species , the eastern wolf is not protected under the act , although gray wolves in the eastern half of the united states are listed as threatened ( if in minnesota ) or endangered .

if made final , the effect of the scientific reclassification would be delisting wolves that currently enjoy esa protection .

listing the eastern wolf as a separate species could affect gray wolf protection , even if the gray wolf is delisted by then .

the eastern wolf could be found to be endangered — no breeding pairs of eastern wolves are reported outside of the western great lakes area , yet it is expected to have a broad historic range .

then , despite the proposed rule to delist the western great lakes dps , eastern wolf protection could mean the gray wolf in the western great lakes area might be protected under the esa provision safeguarding species with similar appearances to listed species .

after all , fws only recently determined a distinction between the gray and eastern wolf species , and that distinction requires a dna test .

in addition to the five - year status review for the gray wolf , and the review of the proposed eastern wolf , fws proposes two other status reviews in the may 5 notice .

fws plans to consider populations in the pacific northwest and the southwest .

these reviews could find wolves in those areas should be appropriately designated as dpss .

gray wolf protections could be altered population by population .

this would be consistent with fws's statement that it intends to replace the 48-state listing with "more targeted regional units. .

it is unclear what effect the proposed removal of most of 29 states from the historic range of the gray wolf may have on the animal's protection .

however , taken in context with fws's interpretation of significant portion of its range within the may 5 proposed rulemaking , which is discussed below , it could lead to more delisting .

when fws reopened the comment period for this proposed rulemaking , it stated that this revision might be done in two final rules based on geography: northeast and southeast .

a species is listed under the esa depending on its presence in its range .

however , despite having an enormous range across the continent of north america , the gray wolf has always had different protection status based on its location — for example , the gray wolf has never been protected in alaska .

the fws website for the gray wolf shows how the listing status varies based on population location .

in contrast , the listing for the tiger shows it is protected "wherever found," and the polar bear is listed throughout its entire range .

as discussed earlier in this report , the gray wolf's history is one of designating and delisting dpss .

eliminating such a great area from the wolves' range could lead to a finding that in its ( now much smaller ) historic range wolves have a proportionally larger population — perhaps leading to a finding that wolf populations have recovered there .

thus , it could lead to a finding that gray wolves need less protection in the west .

another possibility is that it could lead to a finding that no protection of gray wolves is necessary in the eastern 29 states as fws has stated that no such population ever existed there .

fws's interpretation of significant portion of its range , announced may 5 , 2011 , to support its proposed delisting of the western great lakes dps , appears to support these theories .

for the proposed rulemaking , fws stated that a portion of a species' range is significant if it meets two criteria: ( 1 ) it is part of the current range of the species ; and ( 2 ) it is important to the species' conservation "because it contributes meaningfully to the representation , resiliency , or redundancy of the species. .

it could be argued that the focus on a species' current range artificially limits the scope of the esa listing process .

under that theory , a species is important only where it exists today .

courts rejected a seemingly identical interpretation when it was used in the 2003 designation and revised listing of the western , eastern , and southern dpss , discussed above .

the interpretation essentially eliminates consideration of a species' historic range and restricts the review of a species' health to where it is now present .

it could skew the listing process , eliminating consideration of areas where a species once was abundant but now is extirpated .

the second criteria of fws's may 5 interpretation — that the area contributes meaningfully to the species — further limits the area being considered , and so does not appear to avoid this conflict with court precedent .

additionally , fws's interpretation appears to conflict with other portions of the act , which require consideration of a broader area than a species' current range .

under fws's interpretation , it would be possible to establish critical habitat of a species in an area that fws says is not part of its range .

esa defines critical habitat to include areas not just currently occupied by the species at the time of listing , but also "specific areas outside the geographical area occupied by the species at the time it is listed ... upon a determination by the secretary that such areas are essential for the conservation of the species. .

the interpretation also may be seen as inconsistent with the statutory requirement that listing be based in part on the "present or threatened destruction , modification , or curtailment of its habitat or range. .

if a species has already been chased out of damaged habitat , evaluation of its presence in only its current range may seem to restrict consideration of this factor .

on october 5 , 2011 , fws published a notice of proposed rulemaking to end federal protection of the gray wolf in wyoming under the esa .

wolves would continue to be protected from taking in two national parks and a national wildlife refuge in the northwestern part of the state .

the remainder of the state would be divided into zones of regulated hunting and unregulated take .

specifically , the rule would end the wolf's protection as either a dps or an ex pop .

the rule is contingent upon the wyoming legislature's passing a wolf management plan that meets certain criteria specified in the proposed rule ; the rule would not be finalized until the legislature's approval of the plan .

the rule makes certain assumptions about the management of wolves on federal lands .

comments to the proposed rule are accepted until january 13 , 2012 .

according to fws , the wyoming management plan , if enacted by the state legislature , would permanently place wolves in one of three management zones: ( 1 ) protected zone , with hunting forbidden ; ( 2 ) hunted zone , with wolf hunting subject to quotas ; and ( 3 ) unregulated hunting zones .

the first two categories , taken together , would constitute 15.7% of the area of the state and would include two national parks and a wildlife refuge .

in the remainder of the state , wolves would be treated as predator species , and would "experience unregulated human - caused mortality , although mortality in this area will be monitored through mandatory reporting within 10 days of the kill. .

the state would manage wolf populations at 10 breeding pairs or 100 wolves in areas under state jurisdiction .

passage by the state of the fws - approved management plan would provide the chief enforcement mechanism for wolf management in these areas once wolf protection under esa would end , and the fws states that the proposed rule would not be finalized until after the legislature meets and passes such a plan .

assuming it does , any future change in the plan by the legislature ( eg , changing zones or management quotas ) would appear to leave fws with the primary remedy of re - listing the species , if the change seemed inadequate to conserve the species .

the fws proposal is somewhat unclear on which areas are in which of the three wolf management zones .

perhaps most confusing is the determination of which lands fall in zone 1 ( protected , no hunting ) versus which would be in zone 2 ( trophy hunting allowed ) .

hunting is allowed in national parks per se only if authorized by the statute that created the park .

consequently , the protection for wolves in yellowstone national park and grand teton national park is unchanged: they cannot be hunted in those units .

on the other hand , while hunting of wolves is not now permitted in the john d. rockefeller memorial parkway ( one of the 394 units in the national park system ) , which lies between the two parks , the enabling legislation for the parkway provides the following: the secretary shall permit hunting and fishing within the area described by section 1 ( a ) of this act in accordance with applicable laws of the united states and the state of wyoming , except that the secretary may designate zones where , and periods when , no hunting or fishing shall be permitted for reasons of public safety , administration , or public use and enjoyment .

if wolves are no longer protected under esa , then hunting in the parkway would be prohibited ( i.e. , zone 1 ) either if the secretary ( acting through nps ) forbids it , or if the wyoming management plan were to forbid it .

otherwise , wolves in the parkway might be considered as trophy game ( zone 2 ) ; if so , their populations might be reduced , as long as the state maintained the 100 wolves / 10 breeding pairs quota for the state , as described above .

given the central location of the parkway , trophy hunting in the parkway could affect wolf populations in both parks .

it is not clear from the text and an accompanying map whether the parkway is intended as zone 1 or 2 .

restrictions on wolf hunting in refuges could also be clarified .

hunting is commonly allowed in many units of the national wildlife refuge system .

specifically , in the national elk refuge ( ner , the only national wildlife refuge in northwestern wyoming ) , hunting is allowed for elk and bison .

the fws notice indicates that its regulations would provide that no wolf hunting will be allowed in the ner .

is the current and proposed prohibition on wolf hunting permanent , either through the permanency of the state's management plan or through fws regulations , and if not , what role would the state play in the ner in future wolf management ? .

additionally , the fws notice indicates that in 15.7% of the state's area , wolves would be categorized as "permanently managed as game animals or protected. .

this category , in addition to the above - referenced three park units and wildlife refuge , would include "adjacent u.s. forest service - designated wilderness areas , adjacent public and private lands ... and the wind river indian reservation. .

currently , the tribe forbids all hunting on the reservation , except by members of the shoshone and arapahoe tribes .

any hunting on the reservation is not regulated by the state .

according to fws , "the wind river indian reservation may consider legal regulated harvest" at some future time .

any management plans or agreements on such plans with the tribes are not specified in the proposal .

while the proposal would specify designated wilderness as part of the zone in which wolves could be hunted as trophy animals , the wilderness act itself does not prevent hunting in designated wilderness .

states have traditionally worked closely with the federal agencies that manage lands where hunting occurs to set harvest quotas , and forest service regulations also provide that wilderness designations do not change the state's right to control fish and game .

it appears that the wyoming plan is to be a formal proposal to prohibit wolf hunting in those forest service wilderness areas under state law .

the authority of private landowners to take wolves on their land has been an important issue in wyoming , particularly among the ranching community , but among others as well .

south and east of the two parks , significant amounts of private lands are included in zone 2 .

private landowners may object to their land's use ( i.e. , ability to take wolves ) being limited by the state's plan .

finally , the map included in the proposed rule appears to contradict some of the narrative of the proposed rule .

the map includes all of grand teton national park , john d. rockefeller jr. memorial parkway , and ner within the boundaries of the trophy hunting area , although the text states that hunting is to be prohibited in grand teton and ner , and is unclear whether it would be prohibited in the parkway .

according to this map , the wind river reservation falls outside of the protected trophy hunting area , although the text ( cited above ) includes it in the trophy area .

section 4 ( d ) rules for gray wolves according to fws , section 4 ( d ) rules are intended to reduce conflicts between the provisions of the act and needs of people near the areas occupied by the species .

special rules have been in effect for the threatened gray wolves in minnesota for many years , and were extended to gray wolves in other states , when and where the wolf was downlisted .

under the rule for minnesota , individual "wolves that have preyed on domestic animals can be ... killed by designated government agents. .

fws asserts that this rule avoids "even larger numbers of wolves being killed by private citizens who might otherwise take wolf control into their own hands. .

in 2003 as part of the rulemaking that was vacated , fws issued special rules for two dpss: eastern and western .

the special rules would have allowed individuals to kill western dps wolves in the act of attacking livestock on private land , and to harass wolves near livestock .

permits to kill wolves could also be issued to landowners who showed wolves routinely were present and formed a significant risk to livestock .

fws said that , as in minnesota , the rule would "increase human tolerance of wolves in order to enhance the survival and recovery of the wolf population. .

michigan and wisconsin citizens would be able to kill any wolf within one mile of killed livestock , and in other eastern states beside minnesota , any lethal measures could be used within four miles of such a site .

this rule was vacated , as discussed in "2003 western , eastern , and southwestern dps litigation. .

when fws settled the case challenging the 2009 delisting of the western great lakes dps , the special rule was put back into effect .

section 4 ( d ) rules for yellowstone and idaho experimental populations in 2005 after fws found that the wolf population had exceeded its minimum recovery goals of 30 breeding pairs for yellowstone and central idaho , it issued a rule to manage wolves where they had an unacceptable impact on ungulate populations .

this 2005 rule modified the provisions put in effect when the wolves were first introduced , which stated that "wolves could not be deliberately killed solely to resolve predation conflicts with big game. .

when the 2009 northern rocky mountains dps rule was reissued , the special rule for the wyoming ex pop was returned to effect .

the 2005 rule allowed states and tribes in the area to kill wolves where it was shown they were adversely affecting the populations of deer , antelope , elk , big horn sheep , mountain goats , bison , or moose in the area .

before the states and tribes could act , they were required to submit the plan for peer review , public comment , and fws approval .

data at the time , from many sources cited by fws , showed that wolf predation was "unlikely to be the primary cause of a reduction of any ungulate herd or population in idaho , wyoming , or montana. .

fws reported that more wolves were killed ( by wildlife agents or by hunting ) in each year from 2007 through 2010 , than cattle were killed by wolves .

the wolf population in the area was estimated at 1,651 for 2010 .

in 2008 fws changed the special rule .

fws determined that the definition of unacceptable impact had to be altered , as wolves were not the primary cause in ungulate population decreases .

accordingly , the definition was modified to mean: "impact to a wild ungulate population or herd where a state or tribe has determined that wolves are one of the major causes of the population or herd not meeting established state or tribal population or herd management goals. .

public and peer reviews are still required .

the plan allows a state to kill wolves , provided the experimental population does not go below 20 breeding pairs in the state .

additionally , wolves found by wildlife officials to be hybrids may be killed .

the 2008 rule also expands the provision for killing wolves when they are in the act of attacking livestock or dogs .

the 2005 rule allowed an individual to "take" a wolf that was in the act of attacking stock animals or dogs on private property .

the 2008 rule allows individuals to take wolves that are in the act of attacking livestock or dogs on public lands as well , except for national park service property .

when the 2009 delisting of the northern rockies dps was invalidated by a court , fws reinstated the special rules regarding the ex pops in the area .

in february 2011 fws proposed to allow idaho to kill some wolves across five years to help the elk population rebound .

the rule would modify the special rules for ex pops .

