the purpose of this report is to examine three labor issues and arguments related to the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement ( cfta ) : violence against trade unionists ; impunity ( accountability for or punishment of the perpetrators ) ; and worker rights protections for colombians .

for general issues relating to the cfta , see crs report rl34470 , the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

for background on colombia and its political situation and context for the agreement , see crs report rl32250 , colombia: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

labor provisions in the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement result from a may 10 , 2007 , agreement between the administration and congress .

under those provisions in the colombia free trade agreement , ( article 17.2.1 ) , each party to the agreement shall "adopt and maintain in its statutes and regulations , and practices thereunder," five rights as stated in the international labor organization ( ilo ) declaration on fundamental principles and r ights at work and its follow - up ( 1998 ) : ( a ) freedom of association ; ( b ) the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining ; ( c ) the elimination of all forms of compulsory or forced labor ; ( d ) the effective abolition of child labor and for purposes of this agreement , a prohibition on the worst forms of child labor ; and ( e ) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation .

opponents of the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement argued against it on three points: ( 1 ) the high rate of violence ( homicides , arbitrary detentions / kidnappings , and death threats ) against trade unionists in colombia ; ( 2 ) the lack of adequate punishment for the perpetrators of that violence ; and ( 3 ) weak colombian enforcement of international labor organization ( ilo ) core labor principles , the conventions behind them , and their own labor laws .

proponents of the agreement primarily argued for the colombia fta on the basis of economic and national security benefits .

trade typically benefits all parties to a trade agreement , as each country tends to specialize in exporting those goods which it can produce relatively more efficiently , and to import those which it produces relatively less efficiently than its trading partners .

accordingly , proponents argued , the cfta will support increased exports , expand economic growth , create u.s. jobs , offer consumers a greater variety of goods and services at lower prices , and encourage economic development by attracting foreign investment and expanding output .

they also argued that it will reinforce the rule of law , spread values of capitalism in colombia , and anchor hemispheric stability .

proponents specifically respond to the above labor complaints that ( 1 ) homicides and kidnappings against trade unionists have declined dramatically since former president álvaro uribe took office in 2002 ; ( 2 ) substantial progress is being made on the impunity issue as the government has undertaken great efforts to find perpetrators and bring them to justice ; and ( 3 ) the colombian government is taking steps to improve conditions for workers .

on april 7 , 2011 , the white house and the government of colombia , after weeks of negotiations released an "action plan related to labor rights" as part of the colombian government's "ongoing commitment" to prevent violence against labor leaders , prosecute the perpetrators of such violence , and protect internationally recognized worker rights .

for details on this action plan , see crs report rl34470 , the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

the second main issue of opponents in debating cfta is impunity — accountability for and punishment of the perpetrators of assassinations , arbitrary detentions , and death threats .

perpetrators of the violence typically fall into three main groups: paramilitaries , guerrillas , and the colombian military .

the human rights advocates group amnesty international usa has reported on the difficulty in identifying the perpetrators in cases of trade union violence .

however , it reported that , among "cases in which clear evidence of responsibility is available" in 2005 , of all human rights abuses against trade unionists: paramilitaries committed 49% ; security forces committed 43% ; guerrilla forces committed 2% ; and criminals committed 4% .

proponents of the agreement cite data showing progress in bringing perpetrators of the violence to justice: as the result of a tripartite agreement with the ilo ( among the government , trade confederations , and business groups ) , the office of the colombian prosecutor general , in october 2006 , created a special sub - unit to investigate and prosecute 1,272 criminal cases of violence against trade union members .

these included 187 priority cases as determined by the unions .

as of february 20 , 2010 , there were a total of 248 convictions in cases involving violence against trade union members between 2001 and the first two months of 2010 , with 199 ( 80% ) of them handed down in 2007-2010 .

these 248 conviction cases resulted in the conviction of 350 individuals , including 216 imprisonments .

josé luciano sanín vásquez , director general of the ens views convictions over a longer period of time and points out that since 1986 , in about 97% of the cases of homicides of trade unionists , the perpetrators have never been identified and brought to justice .

he argued further that while in some cases the perpetrators of labor killings are found guilty , in zero cases has the mastermind behind the crime been convicted .

in september 2009 , the afl - cio , in a submission to the ustr , laid out detailed labor and human rights conditions it wanted colombia to meet before the united states would consider approving the cfta .

these included ( 1 ) convictions in a substantial majority of the over 2,700 cases of trade unionists murdered and prosecutions against both those responsible for carrying out the crimes and those planning the crimes ; and ( 2 ) the undertaking of substantial efforts to investigate non - lethal forms of violence , including death threats .

a third main issue in the cfta is adequacy of enforcement of colombia's labor laws , and colombia's ability to protect workers .

many observers point out that enforcement of labor laws and standards generally is an issue for colombia as well as throughout latin america and other developing countries .

proponents pointed to colombia's system of labor laws and protections , which includes ratification of all four ilo core labor standards — that is , ratification of both the ilo core labor principles and the detailed conventions that define them .

the ilo core labor principles: ( 1 ) protect the right of workers to organize and bargain collectively , ( 2 ) prohibit forced labor , ( 3 ) prohibit child labor , and ( 4 ) provide for nondiscrimination in employment .

others point to strengths and weaknesses in colombia's protection of worker rights , as reported in the state department's annual country reports on human rights practices .

some key findings from its 2011 report for colombia are as follows: right to organize and bargain collectively .

in general , colombian law allows some workers to form unions , and the government generally respected this right in practice .

however , there exist a number of legal restrictions to forming and joining a union , particularly in indirect contracting situations .

these restrictions stem from the fact that colombia's labor laws define a "worker" as a direct hire with an employment contract .

thus , workers in three groups have at times been treated — legally or illegally — as indirect hires , and thus not covered by colombia's labor code: those employed under ( 1 ) workers' cooperatives , ( 2 ) temporary service agencies for seasonal , temporary , and contract workers , and ( 3 ) collective pacts .

the report also notes that some unions have been formed despite some legal restrictions .

it also notes that unionists continue to advocate for revision to the labor code .

in addition , the report notes that collective bargaining has not been fully implemented in the public sector .

prohibition of forced or compulsory labor .

the law prohibits forced or compulsory labor , including by children , but there were some reports that such practices occurred .

new illegal armed groups , which included some former paramilitary members and guerrillas , reportedly used forced labor in coca cultivation in areas outside government control .

forced labor which included organized begging and forced commercial sexual exploitation , often of internally trafficked women and children , reportedly remained a serious problem .

prohibition of child labor and minimum wage for employment .

while there are laws to protect children from exploitation in the workplace , child labor reportedly remained a problem in the informal and illicit sectors .

mentioned as significant incidences in which child labor was used , included in the production of clay bricks , coal , emeralds , gold , coca , and pornography , often under dangerous conditions and in many instances with the approval and / or insistence of their parents .

acceptable conditions of work .

the government establishes a uniform minimum wage every january .

the monthly minimum wage for 2010 was reportedly $285 , a 3.6% increase over the previous year .

according to the report , the national minimum wage did not provide a decent standard living for a worker and family .

in addition the government reportedly remained unable to enforce the minimum wage in the informal sector .

the law provides protection for workers' occupational safety and health in the formal sector , which the government enforced through periodic inspections .

however , the report notes , a scarcity of government inspectors , poor safety awareness , and inadequate attention by unions resulted in a high level of industrial accidents and unhealthy working conditions in the formal sector .

the colombia fta ( along with panama and south korea ) is in the second set of ftas ( after peru ) to have some labor enforcement "teeth. .

labor provisions including the four basic ilo core labor principles ( enumerated previously ) would be enforceable through the same dispute settlement procedures as for all other provisions , such a those for commercial interests .

opponents argued that under the cfta , only the concepts of core labor principles , and not the details of the ilo conventions behind them , would be enforceable .

proponents pointed to recent colombian progress in protecting workers on many fronts .

first , the personal protection program for union members has been a success in that since 2002 , not a single trade union member enrolled in the program has been killed , according to the colombian embassy .

second , funding for investigating and prosecuting perpetrators of crimes against trade unionists has increased .

third , the government has engaged in greater social dialogue with the ilo and other international union organizations , which are having an impact on national labor policy .

fourth , other legislative approaches have been proposed to further protect basic core labor rights .

fifth , the "action plan related to labor rights," jointly released by the president obama and colombian president juan manuel santos on april 7 , 2011 , is designed to "address serious and immediate labor concerns" and to "lead to greatly enhanced labor rights in colombia and clear the way for the u.s. - colombia trade agreement to more forward in congress. .

opponents argued that delaying the vote on the cfta further would give colombia more time to keep improving protections for its workers .

they asserted that colombia is still the most dangerous place in the world to be a trade unionist , since it still accounts for the majority of homicides of trade unionists world - wide .

they also argued that the progress made in bringing to justice perpetrators of violence against union workers has been limited , and point to the fact that a significant percentage of those convicted in these cases are convicted in absentia and remain at large .

finally , they argued that passing the cfta could very well halt the progress by the colombian government on worker rights protections achieved to date .

proponents argued that the window of opportunity to pass the cfta may be relatively narrow , and that approval of the fta and the economic growth in colombia that would result is the best way to protect colombia's trade unionists .

they also argued that not passing the agreement would not resolve colombia's labor issues .

passage of the colombia fta implementing legislation on october 21 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-42 ) , opens up a new lens through which to observe colombia's progress relating to labor rights .

