the five major integrated oil companies operating in the u.s. market have earned net incomes totaling $424 billion since 2004 .

in the previous four years , from 2000 to 2003 , they earned net incomes of $171 billion .

this 148% increase in profit has attracted public attention and raised the issue of whether "windfall" profits had accrued to the firms .

at the same time that these oil companies were earning increased profits , u.s. gasoline consumers were facing prices that rose above $3.30 per gallon , raising concerns that the increased profits might be tied to price gouging by the oil companies .

this report analyzes the uses of accrued profits by the five major integrated oil companies from 2004 through 2007 .

although the oil industry is composed of thousands of firms involved in many different aspects of the business , these five firms represent the visible face of the oil industry to the american public .

these companies also earned 90% of the total earnings of integrated oil companies , and 74% of the earnings of all the integrated oil companies , the independent oil and gas producers , and the independent refiners and marketers in 2007 .

because of their size , the decisions they make with respect to utilizing profits will largely determine how the industry's use of profit is viewed by the public .

how the industry uses its recent profits is important because the demand and supply balance , and hence petroleum product prices for the u.s. consumer , will be affected by the decisions made .

for example , one of the commonly cited reasons for high gasoline prices in 2007 is that refinery capacity has been offline as a result of catching up on deferred maintenance and of accidents .

if investments had been made in new refineries over the past 20 years , the balance between refinery capacity and product demand might not be as tight , thus reducing the pressure on gasoline prices .

a primary source of the increased profits of the five oil companies has been the increased price of crude oil on the world market .

the increased price of crude oil since 2004 has been attributed to the growth in demand from china , india , the united states , and other areas , as well as to hurricanes katrina and rita and a variety of other factors .

few if any of these factors could be influenced by the five companies .

crude oil prices began their rise toward the end of 2003 , and although volatile , have remained at , or near , historically high levels since then .

all five of the companies produce crude oil .

over the period 2004-2007 , exxonmobil produced an average of 2.6 million barrels per day ( b / d ) , and was the leading producer among the five companies .

shell averaged 2.0 million b / d , bp averaged 2.5 million b / d , chevron averaged 1.7 million b / d , and conocophillips averaged 1.0 million b / d .

higher world prices for crude oil increased the revenue from this production in proportion to the increase in prices .

in addition to the increasing price of crude oil , tightness in the refining industry contributed to the increase in petroleum product prices , notably gasoline .

all five of the selected companies are active in the refining industry .

in 2007 , these five companies accounted for approximately 38% of total u.s. refining capacity .

although , historically , refining margins and profitability have tended to be volatile over time , profit margins have been at , or near , historic highs since 2004 .

during the fourth quarter of 2007 refining margins declined as the price of crude oil rose , and refiners were unable to quickly pass cost increases on to consumers because of the weakening demand growth of gasoline .

for the five companies , operating in both the upstream ( exploration and production ) and downstream ( refining , distribution , and marketing ) segments of the oil market has led to growing profitability , as shown in table 3 .

profits declined for the five companies from 2000 through 2002 , then doubled in 2003 .

profits rose by 39% in 2004 , 34% in 2005 , 8% in 2006 , and declined by 1.3% in 2007 .

however , the two companies whose profits declined in 2007 each experienced singular losses , conocophillips taking a writedown as a result of venezuela nationalizing its orinoco basin investments , and bp experiencing pipeline problems in alaska and refinery accidents in texas .

the magnitude of the profits earned , as well as the rapidity with which they accrued , has created a challenge for the oil companies: how to best utilize these resources and meet the varied demands of shareholders and the public .

private corporations , such as the five major integrated oil companies , operate for the purpose of maximizing shareholder value , that is , to enhance , as much as possible , the value of the shares held by investors and the returns earned by those shares .

the goal of maximizing shareholder value can be achieved in various ways .

the management may choose to reinvest profits in the business , deploying new technology and capital equipment or hiring more workers .

the management might also acquire assets for the corporation through merger or acquisition .

another strategy might be to directly pay cash dividends to the shareholders , or to buy back the company's shares on the open market to enhance the price of outstanding shares .

the management also might decide to alter the capital structure of the company by reducing the outstanding debt of the company .

finally , the management might decide to hold the profits as cash , or other short - term assets , to acquire the flexibility to implement resource allocation decisions in the future .

of course , the company may apply the profits to several or all of these uses .

in principle , the expected rate of return on investments should be at least as great as the current rate of return earned by the company .

if the management cannot identify investment opportunities that have expected rates of return in excess of the current rate of return , the profit is typically returned to the shareholders in the form of dividends or other payments .

it is likely that the increases in the price of oil that began in late 2003 and persist today were unexpected by the major integrated companies .

the onset of the war in iraq and the rapid growth of oil demand in china , india , and even the united states , were not generally forecast .

hurricanes katrina and rita were associated with even greater degrees of uncertainty than the war and demand growth .

as a result , and especially in the context of 2002 being a relatively weak year for oil company financials , it is likely that no set plan existed for the use of the rapidly growing profits that began to accrue in 2004 .

in the several years that have passed since 2003 , capital expenditures have begun to expand , investor returns have been enhanced , acquisitions have been made , and balance sheets have been strengthened , even though cash balance levels are still high and growing .

in time , as corporate plans more reflect a crude oil market characterized by higher prices , long - term assets might be accumulated , supplies of both crude oil and petroleum products might be enhanced , and consumers might see a slacker market where prices may moderate from current levels .

until that time , investors in the oil industry may continue to see high rates of dividend payout , stock repurchase plans , and the accumulation of short - term assets .

