to address the turmoil in financial markets , congress passed and the president signed the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ; h.r .

1424 , p.l .

110-343 ) on october 3 , 2008 .

the act authorizes the secretary of treasury "to restore liquidity and stability to the financial system of the united states" ( sec .

2 ) by purchasing or insuring "troubled assets. .

the secretary will design the mechanism for purchasing the troubled assets and methods for pricing and valuing these assets .

the act broadly defines troubled assets as ( 1 ) mortgages and any securities based on such mortgages whose purchase the secretary determines will promote financial market stability , and ( 2 ) any other financial instrument whose purchase the secretary and the federal reserve board chairman determines will promote financial market stability .

the act authorized the treasury secretary to use $700 billion to enhance liquidity and to inject capital into financial markets by purchasing ( 1 ) mortgages and pools of mortgages , ( 2 ) preferred stock in ailing financial institutions , and ( 3 ) troubled mortgage - backed securities ( mbss ) .

secretary paulson had indicated that reverse auctions would be used to purchase mortgage - backed securities from troubled financial institutions .

well - designed auctions can help price such assets in an efficient manner .

the bush administration treasury secretary at the time , henry paulson , soon decided to use the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) to inject capital into financial institutions by purchasing special preferred equity shares .

members of the bush administration have said that they came to believe that direct capital injections would provide greater leverage to stimulate borrowing and that the sharp deterioration in financial markets in mid october 2007 — during the time that congress was considering eesa — required strategies that could be implemented more quickly .

in mid - january 2009 , congress declined to block a presidential request to release the second tranche of $350 billion in tarp funds .

on january 22 , 2009 , the house passed a measure ( h.j.res .

3 ) to disapprove release of those funds on a 270-155 vote , but the senate had declined on january 15 , 2009 , to pass a related measure ( s.j.res .

5 ) by a 42-52 vote .

on february 10 , 2009 , treasury secretary timothy geithner outlined a "financial stability plan" intended to address continued financial and economic turmoil .

geithner said that he aimed "to use private capital and private asset managers to help provide a market mechanism for valuing the assets. .

according to some experts , market pricing of such assets implies that reverse auctions would play an important role in the plan .

many proposed plans to address financial turmoil involve asset purchases by federal entities .

market - based pricing would probably involve auctions or similar mechanisms .

this report provides congress with information on the uses , design , and functions of auctions .

it reviews some common types of auctions used by the federal government and some of the issues of auction design that may face the treasury department .

the deterioration in the credit quality of mortgage - related assets and similar types of assets , according to many experts , is closely linked with the credit crunch that emerged in august 2007 , and which worsened in the fall of 2008 .

many have therefore argued that creating a government - sponsored vehicle to absorb troubled assets , either directly by asset purchases or indirectly by acquiring equity shares in institutions that hold troubled assets , would strengthen lenders' balance sheets , which in turn would stimulate new lending .

thus , the federal government , in this view , can encourage lending by shouldering some portion of risks associated with troubled assets .

government purchases of troubled assets , however , present two types of risks to federal stakeholders .

first , uncertainty about the fundamental value of troubled assets implies that federal stakeholders will bear financial risks , especially when those risks are related to systematic economic trends .

second , the government may overpay for troubled assets or for equity in firms that hold such assets .

in early february 2009 , the chair of the eesa congressional oversight board expressed concern that the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) had overpaid for assets it had acquired .

details of secretary geithner's proposals have not yet been released .

the plan outline released on february 10 , 2009 , indicates that market - based asset purchases , which presumably would involve auction mechanisms , would play an important role .

congress , therefore , may wish to understand how treasury proposals determine asset purchase prices when it considers enabling legislation and while it conducts on - going oversight of tarp and related programs .

in early october 2008 , the bush administration proposed using reverse auctions to purchase mortgage - related securities from financial institutions , which are similar to the multiple - unit dutch auctions that the treasury uses to sell government securities .

while the bush administration focused on other strategies to address continuing financial turmoil , a "financial stability plan" outlined by president obama's treasury secretary , timothy geithner , may include reverse auctions as part of the proposed "public - private investment fund. .

in a reverse auction , a buyer accepts bids from multiple potential sellers .

in reverse multi - unit dutch auctions , a buyer ( eg , the u.s. treasury ) buys a given number of units from private parties ( eg , financial institutions ) at a price set by the last accepted bid .

the box below contains a hypothetical example of a reverse dutch auction .

auctions provide a means of selling objects whose value to potential owners is unknown to the seller .

many different auction mechanisms are in common use .

a large research literature in economic theory and experimental economics examines how different types of auctions work .

on the one hand , well - designed auctions can provide an expeditious and efficient method for selling or acquiring objects .

on the other hand , poorly designed auctions have caused governments to forego large amounts of revenue .

moreover , poorly designed auctions may increase the likelihood that valuable resources are allocated to buyers who value those resources less than others — a source of inefficiency .

in particular , auctions suitable for some applications may be unsuited for other applications .

the american government has used reverse auctions since robert morris , who headed the treasury department , used them to procure supplies for troops in the revolutionary war .

in recent decades , the treasury department has used auctions to sell federal securities .

over time , the federal government has gained valuable experience in conducting and designing auctions , which has reduced costs and increased revenues compared to other methods .

current u.s. treasury auctions , which use a multi - unit dutch auction mechanism to sell securities , have apparently provided a starting point for administration proposals to buy "troubled assets" via reverse dutch auctions .

because the reverse dutch auction process would , in approximate mirror fashion , resemble treasury auctions of government securities to primary dealers , key market participants could quickly familiarize themselves with new bidding procedures .

those administering treasury reverse auctions , however , recognize that differences between treasury securities and troubled assets have consequences for auction design .

designing reverse dutch auctions may present some tradeoffs between enhancing competition among bidders and overpaying for assets relative to their quality .

careful auction design , however , can help minimize these problems .

in the dutch auction mechanism used to sell u.s. treasury securities , all successful buyers pay the same price ; in other words , it is a uniform - price mechanism .

uniform - price mechanisms , according to some experts , may encourage more aggressive bidding , which raises expected revenues .

while details of the treasury reverse dutch auctions remain unspecified , the u.s. treasury would probably announce that it wished to buy a given amount of mortgage - related securities ( mbss ) of specific types or issues for a given auction .

bidders would then list securities they wish to sell and specify prices .

the treasury would then buy the securities listed at the lowest prices until the specified amount was reached .

the price offered by the last successful bidder would then be paid to all successful bidders .

auctions in recent years have been used to address a wide range of policy issues .

auctions may capture higher revenues for governments and can allocate scarce resources more efficiently than traditional methods .

different policy issues , however , may require different types of auctions to achieve reasonable results .

to provide a basis for evaluating the reverse auction mechanisms that may be used in tarp , this section discusses potential problems that may arise in using auctions , and how those problems can be minimized by careful design of auction mechanisms .

the most common auction mechanisms used to sell single items are the first - price sealed - bid auction , the english or ascending - price open - bid auction , and the dutch or descending - price auction .

in the first - price sealed - bid auction , bidders submit bids to the seller , who then selects the highest bid when selling an item or the lowest bid when buying an item .

in the english or ascending - price auction , bidders announce prices that must exceed previous prices by a set amount .

the last bidder to remain receives the object at her last announced price .

in flower markets in amsterdam and other trading centers in the netherlands , bidders watch a price clock that starts at a high price and descends at a constant rate .

the first bidder to press a button buys the lot of flowers at the price indicated on the price clock .

similar descending - price mechanisms are called dutch auctions .

treasury auctions for government securities , which use sealed - bid rules , are often described as "dutch" auctions even though they do not use a descending - price mechanism as in flower auctions .

treasury securities auctions , however , are strategically equivalent to a particular descending - price ( dutch ) auction .

an auction mechanism is strategically equivalent to another auction mechanism when bidders' incentives , the identity of the winner , and the final sale price are the same for both .

some auction rules , however , may be operationally easier to carry out .

for example , bidders can mail in responses for a sealed - bid auction , while english auctions require bidders ( or their agents ) to gather in the same place .

a descending - price ( dutch ) auction , under certain conditions , is strategically equivalent to a sealed - bid , first - price auction .

a rational bidder calculates what the item for sale is worth to her .

if a bidder bid her value , however , she would make zero gain in a first - price auction because the price paid would exactly match the item's value to her .

a rational bidder therefore shades her bid downwards , trading off a larger gain ( value minus price paid if she wins the auction ) against the possibility that she would lose the item by lowering her bid .

the same calculation applies to both the sealed - bid , first - price auction and to the descending - price auction , so the two auctions may be considered strategically equivalent .

an english ( ascending - bid ) is strategically equivalent to a second - price sealed - bid auction when bidders know what the object up for auction is worth to them .

when bidders have imperfect information about the value of an item , an english or ascending - bid auction may force better - informed bidders to reveal valuable information to less well informed bidders .

for example , the value of an antique may depend on who made it , how rare it is , and on who owned it before .

a knowledgeable bidder , who may know more about an item's value , will attempt to use bidding strategies that conceal private information .

the value to bidders of some auctioned items may be linked .

for example , the value one energy company places on an offshore continental shelf ( ocs ) lease that would allow exploration and extraction of oil and gas will correlate to the value other energy companies place on the same lease .

different companies might have strengths and weaknesses in exploration and extraction techniques , so the value of the lease will not be the same to each company .

any company that got the lease , however , would sell oil and gas on the same world markets .

auctions that sell items whose value to bidders is correlated are called common - value auctions .

bidders in a common - value auction may have different indications of an item's value .

for example , many energy companies may have private information about the geological structures of areas covered by an ocs lease .

a company holding an ocs lease in a nearby area that had run seismic tests might have more precise information about those geological structures , and thus would have a more precise estimate of the value of the ocs lease up for auction .

when bidders have imperfect signals of value , bidders with overly optimistic signals are likely to win auctions .

such bidders , however , will suffer losses because the true value of the item is less than their optimistic estimate .

this is the winner's curse: such auction winners would have been better off losing .

sophisticated bidders in common - value auctions shade their bids downward to account for the winner's curse .

sophisticated auction designers release as much information as possible about an item's value so that revenues are not reduced by bidders who shade their bids downwards .

that is , bidders with better information bid more aggressively .

certain auction mechanisms , as noted above , are functionally equivalent to certain other auctions run using different rules .

the auctions discussed above ( dutch , english , first - price and second - price sealed bid ) in theory deliver the same profits to bidders and the same revenues to sellers .

moreover , any ( independent private value ) auction that awards the item to the highest bidders and attracts the same pool of participants also in theory provides the same profits to bidders and the same revenues to sellers .

this result , known as the revenue equivalence theorem , implies that to affect expected revenues requires changing who participates in an auction .

for example , minimum bid rules can raise expected revenue , but may lower an auction's economic efficiency .

experimental research has found that some expected auction equivalences hold , while others do not .

experimental testing of revenue equivalence of auction mechanisms is an active research area .

auctions in which multiple units are sold simultaneously are more complex than single - unit auctions .

computing optimal bidding strategies in multiple - unit auctions may be complex and difficult .

designing multiple - unit auctions so that government revenue is maximized and so that scarce resources are likely to be assigned to those who value them the most can be challenging .

the federal government , however , has successfully used complex multi - unit auctions to allocate electromagnetic spectrum for wireless communication and related uses .

bidders in some situations can benefit by strategically withdrawing bids on some items in order to lower prices on other items .

the logic of this strategy is analogous to standard monopoly or oligopoly pricing models .

a monopolist or a firm with some market power can raise profits by reducing output below the level that would prevail in a competitive market .

just as entry by new competitors can reduce the market power of existing firms , auction designs that encourage many bidders to participate can limit the effect of demand - reduction strategies .

auctions that sell complementary goods can be extraordinarily complex .

items are considered complements when groups of items are more valuable than the sum of individual items .

for example , take - off rights from a specific airport that a government might auction off will be more valuable if the airline can obtain landing rights at a different airport .

federal communications commission auctions of electromagnetic spectrum involve complementarities because a license in one geographic area may be more valuable to a telecommunications firm that holds a license in an adjacent area .

complementarities among troubled assets may complicate current reverse auctions implemented as part of tarp .

for instance , some assets backed by sub - prime loans were often linked to collateralized default obligations ( cdos ) , which provided something akin to insurance to investors holding those assets .

in that case , the asset backed by a pool of sub - prime loans and the associated cdo would share a strong complementarity , which could affect behavior in a reverse auction .

the u.s. treasury , as noted above , uses a multi - unit dutch auction mechanism to sell government securities to primary dealers .

the federal government and some corporations have used reverse dutch auctions for some procurements .

treasury auction mechanisms can , under certain circumstances , be vulnerable to manipulations related to the demand - reduction strategies discussed above .

the u.s. treasury and many entities that use auctions , however , have developed methods designed to detect or mitigate manipulation strategies .

in some multiple - unit auctions , such as dutch auctions , all successful bidders pay the same price .

such auctions are called uniform - price auctions .

in other auctions , such as first - price auctions , in which successful bidders pay their bids , different bidders pay different prices for identical items .

such auctions are often called discriminatory or multiple - price auctions .

a 2002 international monetary fund report found that 10 of 18 advanced industrial countries surveyed used uniform - price auctions , and 15 of 18 used multiple - price auctions .

the u.s. treasury claims that a uniform - price auction raises slightly more revenue than a multiple - price auction because it reduces winner's curse risks .

