the federal railroad administration ( fra ) of the u.s. department of transportation is the federal agency primarily responsible for promoting and regulating the safety of the railroad industry .

the fra's rail safety programs were last authorized in 1994 ( p.l .

103 - 440 ) ; that authorization expired at the end of fy1998 .

fra's safety programs have continued to be funded through annual appropriations bills .

reauthorization of the fra is taking place in a context of improvement in most measures of rail safety .

however , there continue to be around 1,000 rail - related deaths each year .

the trend of improvement in some rail safety measures , such as train accidents and deaths in grade - crossing collisions , has leveled off in recent years , and with forecasts of significant growth in rail traffic in the future , there is concern over the need to make more progress in rail safety .

several hearings have been held in the 110 th congress in both the house and senate on reauthorization of fra .

an administration proposal to reauthorize fra has been introduced , by request , as the federal railroad safety accountability and improvement act ( h.r .

1516 and s. 918 ) .

no action has been taken on this legislation in either the house or the senate .

representative james oberstar , chairman of the house transportation and infrastructure committee has introduced a reauthorization proposal , the federal railroad safety improvement act of 2007 ( h.r .

2095 ) .

a managers' amendment was adopted , with amendments , and was ordered to be reported out of the transportation and infrastructure committee on june 14 , 2007 .

the amended bill was reported by the committee on september 19 , 2007 , and was approved by the house of representatives on october 17 , 2007 .

senator frank lautenberg , chairman of the senate commerce committee's subcommittee on surface transportation and merchant marine infrastructure , safety , and security , has also introduced a reauthorization proposal , the railroad safety enhancement act of 2007 ( s. 1889 ) .

a managers' amendment was adopted and ordered to be reported out of the commerce committee on september 27 , 2007 ; the bill was reported out on march 3 , 2008 .

the senate substituted s. 1889 , with amendments , for the text of h.r .

2095 , and passed it by unanimous consent on august 1 , 2008 .

this report describes the major issues in the debate over reauthorization of fra in the 110 th congress .

it also describes the major provisions of h.r .

2095 as passed by the house and as passed by the senate .

these include changes to the rail hours of service law , including limitations on limbo time ; imposition of a deadline for the implementation of positive train control by railroads ; and new requirements for highway - rail grade crossings .

the major issues in the current reauthorization debate include addressing employee fatigue through changes to the federal rail hours of service legislation , implementing new train control technology that promotes safety , improving the condition of track , and improving safety at highway - rail grade crossings .

several hearings have been held in both the house and senate during the 110 th congress on rail safety reauthorization issues .

several bills have been introduced and are under consideration in both houses .

an administration proposal to reauthorize fra has been introduced , by request , as the federal railroad safety accountability and improvement act ( h.r .

1516 and s. 918 ) .

no action has been taken on this legislation in either in the house or the senate .

representative james oberstar , chairman of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , has introduced a reauthorization proposal , the federal railroad safety improvement act of 2007 ( h.r .

2095 ) .

a managers' amendment was adopted by the full committee , with amendments , by the transportation and infrastructure committee on june 14 , 2007 ; the amended bill was reported on september 19 , 2007 .

an amendment in the nature of a substitute was adopted by the house on october 17 , 2007 .

senator frank lautenberg , chairman of the senate commerce committee's subcommittee on surface transportation and merchant marine infrastructure , safety , and security , has introduced a reauthorization proposal , the railroad safety enhancement act of 2007 ( s. 1889 ) .

a managers' amendment was adopted by the full committee and was ordered to be reported out of the commerce committee on september 27 , 2007 ; it was reported on march 3 , 2008 , and with some further changes was passed , as an amended version of h.r .

2095 , on august 1 , 2008 .

summaries of the contents of these bills , and an analysis of selected issues , follow .

the administration's reauthorization proposal ( h.r .

1516 / s. 918 ) included few significant changes to fra's safety program .

it did propose to convert the rail hours of service law to a regulation which dot could amend through the regulatory process .

it also proposed to create a safety risk reduction program within fra to augment fra's traditional regulatory approach to safety , which focuses on catching mistakes on the part of railroads .

the safety risk reduction program would promote improvements in the processes railroads use in order to eliminate the causes of mistakes .

the administration asserted that this approach would maximize the safety results obtained with fra's limited resources , but that to implement the program , fra would have to acquire new skills and adopt new ways of thinking .

the administration also proposed to allow fra to monitor the radio communications of railroads without their consent , in order to determine whether safety rules are being followed and for investigating accidents .

the administration observed that allowing fra to monitor these communications without the knowledge of railroads and their employees would provide a more accurate picture of the degree of compliance with safety rules .

no action has been taken on this legislation in either the house or the senate , and it appears likely that congress will focus on other legislation in the fra reauthorization debate .

the federal railroad safety improvement act of 2007 ( h.r .

2095 ) was introduced by representative james oberstar , chairman of the house committee on transportation and infrastructure .

a managers' amendment was marked up and ordered to be reported , with amendments , by the transportation and infrastructure committee on june 14 , 2007 , and was reported on september 19 , 2007 .

an amended version was adopted by the house on october 17 , 2007 , by a vote of 377-38 .

h.r .

2095 would make significant changes to a number of fra's safety programs .

fra would be renamed the federal railroad safety administration ( frsa ) .

it would make several changes to address the issue of employee fatigue: it would increase the minimum rest period length under the rail hours of service act from 8 to 10 hours , and would authorize frsa to further increase the length of that minimum rest period through regulation ; it would phase in a limit of 10 hours on the amount of limbo time an employee could accrue each month ( not including any limbo time caused by delays unforeseeable at the time the employee left a designated terminal ) ; it would require that employees accruing limbo time on a shift be given additional rest time after that shift equal to the amount of limbo time accrued ; and it would require railroads to develop fatigue management plans in consultation with rail labor unions it would also require railroads to set minimum training standards for employees , to address concerns that employees are not being provided adequate training .

the bill would increase the number of safety inspectors from the current level of approximately 430 to 800 .

it would require class i railroads to implement positive train control by december 2014 , though dot could extend that deadline through waivers .

the bill would require safety improvements at grade crossings , such as posting of toll - free telephone numbers to notify railroads of emergency situations at grade crossings and requiring railroads to remove visual obstructions ( such as vegetation ) near grade crossings .

it would also direct fra to provide model legislation to state and local governments regarding safety at grade crossings .

the bill would establish new civil penalties , and increase existing penalties , for failure to comply with federal safety regulations .

the bill would authorize a total of $1.1 billion over four years ( fy2008-fy2011 ) for fra's safety programs .

currently fra receives around $200 million annually for its safety & operations and research & development accounts .

the bill would also authorize three new grant programs: for operation lifesaver ( $1.5 million annually ) ; for deployment of positive train control systems ( such sums as may be necessary ) ; and for emergency improvements to grade crossings ( such sums as may be necessary ) .

the bill would also authorize $18 million for the construction of a tunnel at the transportation technology center in pueblo , colorado , for safety and security training .

it also requires the ntsb to assist the families of passengers involved in rail accidents that result in fatalities .

the bill also requires dot to issue regulations requiring that , in nonsignaled territory ( i.e. , areas where there are no signals along the track to inform train operators of track conditions or the approach of other trains ) , railroads must either install position indicators on track switches on main lines or operate trains at speeds that will allow train employees to observe , and stop in advance of , misaligned switches .

in october of 2006 fra issued a notice of proposed rulemaking on , among other issues , preventing misaligned switches in nonsignaled territory .

amendments added during house consideration include ( 1 ) a provision that mechanical and brake inspections of rail cars that are performed in mexico will not be regarded as satisfying u.s. standards unless the secretary of transportation certifies that the inspection standards and procedures are comparable to u.s. inspections and that fra is allowed to perform onsite inspections to ensure compliance ; and ( 2 ) a provision allowing state and local governments to regulate solid waste rail transfer facilities .

the administration has stated its opposition to several of the provisions of the bill .

these include the hours of service provisions , which it terms "overly prescriptive," several of the mandated fra rulemakings , and the mandated adoption of positive train control .

h.r .

2095 , as passed by the senate , reflects much of the substance of s. 1889 , the railroad safety enhancement act of 2007 .

the senate struck the text of h.r .

2095 , as passed by the house , and substituted much of s. 1889 , with some changes .

this bill was passed by the senate by unanimous consent on august 1 , 2008 .

s. 1889 was introduced by senator frank lautenberg , chairman of the senate commerce committee's subcommittee on surface transportation and merchant marine infrastructure , safety , and security , on july 26 , 2007 .

the committee approved an amended bill on september 27 , 2007 , and ordered it to be reported .

the bill was reported on march 3 , 2008 , and a version of the bill was substituted as an amendment to h.r .

2095 , with additional changes , when it was passed by the senate .

h.r .

2095 , as passed by the senate , authorizes $1.5 billion for fra over six years ( fy2008-2013 ) , create two new grant programs ( for rail safety technology and for rail safety infrastructure improvements ) , directs fra to increase its labor force by 150 safety personnel over the period 2008-2013 , and require railroads to implement positive train control technology by the end of 2018 .

it directs fra to issue regulations regarding rail employee training , and includes provisions promoting safety at highway - rail grade crossings .

the bill would increase the minimum amount of uninterrupted rest time and limit the amount of limbo time that can be accrued by rail employees under the rail hours of service statute , and would authorize dot to amend the rail hours of service limits through the regulatory process .

the bill would also allow fra to monitor the radio communications of railroads without their consent , in order to determine whether safety rules are being followed and for investigating accidents .

in h.r .

1516 / s. 918 , the administration proposed to give the fra authority to completely revise the rail hours of service laws through the regulatory process .

in acknowledgment of the variety of working conditions within the rail industry , the administration proposed to allow dot to authorize and enforce compliance with fatigue management plans proposed by railroads as an alternative to compliance with an hours of service regulation , provided fra judged that those plans provided a level of safety equal to or better than that provided by the regulation .

h.r .

2095 , as passed by the house , would increase the minimum off - duty period under the rail hours of service law , and would give the dot authority to further increase the minimum off - duty period , or decrease the maximum on - duty period , by regulation .

it would also require railroads to submit to dot fatigue management plans designed to reduce employee fatigue and the likelihood of accidents and injuries caused by fatigue .

the bill would also amend the hours of service law to increase the current minimum off - duty period from eight hours to 10 hours , with a minimum of one 24-hour rest period every seven days , thereby reducing the maximum amount of time that could be worked in a week from the current level of 100 hours to 78 hours .

the bill would also require that an employee's minimum rest time be undisturbed ; that is , it would bar a rail company from communicating with a train employee in any manner that would disturb the employee's rest during the minimum rest period ( except for emergencies ) .

h.r .

2095 , as passed by the senate , would make similar changes .

significant differences from the changes proposed by the house include requiring 48 consecutive hours off duty for employees after working six consecutive days , unless a collective bargaining agreement allows for working seven consecutive days , in which case employees must then be given 72 consecutive hours off duty ; capping the total on - duty and limbo time an employee could accrue at 276 hours per month ; giving dot the authority to approve alternate hours of service plans jointly developed by rail labor and management that will not adversely affect rail safety ; allowing dot to waive the prohibition on communicating with a train employee during the minimum rest period for commuter or intercity passenger rail carriers if necessary in order to maintain efficient operations and on - time performance ; and directing dot to regulate hours of service for commuter rail and intercity passenger rail train employees ( such requirements may vary from those prescribed in the bill ) .

fra testified against the provisions of these bills that would amend the hours of service limits .

acknowledging the frustrations that the issue has produced and the desires of some members of congress to provide quick relief , fra asserted that hours of service issues are complicated and need to be addressed within the overall context of fatigue prevention and management .

consequently , fra urged that it be given the authority to completely revise the hours of service law through regulations based on the current scientific understanding of fatigue .

both the house and senate version of h.r .

2095 allow fra to regulate hours of service , but not to increase the on - duty time or reduce the off - duty requirements prescribed in the bill ( except for commuter and intercity passenger rail train employees ) .

in a statement of administration policy , the administration opposed the hours of service provision of the house - passed h.r .

2095 as being overly prescriptive , and expressed concern that the new limits on hours of service , in combination with the limits on limbo time also included in the bill , would tend to increase railroads' need to hire additional operating employees at a time when retirements and resignations are making it increasingly difficult for railroads to have a full complement of workers , thereby aggravating potential service disruptions and the safety problems that can come with large numbers of new , relatively inexperienced employees .

aar supported a revision of the hours of service law to reflect current scientific understanding of fatigue .

aar contended that rail companies do not want workers who are too tired to properly perform their duties , and are making efforts to address fatigue .

aar testified that , generally speaking , railroads do not object to the provision of these bills that increase the minimum rest time from 8 to 10 hours , and that bar nonemergency communications from rail companies during the minimum rest period .

however , aar did object to the provision requiring that employees subject to hours of service limits have at least 24 consecutive hours off duty every seven days as being inconsistent with railroad work schedules .

aar requested that period be extended by one day , to require that employees receive 24 consecutive hours off duty every eight days ( with an exception for signal employees ) .

and while not objecting to the requirement that railroads prepare fatigue management plans , aar did request some changes to the specifics of that requirement , including that the plans should only apply to those employees who are subject to the hours of service law .

aar supported the limitation of total hours worked by an employee ( including limbo time ) to 276 hours per month , as proposed in the senate - passed h.r .

2095 .

rail labor organizations also support a revision of the hours of service regime .

they support the provisions these bills that would amend the current rail hours of service regime to ensure that an employee was undisturbed during their minimum rest period , and to require rail companies to develop fatigue management plans in consultation with employees .

the administration bill did not propose any direct change ( though it is possible that limbo time would be affected as a result of the regulatory process of revising the hours of service regime , which the administration proposed ) .

the house - passed version of h.r .

2095 , which as introduced would have eliminated limbo time , limits the amount of limbo time an employee can accrue to 10 hours per month ( not including limbo time caused by delays that were unforeseeable at the time an employee left a designated terminal ) , phased in over a period of two years after enactment of the legislation .

the senate - passed version of h.r .

2095 would limit limbo time to a maximum of three hours per day ( not including limbo time caused by delays that were unforeseeable when an employee left a designated terminal ) , while allowing employees to elect additional off - duty time equal to the amount of limbo time incurred during their shift .

the senate bill's overall limit of 276 hours of work by an employee each month includes limbo time in calculating the total hours worked .

the administration objected to the limbo time provision of the house - passed h.r .

2095 , contending that "there is nothing inherently unsafe about a crew being left on a train so long as the crew is relieved of duties and given adequate rest time. .

while the fra is concerned about the impact of limbo time on employee fatigue , the fra administrator objected that reclassifying limbo time as on - duty time would: shift the law from a safety frame of reference to a "fair labor standards" frame of reference , force carriers to reduce the length of many assignments to avoid the possibility of "violations" under circumstances where safety could not be seriously compromised , and ensure that any further reforms would be very costly indeed .

the fra administrator urged instead that , given the complications of hours of service issues , and the need to consider them within the context of fatigue prevention and management , the fra be given the authority to develop hours of service regulations based on a scientific understanding of fatigue .

the aar contends that eliminating limbo time by reclassifying it as on - duty time would create "intractable scheduling problems" for railroads and result in increased costs that would be passed on to rail shippers .

the railroads propose instead to address the safety - related fatigue implications of limbo time by providing additional time off to employees who have accrued at least one hour of limbo time .

also , the railroads propose a monthly maximum of 276 on - duty hours for train operating employees ; limbo time would count toward that monthly maximum , even though it would not be considered on - duty time in any particular instance .

failing that approach , the railroads would support providing fra with the authority to deal with the issue through regulating rail hours of service .

rail labor groups support the elimination of limbo time by reclassifying it as on - duty time .

they argue that the supreme court decision classifying the time the original crew spends waiting for transportation as limbo time promotes the type of abuse — failing to get the crews to their final release point as soon as possible — that the 1969 amendment to the hours of service act was intended to remedy .

james brunkenhoefer , the united transportation union's national legislative director , asserted that the limit of 10 hours per month on limbo time would effectively eliminate limbo time , because of the difficulty railroads would have in keeping track of the remaining limbo time for two separate members of a train crew .

the administration bill did not address ptc .

the house - passed h.r .

2095 would require each class i railroad to submit to dot , within 12 months of passage of the bill , a plan for implementing a ptc system by december 31 , 2014 .

the secretary would be permitted to extend the implementation deadline by up to 24 months .

the secretary would be required to review the railroads' compliance with their plans , and issue a report to the pertinent congressional committees by december 31 , 2011 on the status of ptc implementation .

no penalty is provided in the event that railroads do not comply with this requirement .

the house - passed h.r .

2095 also includes a grant program to support deployment of train control technologies ; no specific level of funding was authorized for this program .

the senate - passed h.r .

2095 requires that each railroad that has inadequate safety performance ( as determined by the dot secretary ) submit a risk reduction plan , which shall include a schedule for implementing a ptc system by december 31 , 2018 , though the secretary can set an earlier deadline .

again , no penalty is provided for noncompliance .

the bill also creates a safety technology grant program , which provides a 50% match for the implementation of train control technologies ; the program would be funded at $10 million annually .

the administration has objected that mandating implementation of ptc by an "arbitrary" deadline is premature , contending that the safety benefits have not yet been shown to justify the costs , and that the technology is not yet proven .

if congress decides to mandate the implementation , the administration requested that the secretary of transportation be given greater flexibility to guide implementation to promote safety and avoid disruptions to commerce .

aar has testified that railroads are committed to the deployment of positive train control technology where it makes sense ( eg , on high - density main lines , not low - density branch lines ) and on a schedule based on available funds .

in light of the variety of train control systems and their differing advantages and disadvantages , which railroads are still evaluating , aar objected to setting a fixed deadline for deployment at this stage .

aar did support having railroads provide fra with an implementation plan for ptc within 12 months of the act , suggesting that a firmer implementation timetable might be established at that point .

the brotherhood of railroad signalmen testified in support of the requirement for deployment of ptc in house - passed h.r .

2095 , and the brotherhood of locomotive engineers and trainmen testified in support of the provision on ptc deployment in senate - passed h.r .

2095 .

testimony from other rail labor groups did not comment on the ptc requirements .

rail labor is wary of ptc's implications for the issue of train operating crew size .

technology has enabled railroads to increase worker productivity , reducing the average train crew size from 4-5 persons to 2-3 persons in recent decades .

there is concern on the part of rail labor that railroads would like to reduce the size of the train operating crew to one person , which would be feasible with ptc .

the brotherhood of locomotive engineers and trainmen has generally expressed support for ptc as a supplement to "existing methods of train control. .

the administration bill did not propose any specific initiatives for track inspection .

house - passed h.r .

2095 would require fra to increase its number of rail inspectors from the current figure of approximately 440 to at least 800 by 2012 .

fra's rail safety inspectors are divided into five areas of expertise ; the legislation does not specify how many inspectors should be added to each of the five groups .

the bill would also direct fra to purchase 6 gage restraint measurement system vehicles and 5 track geometry vehicles , so that one of each type of vehicle can be deployed in each of fra's eight regions .

senate - passed h.r .

2095 requires fra to increase the number of safety - related fra employees by 150 over six years , to purchase gage restraint measurement system vehicles and other track safety inspection vehicles as needed , and requires dot to conduct a study to determine whether current track inspection practices and remedial action requirements should be changed .

representatives of rail labor testified in support of the proposed increase in the number of fra safety inspectors .

aar testified that railroad companies do not see a need for an increase in the number of fra safety inspectors .

fra has noted that traditional visual inspections are not always able to identify subtle track flaws , and that they have acquired automated tracks inspection equipment that can identify flaws that human inspectors often miss , and can inspect track at a much faster rate than could be done by human inspectors .

the administration bill proposed requiring an update of fra's grade crossing inventory .

it also included provisions intended to encourage the development of new technologies to prevent accidents at rail crossings , and would protect suppliers , state and local governments , and railroads from tort liability for the use of such systems , if installed and maintained according to fra's guidelines .

the house - passed h.r .

2095 would require railroads to provide toll - free telephone numbers , to be posted at each grade crossing , to receive reports of malfunctioning safety devices and of highway vehicles blocking a crossing , in order to alert train crews and public safety officials ; require railroads to remove visual obstructions ( such as vegetation ) that might obscure a motorist's or pedestrian's view of an oncoming train ; require dot to develop model legislation providing civil or criminal penalties , or both , for violations of grade crossing warning signals by motorists ; require that the fra's inventory of grade crossings be updated every four years ; authorize dot to buy and distribute small promotional items to increase awareness of grade crossing safety issues ; authorize $1.5 million annually for grants to operation lifesaver , a nonprofit organization promoting awareness of risks at grade crossings ; and authorize a grant program for emergency grade crossings improvements ( no specific level of funding was authorized ) .

the senate - passed h.r .

2095 includes similar grade crossing safety improvements ( its grade crossing safety improvement grant program is authorized at $500,000 annually ) .

representatives of rail labor testified in support of these provisions , except for the administration's proposal providing protection from tort liability for new grade crossing protection technologies .

aar testified in favor of these provisions , while requesting that the provisions of the regulations governing the removal of visual obstructions should specify the distance to be kept clear and should preempt state and local laws to provide uniformity nationwide .

the provision of toll - free numbers for notification of emergency conditions at grade crossings has been of interest to congress for some time .

in 1994 , congress directed fra to conduct a pilot program of the effectiveness of such a program ; the results of that study , published in 2006 , found that such programs provide safety benefits .

fra and ntsb have urged railroads to provide toll - free numbers at each grade crossing .

as of 2006 , approximately 50% of all crossings are included in an emergency notification system .

many states already require railroads to remove visual obstructions near grade crossings , but the requirements are not uniform .

the highway - rail grade crossing hazard elimination formula program currently provides $220 million annually to states for safety improvements at grade crossings .

