this report describes the president's fy2009 request for funding for dhs programs and activities , as submitted to congress on february 4 , 2008 .

it compares the enacted fy2008 amounts to the request for fy2009 , and tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to the fy2009 dhs appropriations bills with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the report does not follow specific funding issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically follow any legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs .

title i covers the general administrative expenses of dhs .

it includes the office of the secretary and executive management ( os&em ) , which is comprised of the immediate office of the secretary and 12 entities that report directly to the secretary ; the undersecretary for management ( usm ) and its components , such as the offices of the chief administrative services officer , chief human capital officer , and chief procurement officer ; the office of the chief financial officer ( ocfo ) ; the office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) ; analysis and operations office ( aoo ) ; office of the federal coordinator for gulf coast rebuilding ( ofcgcr ) ; and office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

table 6 shows title i appropriations for fy2008 and congressional action on the request for fy2009 .

title ii contains the appropriations for the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the us coast guard , and the us secret service .

table 8 shows the fy2008 enacted and fy2009 appropriation action for title ii .

title iii includes appropriations for the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , and the office of health affairs ( oha ) .

congress expanded fema's authorities and responsibilities in the post - katrina emergency reform act ( p.l .

109-295 ) and explicitly kept certain dhs functions out of the "new fema. .

in response to these statutory exclusions , dhs officials created the nppd to house functions not transferred to fema , and the oha was established for the office of the chief medical officer .

table 14 provides account - level appropriations detail for title iii .

title iv includes appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) .

table 18 provides account - level details of title iv appropriations .

the president's fy2009 budget request included nearly $992 billion in discretionary , non - emergency , budget authority .

on march 6 , 2008 , the house and senate budget committees each reported budget resolutions .

the house budget resolution ( h.con.res .

312 ) was passed in the house on march 13 , 2008 .

while the budget resolution does not identify specific amounts for dhs , it does note that: this resolution assumes funding above the president's requested level for 2009 , and additional amounts in subsequent years , in the four budget functions — function 400 ( transportation ) , function 450 ( community and regional development ) , function 550 ( health ) , and function 750 ( administration of justice ) — that fund most nondefense homeland security activities .

the senate budget resolution ( s.con.res .

70 ) was passed in the senate on march 14 , 2008 .

on june 5 , 2008 , the house and senate reached agreement on s.con.res .

70 .

the final agreement contained language similar to the house language excerpted above , and also noted that: the homeland security funding provided in this resolution will help to strengthen the security of our nation's transportation system , particularly our ports where significant security shortfalls still exist and foreign ports , by expanding efforts to identify and scan all high - risk united states - bound cargo , equip , train and support first responders ( including enhancing interoperable communications and emergency management ) , strengthen border patrol , and increase the preparedness of the public health system .

appendix a. dhs funding in p.l .

111-5 title vi of p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , included a number of provisions providing emergency funding to dhs components ; these provisions were also included in the accompanying conference language in title vi of h.rept .

111-16 .

the following funding provisions are included for the department of homeland security: $200 million for the office of the under secretary of management .

these funds are for the planning , design , and construction costs necessary to consolidate the dhs headquarters .

$5 million for the office of inspector general .

funds are to be used for oversight and auditing of programs , grants and projects funded under the dhs title of the stimulus bill .

$160 million for the cbp salaries and expenses account .

this includes $100 million for the procurement and deployment of new or replacement non - intrusive inspection ( nii ) systems , and $60 million for tactical communications .

$100 million for the cbp border security fencing , infrastructure , and technology account for the expedited development and deployment of border security technology on the southwest border .

a dhs expenditure plan is required within 45 days of enactment of p.l .

111-5 .

$420 million for the cbp construction account .

these funds are designated for the planning , design , management , alteration , and construction of land ports - of - entry .

a dhs expenditure plan is required within 45 days of enactment of p.l .

111-2 .

$20 million for ice's automation modernization account for the procurement and deployment of tactical communications equipment and radios .

a dhs expenditure plan is required within 45 days of enactment of p.l .

111-5 .

$1,000 million for tsa's aviation security account to procure and install checked baggage explosives detection systems and checkpoint explosives detection equipment .

a dhs expenditure plan is required within 45 days of enactment of p.l .

111-5 .

$98 million for the coast guard acquisition , construction , and improvements account for shore facilities and aids to navigation facilities , priority procurements due to material and labor cost increases , and for costs to repair , renovate assess , or improve vessels .

the funding cannot be used for pre - acquisition survey , design , or construction of a new polar icebreaker .

a dhs expenditure plan is required within 45 days of enactment of p.l .

111-5 .

$142 million for the coast guard alteration of bridges account to be used for the alteration or removal of obstructive bridges .

a dhs expenditure plan is required within 45 days of enactment of p.l .

111-5 .

$300 million to fema's state and local program account , of which $150 million is for public transportation security assistance and railroad security assistance , including amtrak security , and $150 million is for port security grants .

$210 million for fema's firefighter assistance grants account to be used for the modification , upgrade or construction of non - federal fire stations .

$100 million for fema's emergency food and shelter account .

in addition to the broad funding distribution listed above , the general provisions of the title vi of h.rept .

111-16 includes so - called "buy american" requirements .

with certain exceptions , this provision states that funds appropriated or otherwise made available to dhs in the act may not be used for the procurement of fabric or fiber - related items if the item is not grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states .

generally , dhs can procure items with 10% or less of total value of non - compliant fibers .

exceptions to this requirement are made for vessels in foreign waters , emergency procurements , small purchases , and circumstances wherein the secretary of dhs determines that qualifying items of satisfactory quality or quantity cannot be procured .

appendix b. fy2008 supplemental funding provided by division b of p.l .

110-329 division b of p.l .

110-329 provided supplemental funding related to disaster relief efforts in 2008 .

dhs received a total of $8,260 million in fy2008 emergency supplemental funding .

the act provided $300 million to the coast guard for the acquisition , construction , and improvements account for the reconstruction and restoration of facilities damaged by disasters during 2008 and required that a plan listing these facilities be submitted to the house and senate committees on appropriations .

the act also provided $7,960 million to fema for the disaster relief account and designated that up to $100 million be provided to the american red cross for reimbursement of their activities during major disasters , as designated by the president , during 2008 .

appendix c. emergency funding for border security in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) this appendix describes the distribution of $3,000 million ( $3.0 billion ) in emergency funds for border security throughout the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

division e of p.l .

110-161 includes $2,710 million ( $2.7 billion ) in emergency funding for border security purposes .

this funding is disbursed throughout several dhs funding accounts including customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , u.s .

visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) ; state and local programs ( s&l ) ; the u.s. coast guard , us citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , and the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) .

p.l .

110-161 also includes another $40 million in division b — commerce , justice , science ; the remaining $250 million is included in division d — financial services .

distribution of fy2008 emergency border security funding in division e — dhs of p.l .

110-161 as noted above , $2,710 million ( $2.7 billion ) in emergency funding was distributed among several accounts in division e of p.l .

110-161 .

the funds are distributed as follows: $1,531 million ( $1.5 billion ) for cbp ; $527 million for ice ; $166 million for the u.s. coast guard ; $275 million for usvisit ; $110 million for s&l programs ; $80 million for uscis ; and $21 million for fletc .

cbp fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $1,531 million ( $1.5 billion ) in fy2008 emergency funding for cbp is disbursed as follows , by account and amount: salaries and expenses — $323 million $40 million for the model ports of entry program and includes funding to hire at least 200 additional cbp officers at the 20 u.s. international airports with the highest number of foreign visitors arriving annually ; $45 million for terrorist prevention system enhancements for passenger screening - to develop system infrastructure needed to support a real - time capability to process advanced passenger information for passengers intending to fly to the u.s. ; $36 million to implement the electronic travel authorization program for visa waiver countries ; $150 million for the western hemisphere travel initiative ( whti ) ; $25 million for a ground transportation vehicle contract ( border patrol ) ; $13 million for border patrol vehicles ; $14 million for air and marine personnel compensation and benefits for 82 positions to support the establishment of 11 new marine enforcement units .

border security fencing , infrastructure , and technology ( bsfit ) — $1,053 million: $1,053 million ( $1.1 billion ) for development and deployment of systems and technology .

air and marine interdiction , operations , maintenance , and procurement: $94 million for procurement .

construction — $61 million: $61 million for border patrol construction .

ice fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $527 million in fy2008 emergency funding for ice is disbursed as follows , by account and amount: salaries and expenses — $516 million $4 million for ice vehicle replacements ; $50 million for domestic investigations ; $186 million for custody operations ; $33 million for fugitive operations ; $10 million for alternatives to detention ; $33 million for transportation and removal ; $200 million for the comprehensive identification and removal of criminal aliens .

construction — $11 million $11 million for construction .

u.s. coast guard fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $166 million in fy2008 emergency funding for the u.s. coast guard is disbursed as follows , by account and amount: operating expenses — $70 million $70 million for port and maritime security enhancements .

acquisition , construction , and improvements — $96 million $36 million for medium response boat replacement ; $60 million for interagency operational centers for port security .

u.s .

visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( usvisit ) fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $275 million in fy2008 emergency funding for us - visit is provided in the main us - visit account .

state and local programs fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $110 million in fy2008 emergency funding for state and local programs is disbursed as follows: $60 million for law enforcement terrorism prevention grants — operation stonegarden ; $50 million for real id grants .

uscis fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $80 million in fy2008 emergency funding for uscis is disbursed as follows: $60 million for the e - verify program ; $20 million for the fbi background check backlog .

fletc fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $21 million in fy2008 emergency funding for fletc is disbursed as follows , by amount and account: salaries and expenses — $17 million $17 million for law enforcement training acquisition , construction , improvements , and related expenses — $4 million $4 million for construction .

distribution of fy2008 emergency border security funding in division b — commerce , justice , science of p.l .

110-161 division b — the commerce , justice , science portion of p.l .

110-161 contains border security - related emergency funding to provide additional resources that will be required as a result of an anticipated increase in immigration enforcement actions .

department of justice ( doj ) fy2008 emergency border security appropriations the $40 million in fy2008 emergency funding for doj is disbursed as follows , by amount and account: general administration - salaries and expenses — $8 million $8 million for the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) to provide additional attorneys and judges for the board of immigration appeals legal activities — salaries and expenses , general legal activities - $10 million $10 million for the civil division office of immigration litigation to provide 86 additional attorneys to address appeals resulting from increased immigration enforcement actions legal activities — salaries and expenses , united states attorneys — $7 million $7 million for united states attorneys for criminal and civil litigation resulting from increased immigration enforcement actions .

us marshals service — salaries and expenses — $15 million .

$15 million for prisoner transportation , defendant productions and courthouse security resulting from increased immigration - related federal court proceedings .

distribution of fy2008 emergency border security funding in division d — financial services division d — the financial services portion of p.l .

110-161 contains border security - related emergency funding to provide additional resources that will be required as a result of an anticipated increase in immigration enforcement actions .

this funding is found within the general services administration ( gsa ) , and within the judiciary , courts of appeals , district courts and other judicial services .

general services administration ( gsa ) fy2008 emergency border security appropriations there is $225 million in emergency border security funding included in the construction and acquisition account of the federal buildings fund under the gsa: federal buildings fund — construction and acquisition — $225 million $225 million to expedite construction at select land ports of entry , including one of the nation's most congested sites .

courts of appeals , district courts and other judicial services , fy2008 emergency border security appropriations p.l .

110-161 provides $25 million in emergency funding for border security initiatives within courts of appeals , district courts and other judicial services: salaries and expenses — $15 million $15 million to address the understaffed workload associated with increased immigration enforcement along the southwest border defender services — $11 million $11 million to address the expected increased workload of attorneys appointed to represent persons under the criminal justice act of 1964 as a result of increased immigration enforcement along the southwest border .

appendix d. dhs appropriations in context federal - wide homeland security funding since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been an increasing interest in the levels of funding available for homeland security efforts .

the office of management and budget , as originally directed by the fy1998 national defense authorization act , has published an annual report to congress on combating terrorism .

beginning with the june 24 , 2002 edition of this report , homeland security was included as a part of the analysis .

in subsequent years , this homeland security funding analysis has become more refined , as distinctions ( and account lines ) between homeland and non - homeland security activities have become more precise .

this means that while table d - 1 is presented in such a way as to allow year to year comparisons , they may in fact not be strictly comparable due to the increasing specificity of the analysis , as outlined above .

with regard to dhs funding , it is important to note that dhs funding does not comprise all federal spending on homeland security efforts .

in fact , while the largest component of federal spending on homeland security is contained within dhs , the dhs homeland security request for fy2009 accounts for approximately 49.5% of total federal funding for homeland security .

the department of defense comprises the next highest proportion at 26.6% of all federal spending on homeland security .

the department of health and human services at 6.7% , the department of justice at 5.7% and the department of state at 3.7% round out the top five agencies in spending on homeland security .

these five agencies collectively account for nearly 92.2% of all federal spending on homeland security .

it is also important to note that not all dhs funding is classified as pertaining to homeland security activities .

the legacy agencies that became a part of dhs also conduct activities that are not homeland security related .

therefore , while the fy2009 request included total homeland security budget authority of $32.8 billion for dhs , the requested total gross budget authority was $46.8 billion .

the same is true of the other agencies listed in the table .

