trafficking in persons ( tip ) , or human trafficking , is both an international and a domestic crime that is often also associated with violations of labor , public health , and human rights standards .

as such , the united states and the international community have committed to combating the various manifestations of human trafficking .

anti - tip efforts have accelerated in the united states since the enactment of the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa ) , and internationally since the passage of the u.n. protocol to prevent , suppress , and punish trafficking in persons , especially women and children ( hereinafter , u.n. protocol ) , adopted in 2000 .

congress has been active in enacting anti - tip laws , appropriating funds , and authorizing and evaluating anti - trafficking programs .

since 2000 , congress reauthorized the tvpa four times , most recently in 2013 .

this report focuses on international and domestic human trafficking and u.s. policy responses , with particular emphasis on the tvpa and its subsequent reauthorizations .

the report begins with a description of key tip - related definitions and an overview of the human trafficking problem .

it follows with an overview of major foreign policy responses to international human trafficking .

the report then focuses on responses to trafficking into and within the united states , examining the types of immigration relief available for trafficking victims in the united states and discussing u.s. law enforcement efforts to combat domestic trafficking .

the report concludes with a discussion of the most recent tvpa reauthorization and an analysis of policy issues .

several international and domestic definitions are relevant to u.s. policy responses associated with tip .

these terms are variously used in international treaties as well as domestic statutes and are relevant for attempts to measure progress in combating the phenomenon .

international human trafficking is widely considered to be a leading law enforcement challenge as well as a pervasive and widespread manifestation of modern - day violations of human rights .

observers have also emphasized how tip can impact economic development and public health .

the following sections provide an overview of the scope of the international tip problem and ongoing challenges in combating the phenomenon .

the u.s. government has a number of strategies , policies , and laws in place to combat the international dimensions of human trafficking .

congress , in particular , has played an active role in establishing the overall structure of the u.s. foreign policy approach , as well as providing appropriations for combating human trafficking and conducting periodic oversight of the implementation of anti - tip programs by various executive branch departments and agencies .

key elements of the u.s. foreign policy framework to address tip include the national security presidential directive 22 on combating trafficking in persons ( nspd - 22 ) and the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa ) , as amended and reauthorized in 2003 , 2005 , 2008 , and 2013 ( tvpras ) .

several mechanisms are in place to facilitate interagency coordination and international cooperation .

the tvpa , as amended and reauthorized , established two interagency entities to facilitate coordination on anti - trafficking policy across u.s. government offices: the senior policy operating group ( spog ) and the president's interagency task force ( pitf ) .

the tvpa also mandated the establishment of the office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons at the state department as a central policy office to coordinate international anti - trafficking efforts , annually produce the tip report , and administer an international anti - tip grants program , among other priorities .

the following sections provide a brief summary of u.s. foreign policy responses to human trafficking .

for further analysis of the various foreign policy responses , see crs report r42497 , trafficking in persons: international dimensions and foreign policy issues for congress , by liana rosen .

the united states is a source , transit , and destination country for men , women , and children subject to trafficking in persons .

human trafficking happens in the united states to both u.s. citizens and noncitizens , and occurs in every state .

according to the most recent u.s. government estimates , in 2004 as many as 17,500 people were trafficked into the united states annually .

the trafficking of individuals within u.s. borders is commonly referred to as domestic or "internal" human trafficking .

domestic human trafficking occurs primarily for labor and most commonly in domestic servitude , agriculture , manufacturing , janitorial services , hotel services , construction , health and elder care , hair and nail salons , and strip club dancing .

however , more investigations and prosecutions have taken place for sex trafficking offenses than for labor trafficking offenses .

noncitizens are more susceptible than u.s. citizens to labor trafficking , and more foreign victims are found in labor trafficking than in sex trafficking .

conversely , although labor trafficking can happen to u.s. citizens , more adult and child u.s. citizens are found in sex trafficking than in labor trafficking .

research indicates that most of the victims of sex trafficking into and within the united states are women and children .

in addition , migrant labor camps tend to be common settings for labor exploitation and domestic trafficking .

the response to human trafficking within the united states has focused on ( 1 ) assistance to victims of trafficking — such as temporary housing , medical care , counseling ; ( 2 ) efforts to increase public awareness about human trafficking ; and ( 3 ) law enforcement efforts to arrest and prosecute traffickers , and identify victims .

a broad consensus appears to be shared in congress and the policy community on the need for decisive action to curb human trafficking .

however , there are some fundamental questions related to how broadly human trafficking should be defined .

in addition , questions have been raised about the effective implementation of anti - trafficking programs .

the following sections provide an overview of long - standing policy challenges that continue to confront human trafficking responses both domestically and internationally .

for more detailed analysis of foreign policy - related human trafficking issues , see crs report r42497 , trafficking in persons: international dimensions and foreign policy issues for congress , by liana rosen .

for a more in depth analysis of the issues surround the sex trafficking of children in the united states , see crs report r41878 , sex trafficking of children in the united states: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

on february 28 , 2013 , congress passed the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-4 ) .

title xii of p.l .

113-4 , entitled trafficking victims protection , reauthorizes the tvpa through fy2017 , and makes other changes to the act .

the united states has created a system to combat human trafficking that combines prosecution , protection , and prevention within the united states with help and encouragement to other governments to do the same .

nonetheless , as with combating most criminal activities , it is difficult to understand the extent of the problem , and as a corollary evaluate how policies are working to combat the issue .

the number of trafficking victims in the united states and throughout the world is elusive , and as such it is difficult to evaluate whether the number of prosecutions for human trafficking and the number of victims rescued illustrate a successful strategy .

in addition , given limited resources , there are tensions between whether equal attention is being given to all types of tip ( eg , sex trafficking vs. labor trafficking ) , and all victims ( eg , noncitizen victims vs. u.s. citizen victims ) .

internationally , the effectiveness of the tip report and sanctions as a tool to combat human trafficking continues to be divisive .

human trafficking by u.s. contractors overseas is also an area of focus to the united states .

domestically , the complexity of trafficking investigations and difficulties locating victims raise questions concerning the allocation of resources to trafficking investigations .

furthermore , policies relating to assistance to victims try to ensure that the needed services are available for all victims , and that the resources exist as well as the programs ( eg , shelters for minor victims of sex trafficking ) that can help the victims recover and reintegrate into society .

as with all criminal activity , it is unlikely that human trafficking will be totally eradicated worldwide , but congress has been active in trying to reduce the prevalence of this crime , and will likely continue to do so .

appendix a. anti - trafficking administrative directives and legislation the human trafficking problem has gained increased attention in the united states and worldwide since the late 1990s .

it has been addressed as a priority by congress , as well as the clinton , george w. bush , and obama administrations .

as part of former president clinton's announced international crime control strategy , an interagency working group was set up to address international crime implications of trafficking .

on march 11 , 1998 , president clinton issued a directive establishing a government - wide anti - trafficking strategy of ( 1 ) prevention , ( 2 ) protection and support for victims , and ( 3 ) prosecution of traffickers .

the strategy , as announced , had strong domestic and international policy components .

on the domestic side , a workers' exploitation task force , chaired by doj's civil rights division and the solicitor's office in the department of labor ( dol ) , was charged with investigating and prosecuting cases of exploitation and trafficking .

in addition , doj reviewed existing u.s. criminal laws and their enforcement to see if they adequately dealt with the crime of trafficking .

on the international front , the state department sponsored the creation of a database on u.s. and international legislation on trafficking .

an interagency council on women formed by the clinton administration established a senior governmental working group on trafficking .

the administration urged the enactment of legislation to encourage and support strong action by foreign governments and help the work of non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) in this area .

on december 16 , 2002 , president george w. bush issued national security presidential directive 22 ( nspd - 22 ) , which establishes as u.s. government - wide policy the goal "to attack vigorously the worldwide problem of trafficking in persons , using law enforcement efforts , diplomacy , and all other appropriate tools. .

as part of its plan of action , nspd - 22 required that federal departments and agencies be fully trained to carry out their specific responsibilities with respect to combating human trafficking and established a "zero tolerance" policy against u.s. government employees and contractors representing the united states abroad who engage in trafficking in persons .

nspd - 22 also encouraged the development of federal cooperation with state and local law enforcement in the united states , u.s. support to strengthen regional and international organization efforts to combat human trafficking , and improved coordination of u.s. foreign assistance and grant programs to combat human trafficking .

expanding on nspd - 22's zero tolerance policy , president barack obama issued executive order ( eo ) 13657 on september 25 , 2012 , to strengthen protections against trafficking in persons in federal contracts .

this executive order mandated that the federal acquisition regulatory ( far ) council revise existing contractor guidelines for preventing human trafficking to include prohibitions on misleading or fraudulent recruitment practices ; charging employees recruitment fees ; and destroying or confiscating employee identity documents , such as passports and driver's licenses .

among other provisions , it also required certain contractors and subcontractors performing services abroad to establish compliance plans to prevent trafficking - related activities .

victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 several bills were introduced in the 106 th congress on human trafficking .

in conference , the bills were combined with the violence against women act of 2000 and repackaged as the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 , along with miscellaneous anti - crime and anti - terrorism provisions .

president clinton signed the bill into law on october 28 , 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) .

the act's key provisions on human trafficking: directed the secretary of state to provide an annual report by june 1 , listing countries that do and do not comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking , and to provide information on the nature and extent of severe forms of trafficking in persons ( tip ) in each country and an assessment of the efforts by each government to combat trafficking in the state department's annual human rights report ; called for establishing an interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking , chaired by the secretary of state , and authorized the secretary to establish within the department of state an office to monitor and combat trafficking to assist the task force ; called for measures to enhance economic opportunity for potential victims of trafficking as a method to deter trafficking , to increase public awareness , particularly among potential victims , of the dangers of trafficking and the protections that are available for victims , and for the government to work with ngos to combat trafficking ; established programs and initiatives in foreign countries to assist in the safe integration , reintegration , or resettlement of victims of trafficking and their children , as well as programs to provide assistance to victims of severe forms of tip within the united states , without regard to such victims' immigration status and to make such victims eligible for any benefits that are otherwise available under the crime victims fund ; provided protection and assistance for victims of severe forms of trafficking while in the united states ; amended the federal criminal code to make funds derived from the sale of assets seized from and forfeited by traffickers available for victims assistance programs under this act ; amended the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to allow the attorney general to grant up to 5,000 nonimmigrant visas ( t visas ) per year to certain victims of severe forms of trafficking who are in the united states and who would face unusual and severe harm if they were removed from the united states .

in addition , amended the ina to allow up to 5,000 t visas holders per year to adjust to lawful permanent resident status if the aliens have been in the united states continuously for three years since admission , have remained of good moral character , have not unreasonably refused to assist in trafficking investigations or prosecutions , and would suffer extreme hardship if removed from the united states ; established minimum standards to combat human trafficking applicable to countries that have a significant trafficking problem .

urged such countries to prohibit severe forms of tip , to punish such acts , and to make serious and sustained efforts to eliminate such trafficking ; provided for assistance to foreign countries for programs and activities designed to meet the minimum international standards for the elimination of trafficking ; called for the united states to withhold non - humanitarian assistance and instructed the u.s. executive director of each multilateral development bank and the international monetary fund to vote against non - humanitarian assistance to such countries that do not meet minimum standards against trafficking and are not making efforts to meet minimum standards , unless continued assistance is deemed to be in the u.s. national interest ; encouraged the president to compile and publish a list of foreign persons who play a significant role in a severe form of tip .

also encouraged the president to impose sanctions under the international emergency economic powers act , including the freezing of assets located in the united states , and to exclude significant traffickers , and those who knowingly assist them , from entry into the united states ; and amended the federal criminal code ( 18 u.s.c. ) .

to double the current maximum penalties for peonage , enticement into slavery , and sale into involuntary servitude from 10 years to 20 years imprisonment and to add the possibility of life imprisonment for such violations resulting in death or involving kidnapping , aggravated sexual abuse , or an attempt to kill .

the george w. bush administration , as well as congress , continued the anti - trafficking effort .

then - attorney general john ashcroft announced in march 2001 that the fight against trafficking would be a top priority for the administration and that u.s. law enforcement agencies , including the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the former immigration and naturalization service , and the justice department's civil rights division would cooperate closely to upgrade their efforts to combat trafficking .

the justice department also announced new guidelines for federal prosecutors to pursue trafficking cases .

the state department issued its first congressionally mandated report on worldwide trafficking in july 2001 .

on january 24 , 2002 , then - attorney general john ashcroft announced the implementation of a special "t" visa , as called for in p.l .

106-386 , for victims of trafficking in the united states who cooperate with law enforcement officials .

under the statute , victims who cooperate with law enforcement against their traffickers and would be likely to suffer severe harm if returned to their home countries may be granted permission to stay in the united states .

after three years in t status , the victims are eligible to apply for permanent residency and for non - immigrant status for their spouses and children .

on february 13 , 2002 , president george w. bush signed an executive order establishing an interagency task force to monitor and combat tip .

the task force , mandated by the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) , includes the secretary of state , the attorney general , the secretary of labor , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , the director of the central intelligence agency , the administrator of the agency for international development , the director of the office of management and budget , and office of the national security advisor .

the task force is charged with strengthening coordination among key agencies by identifying what more needs to be done to protect potential victims , to punish traffickers , and to prevent future trafficking .

the state department office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons ( g - tip ) was tasked with assisting the interagency task force in implementing p.l .

106-386 and task force initiatives .

the foreign relations authorization act of 2003 in 2002 , congress amended the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 in section 682 of the foreign relations authorization act , fy2003 ( p.l .

107-228 ) to provide support for local in - country nongovernmental organization to operated hotlines , culturally and linguistically appropriate protective shelters , and regional and international nongovernmental organizational networks and databases on trafficking ; support for nongovernmental organizations and advocates to provide legal , social , and other services and assistance to trafficked individuals , particularly those individuals in detention ; education and training for trafficked women and girls ; the safe integration or reintegration of trafficked individuals into an appropriate community or family , while respecting the wishes , dignity , and safety of the trafficked individual ; and support for developing or increasing programs to assist families of victims in locating , repatriating , and treating their trafficked family members .

the amendment also authorized an increase in appropriations for fy2003 to fund such programs .

trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2003 in 2003 , congress approved the trafficking victims protection reauthorization act ( tvpra ) of 2003 .

the president signed the act into law on december 19 , 2003 ( p.l .

108-193 ) .

the act authorized substantial increases in funding for anti - trafficking programs in fy2004 and fy2005 ( over $100 million for each fiscal year ) .

p.l .

108-193 refined and expanded the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking that governments must meet and placed on such governments the responsibility to provide the information and data by which their compliance with the standards could be judged .

the legislation created a "special watch list" of countries that the secretary of state determined were to get special scrutiny in the coming year .

the list was to include countries where ( 1 ) the absolute number of victims of severe forms of trafficking is very significant or is significantly increasing ; ( 2 ) there is a failure to provide evidence of increasing efforts to combat severe forms of tip from the previous year ; or ( 3 ) the determination that a country is making significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with minimum standards is based on its commitments to take additional steps over the next year .

in the case of such countries , not later than february 1 of each year , the secretary of state is to provide to the appropriate congressional committees an assessment of the progress that the country had made since the last annual report .

intelligence reform and terrorism protection act of 2004 in december 2004 , congress approved the intelligence reform and terrorism protection act of 2004 , signed into law on december 17 , 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) .

the law established a human smuggling and trafficking center ( hstc ) to be jointly operated by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the state department , and doj .

it required that the center serve as a clearinghouse for federal agency information in support of u.s. efforts to combat terrorist travel , migrant smuggling , and human trafficking .

trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2005 on february 17 , 2005 , representative christopher smith and nine co - sponsors introduced the trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2005 to authorize appropriations for fy2006 and fy2007 and close loopholes in previous anti - trafficking legislation .

the bill was signed into law by the president on january 10 , 2006 ( p.l .

109-164 ) .

among other things , the legislation had provisions to increase u.s. assistance to foreign trafficking victims in the united states , including access to legal counsel and better information on programs to aid victims .

it attempted to address the special needs of child victims , as well as the plight of americans trafficked within the united states .

it directed relevant u.s. government agencies to develop anti - trafficking strategies for post - conflict situations and humanitarian emergencies abroad .

it sought to extend u.s. criminal jurisdiction over government personnel and contractors who are involved in acts of trafficking abroad while doing work for the government .

it addressed the problem of peacekeepers and aid workers who are complicit in trafficking .

the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 , p.l .

110-53 ( h.r .

1 ) , signed into law on august 3 , 2007 , directs the secretary of homeland security ( secretary of dhs ) to provide specified funding and administrative support to strengthen the hstc .

the act directs the secretary of dhs to nominate a u.s. government employee to direct the hstc , and specifics that the hstc be staffed by at least 40 full - time staff , including detailees .

in addition , the act mandates the hiring of not less than 40 full - time equivalent staff for the hstc , and would specify the agencies and departments from which the personnel should be detailed ( eg , transportation and security administration , u.s. coast guard , ice , central intelligence agency ) , and their areas of expertise ( eg , consular affairs , counter terrorism ) .

it also directs the secretary of dhs to provide the administrative support and funding for the hstc .

william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ( tvpra 2008 , p.l .

110-457 ; h.r .

7311 ) was signed into law on december 23 , 2008 .

the act authorizes appropriations for fy2008 through fy2011 for the tvpa as amended and establishes a system to monitor and evaluate all assistance under the act .

p.l .

110-457 requires the establishment of an integrated database to be used by u.s. government departments and agencies to collect data for analysis on tip .

in addition , the act creates a presidential award for extraordinary efforts to combat tip .

measures to address human trafficking in foreign countries p.l .

110-457 increases the technical assistance and other support to help foreign governments inspect locations where forced labor occurs , register vulnerable populations , and provide more protection to foreign migrant workers .

the act requires that specific actions be taken against governments of countries that have been on the tier 2 watch - list for two consecutive years .

p.l .

110-457 also requires u.s. department of state to translate the tip report into the principal languages of as many countries as possible .

in addition , among other measures to address the issue of child soldiers , the act prohibits military assistance to foreign governments that recruit and use child soldiers .

preventing trafficking to the united states tvpra 2008 requires pamphlets on the rights and responsibilities of the employee to be produced and given to employment - based and educational - based nonimmigrants , p.l .

110-457 also requires consular officers to make sure that certain aliens interviewing for nonimmigrant visas have received , read , and understood the pamphlet .

during the interview , the consular officer is also required to discuss the alien's legal rights under u.s. immigration , labor and employment law .

the act contains several provisions aimed to protect a - 3 and g - 5 visas holders including directing the secretary of state to deny a - 3 and g - 5 visas to aliens who would be working at a diplomatic mission or international institution where an alien had been subject to trafficking or exploitation at the mission or institution .

in addition , the secretary of state has maintained records on the presence of a - 3 and g - 5 visa holders in the united states , including information regarding any allegations of abuse .

measures to address trafficking in the united states p.l .

110-457 amends the requirements for the t visa , so that an alien would be eligible for a t visa if the alien was unable to comply with requests for assistance in the investigation and prosecution of acts of trafficking due to physical or psychological trauma .

tvpra 2008 also requires when determining whether the alien meets the extreme hardship requirement for t status that the secretary of dhs consider whether the country to which the alien would be removed can adequately address the alien's security and mental and physical health needs .

in addition , p.l .

110-457 amends the requirements for the t visa so that an alien would be eligible if she was present in the united states after being allowed entry to aid in the prosecution of traffickers .

the act also broadens the requirements for an alien to receive continued presence in the united states , and makes it easier for families of trafficking victims to be paroled into the united states .

in addition , p.l .

110-457 amends the law to allow the secretary of dhs to waive the good moral character requirement for those adjusting from t to lpr status , and allows the secretary of dhs to provide a stay of removal for aliens with pending t applications ( with a prima facie case for approval ) , until the application has been adjudicated .

the act also makes aliens with pending applications for t status eligible for public benefits , and makes t visa holders , including derivatives , eligible for public benefits .

furthermore , p.l .

110-457 requires the secretary of hhs to make a prompt determination of eligibility for assistance for child trafficking victims .

tvpra 2008 has provisions relating to enhancing protections for child victims of trafficking .

among these provision include requiring the united states to enter into agreements with contiguous countries regarding the return of unaccompanied minors designed to protect children from severe forms of tip , and specifying screening procedures for children suspected of being trafficking victims .

in addition , the act directs the secretary of hhs to the extent possible to provide legal counsel and appoint child advocates to child trafficking victims and other vulnerable unaccompanied alien children .

moreover , p.l .

110-457 creates new grant programs for u.s. citizen victims of severe forms of trafficking and authorizes appropriations for such programs .

the act also requires the secretary of hhs and the attorney general , within one year of enactment , to submit a report to congress identifying any gaps between services provided to u.s. citizen and noncitizen victims of trafficking .

it also prohibits dos from issuing passports to those convicted of sex tourism until the person has completed their sentence .

furthermore , the act creates new criminal offenses related to human trafficking , including criminalizing retaliation in foreign labor contracting .

p.l .

110-457 creates additional jurisdiction in u.s. courts for trafficking offenses occurring in other countries if the alleged offender is present in the united states .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 title xvii of p.l .

112-239 , ending trafficking in government contracting , amends section 106 ( g ) of the tvpa to authorize federal agencies and departments to terminate , without penalty , grants , contracts , and cooperative agreements if the grantee , subgrantee , contractor , or subcontractor engages in or uses labor recruiters , brokers , or other agents who engage in ( 1 ) severe forms of trafficking in persons ; ( 2 ) the procurement of a commercial sex act while the grant , contract , or cooperative agreement is in effect ; ( 3 ) the use of forced labor in the performance of the grant , contract , or cooperative agreement ; or ( 4 ) one of several specified acts that directly support or advance trafficking in persons .

such specified acts include the withholding employee identity or immigration documents ; refusing to provide or pay for return transportation for foreign national employees , if requested , under certain circumstances ; soliciting prospective employees by means of materially false or fraudulent pretenses ; charging recruited employees unreasonable placement or recruitment fees ; and providing housing that fails to meet host country housing and safety standards .

the provisions of p.l .

112-239 specify a range of heightened compliance and certification requirements to ensure that grants , contracts , and cooperative agreements are performed free of human trafficking .

p.l .

112-239 also enhances federal monitoring and investigation of by inspectors general agencies and expands the criminal penalties for fraud in foreign labor contracting to include attempted fraud and work outside the united states .

appendix b .

domestic and international tip funding u.s. anti - trafficking activities are primarily authorized by the tvpa , as amended , and separately appropriated to several departments and agencies that manage program implementation both domestically and internationally .

the following appendix summarizes key sources of anti - trafficking funding and budget data , including tvpa authorizations and appropriations , domestic and overseas obligated funds , appropriations for grant programs for domestic tip victims , foreign aid budget estimates , and international anti - tip obligations .

tvpa authorizations and appropriations table b - 1 lists trafficking authorization levels for fy2008-fy2017 .

those authorizations are for tip operations and programs .

since many u.s. government agencies do not include a line item in their budget requests for trafficking programs and / or tip - related operations , it is often difficult to calculate the exact level of funding that congress appropriated for trafficking activities ( programs and operations , including law enforcement activities ) by agency .

despite the challenges , the office of management and budget ( omb ) tracks estimated tip appropriations levels by gathering agency estimations of tip - related spending for each fiscal year .

see table b - 2 for tip authorizations versus appropriations .

according to omb , funding for tvpa programs comes from appropriations to a number of u.s. departments and agencies , including the department of state ; the department of justice ( doj ) ; the department of labor ( dol ) ; the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

domestic and overseas obligated funds overall , between fy2001 and fy2011 , u.s. agencies have obligated an estimated $853.5 million on domestic and international anti - tip assistance .

fy2012 and fy2013 obligations by agency are not yet available for all agencies .

in fy2011 , the u.s. government obligated an estimated $56.5 million for international anti - trafficking assistance programs .

in fy2011 , the u.s. government obligated roughly $26 million for domestic anti - tip programs , an increase from $24.2 million obligated in fy2010 .

the total for domestic obligations does not include the costs of administering tip operations or tip - related law enforcement investigations .

appropriations for grant programs for domestic tip victims domestic anti - tip activities include both services to victims , as well as law enforcement operations .

investigations into human trafficking are complex and as a result often require significant resources .

see table b - 3 for authorizations and appropriations for grant programs to assist trafficking victims in the united states for fy2001-fy2014 .

foreign aid budget estimates although current anti - tip funding breakdowns are not available for all agencies , international anti - tip foreign assistance data appropriated through the combined foreign operations budget for the department of state and usaid are available by country and region .

according to the state department , approximately $41 million was provided for anti - tip efforts through the foreign operations budget in fy2013 , up from $40 million in fy2012 .

 ( see table b - 4 ) .

the bulk of u.s. anti - trafficking assistance programs abroad are administered by the u.s. department of state , usaid , and dol .

with regard to foreign assistance administered by the state department and usaid , anti - tip aid has been disbursed through four program accounts: development assistance ( da ) ; economic support fund ( esf ) ; and international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) .

with funding budgeted for foreign operations , the office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons ( j / tip ) administers an international grants program .

for fy2013 , u.s. and foreign non - profit , non - governmental , and academic institutions , as well as for - profit organizations in select circumstances , may compete for j / tip grants to conduct anti - trafficking projects in 14 selected priority countries , including afghanistan , bangladesh , cambodia , costa rica , dominican republic , honduras , jordan , kenya , malaysia , mexico , senegal , sierra leone , south sudan , and uganda .

according to the state department , j / tip has funded more than 700 projects worth approximately $183.5 million over the past 10 years .

within the state department , multiple bureaus and offices address various aspects of human trafficking issues , including j / tip ; bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) ; bureau of democracy , human rights and labor ( drl ) ; bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) ; office of global women's issues ( s / gwi ) ; and bureau of education and cultural exchanges ( eca ) .

regional bureaus , such as the bureau of europe and eurasian affairs ( eur ) , are also involved in human trafficking issues .

dol's bureau of international labor affairs ( ilab ) , particularly its office of child labor , forced labor , and human trafficking ( ocft ) , supports programs that focus on providing assistance to child victims of trafficking and preventing trafficking and forced labor through policy and legislative reform , public awareness campaigns , and capacity - building for governments and service providers .

separately , usaid funds international anti - trafficking programs with emphasis on victim protection and trafficking prevention , as well as some training for police and criminal justice personnel .

dhs and the doj's international criminal training assistance program ( icitap ) also provide some anti - tip training to law enforcement and judicial officials overseas .

some u.s. funding supports the anti - tip efforts of the united nations and other international organizations .

