since the mid - 1990s , bilateral relations between the united states and vietnam have become virtually normalized .

the united states has granted vietnam permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status and vietnam has become a member of the world trade organization ( wto ) — two major objectives of the vietnamese government following the end of the vietnam war .

as part of the bilateral agreements related to pntr and wto membership , vietnam has made a number of significant changes in its trade policies , and has increased its efforts to help the united states recover the remains of u.s. soldiers and civilians who died during the vietnam war .

the two nations also have expanded their nascent cooperation on strategic and military issues to the point that vietnam has emerged as an important partner for the united states on many issues in asia .

although the united states remains concerned about human rights in vietnam , tensions between the two nations are comparatively low .

however , inside vietnam , there is a long - standing issue that could continue to cause friction in the future — the condition of vietnamese people affected by agent orange and its unintended byproduct , the dioxin 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo - p - dioxin , or tcdd .

agent orange was one of several herbicides that the u.s. military used widely in southern vietnam during the vietnam war .

according to u.s .

ambassador to vietnam david shear , "agent orange remains among the most sensitive issues in u.s. - vietnam relations. .

over the last decade , there has been a groundswell of concern among the vietnamese people about the continuing problems of environmental damage and illnesses associated with agent orange .

some non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) in vietnam are seeking compensation or assistance from the u.s. government and the manufacturers of agent orange .

partially in response to this rising tide of popular concern , the vietnamese government has raised the profile of this issue in various bilateral fora with u.s. officials , including the june 2008 summit between president bush and prime minister nguyen tan dung .

vietnam's government is divided on the issue of whether to seek greater u.s. assistance with the agent orange / dioxin issue .

vietnam's ministry of defense ( mod ) and various veterans groups are among the more vocal advocates of seeking more u.s. assistance .

similarly , the ministry of health ( moh ) ; the ministry of labour , war invalids , and social affairs ( molisa ) ; and the ministry of natural resources and the environment ( monre ) would like to see the united states increase its assistance .

however , the ministry of agriculture and rural development ( mard ) is concerned that by drawing attention to the continued pervasive presence of dioxin in the vietnam's environment , other nations may restrict or prohibit the import of vietnamese crops , aquatic products , meats and poultry , and processed foods supposedly for health reasons .

some officials in vietnam's ministry of foreign affairs ( mofa ) are also apprehensive that greater pressure on the united states on the agent orange / dioxin issue may have an adverse impact on other important bilateral issues , such as vietnam's application to the u.s. generalized system of preference program or the ongoing trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations .

according to one vietnamese estimate , there are up to 5 million vietnamese spanning three generations who have medical conditions that are purported to be related to exposure to agent orange and similar herbicides — and more importantly , their accompanying dioxin — that the u.s. military sprayed across much of south vietnam as part of operation ranch hand .

the vietnamese government and various vietnamese interest groups have long sought u.s. assistance with the cleanup of the residual dioxin in vietnam , as well as financial support to provide medical treatment to people exposed to agent orange .

the official u.s. response to date has been to deny any legal liability and to contest that the medical conditions are related to exposure to agent orange and dioxin .

the vietnamese government and people have objected to these denials given the level of support provided to u.s. veterans who were presumably exposed to agent orange and the extensive cleanup efforts made at love canal , times beach , and other u.s. locations found to have elevated levels of dioxin in the soil .

in the waning months of the george w. bush administration , there were some indications that the united states was becoming more flexible on this issue — just as the issue has risen in importance in vietnam .

for example , following president bush's november 2006 meeting with president nguyen minh triet , the two governments issued a joint statement that included the sentence , "the united states and vietnam also agreed that further joint efforts to address the environmental contamination near former dioxin storage facilities would make a valuable contribution to the continued development of their bilateral relations. .

the joint statement also indicated that "president triet also expressed appreciation for the u.s. government's increasing development assistance to vietnam and urged the u.s. side to increase humanitarian assistance including through cooperation on areas such as unexploded ordinance and continued assistance to vietnamese with disabilities. .

in addition , congress has demonstrated a willingness to provide assistance for both the dioxin cleanup and humanitarian support for vietnamese believed to be affected by exposure to dioxin .

in may 2007 , the 110 th congress appropriated $3 million to the state department for the cleanup of dioxin in and around an ex - military base in da nang used as a distribution center for agent orange during the vietnam war .

some of the funds were to be used to provide medical care for residents near the ex - military base .

the 111 th congress appropriated $3 million in fy2009 and an additional $15 million in fy2010 for the cleanup and related health activities in da nang .

in april 2011 , the 112 th congress appropriated $18.5 million as part of department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

112-10 ) for agent orange / dioxin remediation and related health activities in vietnam , and an additional $20.0 million in the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

additional legislation has been introduced in 112 th congress that would appropriate funds for agent orange / dioxin remediation and related health activities in vietnam ( see " issues and options for congress " ) .

some members of congress have also stated that the united states has a "moral obligation" to the people of vietnam — many of whom were either allies at the time or were innocent civilians — to help address the perceived environmental and health problems created by the use of agent orange during the vietnam war .

in april 2008 , senator john mccain said in regards to the agent orange / dioxin issue , "i believe it remains an irritant , and perhaps more than that , for some of the people of vietnam .

i think we need to continue to address the issue both in compensation for the victims as well as cleanup of areas that are clearly contaminated. .

although both sides appear to be willing to discuss the issue , the legacy of agent orange has the potential to adversely affect u.s. - vietnamese relations in the future .

with other key issues apparently resolved , agent orange has emerged as one of vietnam's top concerns .

however , vietnam's interest in forming closer economic ties with the united states — such as its formal request for inclusion in the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program and the ongoing negotiations of the trans - pacific partnership trade agreement — may once again push the agent orange issue into the background .

for the united states , the recent growth in bilateral trade and u.s. investment in vietnam is providing a strong incentive to improve relations with its former enemy .

according to many u.s. manufacturers , vietnam is one of the more attractive alternative sources to china for a variety of imported products .

also , some analysts think that friendly relations with vietnam offer a strategic counterbalance to the growth of chinese influence in asia .

in addition , greater assistance with the cleanup of dioxin in vietnam and / or aid in providing medical care for dioxin victims may enhance the image of the united states in southeast asia , as well as improve vietnam's public environmental management and health systems .

some observers assert that if the united states continues to deny the legitimacy of vietnam's environmental and health claims — and the responsibility to help ameliorate the damage caused by agent orange / dioxin — it risks causing harm to its relations with vietnam , and possibly weakening u.s. soft power in asia .

from 1975 to about 2000 , although the agent orange issue was on vietnam's agenda , it was generally pushed into the background .

there are many reasons for this , including vietnam's desire for greater trade opportunities with the united states , the u.s. desire for a more complete accounting for u.s. soldiers still listed as "missing in action" ( mia ) in vietnam , vietnam's invasion of cambodia in 1978 , and the rising tide of vietnamese "boat people. .

in 1975 , following north vietnam's victory over south vietnam , president gerald ford severed diplomatic relations and imposed a trade embargo on vietnam .

although vietnam sought to normalize relations , it was predicated on the united states honoring president richard nixon's "secret promise" of $3.25 billion in reconstruction assistance , which the united states was unwilling to do .

although president jimmy carter signaled a willingness to discuss normalization soon after his inauguration , the emotional issue of u.s. prisoners of war / missing in action ( pow / mias ) , the migration of vietnam's so - called "boat people," vietnam's 1978 invasion of cambodia ( known at that time as democratic kampuchea ) , and vietnam's border conflict with china made any significant warming of relations politically impossible .

u.s. - vietnamese relations became even more frosty following the signing of a mutual defense treaty between vietnam and the union of soviet socialist republics ( ussr ) on november 3 , 1978 .

these circumstances pushed the issue of agent orange effectively off the bilateral agenda despite vietnamese efforts to raise the subject .

president ronald reagan was generally opposed to any move towards normalizing relations with vietnam so long as vietnamese forces remained in cambodia and the vietnamese government had not provided a "full accounting" of u.s. pow / mias .

in addition , the reagan administration , which repeatedly expressed a skepticism about u.s. veterans claiming medical problems related to agent orange exposure , was generally unwilling to discuss the issue of vietnamese nationals with similar medical conditions supposedly caused by agent orange exposure .

following vietnam's withdrawal from cambodia in 1989 , president george h. w. bush reopened communication with vietnam .

in april 1991 , president bush announced a u.s. "roadmap" for normalization of relations that included greater cooperation in locating and returning the remains of approximately 2,200 u.s. soldiers and civilians who were still unaccounted for at that time .

vietnam responded by allowing the united states to open an mia office in hanoi and offering greater cooperation and assistance in locating the remains of u.s. personnel .

on february 6 , 1991 , president bush said , i am pleased today to sign into law h.r .

556 [ p.l .

102-4 ] , the "agent orange act of 1991. .

this legislation relies on science to settle the troubling questions concerning the effect on veterans of exposure to herbicides — such as agent orange — used during the vietnam era .

however , president bush's approval of assistance for u.s. veterans exposed to agent orange did not extend to vietnamese veterans and civilians ; vietnamese efforts to discuss the issue were generally rebuffed by the united states .

president william clinton built on the general thaw in bilateral relations by signaling the end of u.s. opposition to vietnam receiving international financial assistance .

on february 3 , 1994 , president clinton announced the end of the u.s. trade embargo on vietnam .

in april 1994 , congress passed the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l .

103 - 236 ) that expressed the senate's support for the normalization of relations with vietnam .

despite some congressional efforts to tie normalization to the pow / mia issue , president clinton continued to advance u.s. relations with vietnam by appointing the first post - war ambassador to vietnam in 1996 and signing the u.s. - vietnam bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) in 2000 .

towards the end of the clinton administration , the united states signaled an increased willingness to address the agent orange issue .

in march 2000 , then defense secretary william cohen pledged greater u.s. cooperation with vietnam's agent orange problems during a trip to hanoi .

eight months later , during president clinton's five - day trip to vietnam , the united states and vietnam agreed to set up a joint research study on the effects of dioxin / agent orange .

in march 2002 , the united states and vietnam signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) that specified future collaborative research on the human health and environmental effects of agent orange and dioxin , as well as created a joint advisory committee ( jac ) to oversee such collaboration .

however , there continued to be clear limits on u.s. willingness to provide assistance .

in august 2000 , then u.s. assistant deputy under secretary of defense gary vest traveled to hanoi for bilateral meetings on environmental security , which included discussions of the agent orange issue .

following those meetings , vest stated , "it is very important to emphasize we were not here to discuss a u.s. government cleanup of contamination. .

vest went on to explain that it was his understanding that under current international and u.s. law the u.s. military could only undertake contamination cleanup activities outside of the united states if there is a clear liability under an international agreement or if specifically authorized by congress .

progress towards the resumption of normal bilateral relations continued during the bush administration .

congress ratified the u.s. - vietnam bta in october 2001 ; the new agreement went into effect on december 10 , 2001 .

under the bta , the united states granted vietnam conditional normal trade relations ( ntr ) .

vietnam's conditional ntr status was renewed every year until december 2006 , when congress passed p.l .

109 - 432 , a comprehensive trade and tax bill , that granted vietnam permanent ntr status as part of a wider agreement that saw vietnam become a member of the world trade organization ( wto ) on january 11 , 2007 .

following the lifting of the trade embargo and the granting of ntr status , u.s. trade with vietnam grew rapidly ( see figure 1 ) .

in addition , a rising number of u.s. companies invested in manufacturing facilities in vietnam .

between 2001 and 2011 , total bilateral trade between the two nations rose from $1.5 billion to $21.8 billion , according to official u.s. trade statistics .

relations between vietnam and the united states have also improved on matters of national security .

in 2005 , the united states and vietnam signed an international military education training ( imet ) agreement .

since then , a number of vietnamese military officials have participated in training programs in the united states , and u.s. naval vessels have been allowed to make port of call visits to vietnam .

in august 2010 , the two nations conducted week - long joint naval exercises in the south china sea , as part of the celebration of 15 years of renewed diplomatic relations .

joint naval exercises were held again in july 2011 and april 2012 , off the coast of da nang .

despite the general improvement in bilateral relations during the bush administration , the joint u.s. - vietnamese studies of the effects of agent orange on vietnam fell apart among claims of failure to act in good faith by both parties .

in a "sensitive" ( but not classified ) dispatch of february 16 , 2003 , from the u.s. embassy in hanoi to the secretary of state , a state department official wrote that the vietnamese government was unwilling to accept internationally recognized scientific methods because the results may not support their claims of widespread environmental damage and severe health effects .

the vietnamese government claimed that u.s. officials were instructed to prevent the completion of the exposure studies by senior government officials .

in march 2005 , the united states unilaterally terminated the research project .

moreover , the bush administration was reluctant to provide direct assistance to people with health problems related to exposure to dioxin .

during an april 2006 trip to vietnam , then u.s. secretary of veterans affairs james nicholson was pressed by vietnamese journalists to explain why the united states offered compensation to u.s. vietnam veterans with agent orange - related medical conditions , but not to vietnamese veterans and civilians .

in june 2006 , then u.s. secretary of defense donald rumsfeld reportedly stated that the united states would not compensate supposed vietnamese agent orange victims , but would be willing to provide scientific information and technical advice on the effects of dioxin .

there have been modest efforts to revitalize joint research on agent orange exposure and the effect of dioxin on the people of vietnam .

these studies frequently involve non - government organizations ( ngos ) in addition to agencies from both the u.s. and vietnamese governments .

in general , the participation of the ngos has been welcomed by both the u.s. and vietnamese government .

the first meeting of the joint advisory committee ( jac ) on agent orange and dioxin was held on june 5 and 6 , 2006 — more than four years after its creation .

since then , the jac has met every year .

since the resumption of diplomatic relations , the u.s. government has maintained a comparatively consistent policy on the issue of agent orange / dioxin contamination in vietnam .

on the one hand , the u.s. government has been willing to offer some assistance with scientific research to evaluate the extent and severity of dioxin contamination , and , in locations where serious contamination has been found , provide financial and technical assistance with the containment and cleanup effort .

on the other hand , the u.s. government has repeatedly reiterated that it "does not recognize any legal liability for damages alleged to be related to agent orange. .

in addition , the u.s. government has continually questioned the credibility of vietnam's evidence that the dioxin contained in agent orange and other herbicides sprayed during the war are responsible for the various illnesses , health problems , and birth defects prevalent in the vietnamese population .

for example , then u.s .

ambassador to vietnam michael w. marine responded to a question regarding u.s. assistance to "agent orange victims," by saying , "but honestly , i cannot say whether or not i have myself seen a victim of agent orange .

the reason for that is that we still lack good scientific definitions of the causes of disabilities … that have occurred in vietnam… .

we just don't have the scientific evidence to make that statement with certainty. .

as a result , the united states government has demonstrated a willingness to participate in programs designed to assess , contain , and clean up dioxin found in vietnam's physical environment .

however , it has been comparatively reluctant to support or assist programs designed to address the health problems of vietnamese nationals attributed to agent orange / dioxin .

to date , congress has directly or indirectly appropriated $63.4 million for agent orange / dioxin remediation and related health care activities in vietnam .

of this amount , $3.9 million was allocated for these purposes by the state department out of funds appropriated for more general purposes , such as the economic support fund ( esf ) .

funding levels were relatively low prior to 2007 , but have noticeably increased since then .

most of the appropriated funds continue to be directed towards environmental remediation , with smaller amounts being provided for "related health activities. .

virtually every aspect of the effects of agent orange on vietnam is infused with uncertainty and / or controversy .

there is some question about the amount of agent orange and other herbicides sprayed in vietnam , as well as the amount of dioxin contained in the agent orange used .

it is also unclear exactly where the herbicides were sprayed and the amount sprayed at each location .

nor is it known who was exposed to agent orange and its dioxin , and for what duration they were exposed .

finally , there is limited information about the long - term effects of agent orange on the environment and people of vietnam .

the uncertainty and controversies are in part attributable to the general "fog of war. .

at the time the herbicides were used , there was little consideration within the u.s. military about potential long - term environmental and health effects of the widespread use of agent orange in vietnam .

similarly , both the south vietnamese and north vietnamese governments were not keeping detailed troop deployment information in anticipation of future claims of health problems associated with exposure to agent orange and dioxin .

in addition , after the war ended , many vietnamese combatants returned to their home towns , far away from the jungles where they once were sprayed with herbicides from u.s. military aircraft .

given that direct information about agent orange exposure is not available , the alternative generally used has been to seek indirect evidence of dioxin exposure .

soil samples taken from supposedly sprayed and unsprayed locations can be analyzed to determine the amount and extent to which vietnam has been contaminated with dioxin due to operation ranch hand .

at the same time , blood and tissue samples can be taken from vietnamese nationals across the country to determine how much dioxin is present in their systems .

to date , relatively few of these studies have been done , in part because of the cost associated with the research , and in part because of the political implications of the findings of such studies .

although the research on the use of agent orange and other herbicides in vietnam — and the resulting exposure of the people of vietnam to dioxin — is limited in scale , it is possible to draw a few tentative conclusions from existing studies .

first , numerous areas of southern vietnam were sprayed with agent orange and other herbicides during the vietnam war , with widely varying levels of contamination with dioxin .

some locations were sprayed repeatedly ; other locations only once .

second , millions of vietnamese were directly exposed to dioxin at the time the herbicides were sprayed , and millions more have been exposed to dioxin that remains in the soil and in the sediment of waterways of southern vietnam .

third , blood and tissue studies of vietnamese nationals provide some evidence of higher than normal levels of dioxin in the systems of people presumed to be have been exposed to agent orange , but methodological problems make interpretation of the data difficult and open to debate .

fourth , research in vietnam on the long - term health effects of exposure to varying levels of dioxin is limited , making it difficult to firmly establish the connection between dioxin exposure and a variety of health problems occurring among the vietnamese people with unusually high frequency .

the prospects for cleaning up the dioxin in vietnam distributed by the spraying of agent orange and other herbicides are complicated by the area sprayed , the passage of time , and a general lack of resources .

there is a supposition that sunlight , vietnam's episodic heavy rains and the passage of time have probably removed most of the dioxin from sprayed areas or lowered concentration levels below the danger level , but there are no definitive studies to verify this notion .

in addition , political and other considerations have tended to shift the focus on agent orange cleanup efforts towards the confinement and cleanup of dioxin from the identified "hot spots" with elevated levels of dioxin in the soil , such as the airbases used by operation ranch hand .

both the vietnamese and u.s. governments have had reasons to avoid or delay consideration of the topic of agent orange cleanup .

it is thought that vietnam avoided raising the issue prior to its obtaining ntr in 2002 and "permanent normal trade relations" ( pntr ) status with the united states in 2006 and membership in the world trade organization ( wto ) in 2007 .

the u.s. government purportedly also has avoided the issue because of concerns about potential liability issues and / or presumptions of responsibility .

however , since vietnam obtained pntr status and joined the wto , the issue of agent orange and its cleanup has risen in prominence in bilateral relations .

in february 2007 , the united states announced it would provide $400,000 to support mitigation planning for the dioxin cleanup of the da nang airbase .

in june 2007 , the dod presented the vietnamese ministry of defense with a detailed map of herbicide storage locations from 1962 to 1971 during a hanoi workshop on chemical herbicide use during the vietnam war .

the official entity responsible for the bilateral efforts to address the environmental and health effects of dioxin in vietnam is the joint advisory committee ( jac ) .

although the two nations agreed to form the jac in 2002 , it did not hold its first meeting until 2006 due to disagreements between the united states and vietnam over the role of the jac .

the seventh meeting of the jac was held in september 2012 in hanoi .

the u.s. delegation to the jac consists of representatives from the department of defense , the department of state , the environmental protection agency , the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , and usaid .

the vietnamese delegation includes representatives from office 33 , the ministry of defense , the ministry of foreign affairs , the ministry of health , the ministry of natural resources and the environment , and the vietnam association of science and technology .

in addition , a group called the u.s. - vietnam dialogue group on agent orange / dioxin ( dialogue group ) , established by the ford foundation , is regularly consulted on the cleanup process .

the cost and scope of cleaning up vietnam's dioxin "hot spots" have gradually increased over time .

in 2006 , the vietnamese government estimated the cost for the detoxification of the da nang and the bien hoa airbases could reach $10 million .

in november 2008 , the estimated cost of cleaning up the da nang airbase was raised to $17 million .

according to then - acting deputy assistant secretary , bureau of east asian and pacific affairs matthew palmer in his july 2010 testimony before the subcommittee on asia , the pacific , and the global environment of the house committee on foreign affairs , usaid has estimated the remediation of da nang will cost at least $34 million .

in his testimony at the same hearing , usaid director of technical support john wilson stated that the current plan was to use thermal desorption destruction technology to remove the dioxin from the affected soil at the da nang airport .

according to usaid , the cost of remediating the da nang airport has been increased to $43 million .

as the cost and size of the cleanup efforts have risen , the estimated time for their completion has been delayed .

the voice of vietnam , a vietnamese government - run radio station , reported on february 15 , 2008 , that the cleanup of the da nang airbase was expected to be completed by the end of 2008 .

however , issues concerning the manner by which to decontaminate the soil , as well as the recent identification of a new "hot spot" at the da nang airbase by the u.s. department of defense , have delayed completion of the cleanup effort .

in 2010 , usaid projected the cleanup at da nang would be completed by the end of fy2013 , if sufficient funding was made available .

as of august 2012 , the estimated date of completion of the thermal remediation of da nang airport has been moved to late 2016 .

while the total cost and timing of the cleanup of the da nang airport remains uncertain , the two governments have agreed on the method to remove the dioxin from the contaminated soil .

after consideration of several different methods , thermal remediation using in - pile thermal desorption ( iptd ) technology was chosen as being the most cost - effective , reliable , and practical method for the da nang airport project .

terratherm , the company awarded the remediation contract , intends to use a combination of conductive thermal heating elements and negative pressure ( partial vacuum ) to circulate heat throughout the contaminated soil to break down the dioxin into non - toxic compounds .

terratherm reportedly will excavate and treat 72,900 cubic meters of soil in two stages in an above - ground , covered pile located at the airport .

the estimated size of the thermal pile is 100 meters long , 70 meters wide , and 8 meters tall .

to break down the dioxin , the contained soil will be heated to 335°c ( 635°f ) until such time as the soil's concentration of dioxin is less than 150 parts per trillion ( ppt ) .

a groundbreaking ceremony for the remediation project was held in august 2012 .

information on the status of cleanup projects on hot spots other than da nang airport is limited .

the vietnamese military has begun cleanup operations at the bien hoa airbase , with an estimated cost of $4 million - $5 million .

there is limited evidence of detoxification efforts undertaken in areas heavily sprayed with agent orange .

one area where the vietnamese government — with the assistance of international agencies such as the asian development bank and other contributors — has attempted to address the long - term damage caused by agent orange is the rehabilitation of affected forestland .

the vietnamese government asserts it lacks the financial resources to undertake the cleanup projects on their own .

in addition , other war - related projects — such as the removal of unexploded ordnance and care of vietnam's war veterans — require significant financial resources , making it difficult to allocate more resources to agent orange and dioxin .

the united nations development program ( undp ) announced in august 2007 it would provide $350,000 in financial support for the cleanup of the airbases at da nang , bien hoa , and phu cat .

the czech government has also offered assistance with the remediation of phu cat .

according to undp estimates , it will cost nearly $51 million to clean up all three hotspots .

in june 2010 , the dialogue group — with the assistance of the aspen institute — released a proposed 10-year "declaration and plan of action" to address the legacy of agent orange in vietnam .

the proposed plan would be carried out in three phases , with an estimated cost of $300 million .

the plan is divided into remediation efforts and services for people with disabilities linked to dioxin .

the remediation efforts are projected to cost $97.7 million ; the services to people with disabilities are estimated at $202.3 million .

the first phase of the remediation plan would last three years with an estimated cost of $29.7 million , and would focus on the cleanup of the da nang site .

the second phase would last four years and cost an estimated $50.0 million , and clean up the hot spots at phu cat and bien hoa , as well as reforest affected areas in a luoi , ma da , and ngoc hien .

the third and final phase would last three years with an estimated cost of $18.0 million , and would primarily address the remediation and reforestation of secondary hot spots .

the dialogue group's proposed plan for services for people with disabilities is also divided into three phases .

the first phase would be three years in duration , costing $68.3 million , involving a national survey of disabilities in vietnam and training of health care providers to improve services to people with disabilities .

the second phase would run for four years with an estimated cost of $125 million to establish a bio - monitoring program for people living near hot spots and a district - level early identification / early intervention program for children with disabilities .

the third phase would last three years and cost $9.0 million , and would center on evaluating the various service programs being provided to people with disabilities .

the dialogue group did not stipulate how the plan of action was to be funded .

it did , however , state that "the u.s. government should play a key role in meeting these costs , along with public and private donors , supplementing an appropriate continuing investment from the government and people of vietnam. .

in may 2012 , the dialogue group released its second year report on the declaration and plan of action .

the report reviewed the developments of the year , including congressional appropriations , funding provided by the vietnamese government , and private contributions .

it also updated the projected costs of environmental remediation of dioxin "hot spots. .

the dialogue group projects the cost of dioxin cleanup at da nang at $43 million ; at bien hoa at $85 million ; at phu cat at $5 million ; and at lesser sites at $17 million — raising the total remediation cost to $150 million .

similarly , costs of health - related services to agent orange / dioxin victims were increased from $200 million to $300 million .

the dialogue group suggested that the u.s. government provide $65 million each year for five years ( $325 million ) , and other groups provide an additional $17 million per year .

there is little publicly available information on vietnam's assistance program for people exposed to agent orange , and what is available is often contradictory .

in addition , there are differing views within the vietnamese government on the importance of the agent orange / dioxin issue .

in general , vietnam's ministry of defense , molisa , veterans , and victims support groups would like to see more help from the united states , while mofa and the ministry of agriculture and rural development ( mard ) do not want the ao issue to cause problems in bilateral relations with the united states or with agricultural exports .

the following summary represents the best compilation of information possible given the current level of disclosure about vietnam's assistance programs .

office 33 works with vietnam's ministry of health ( moh ) and ministry of health and the ministry of labour , war invalids , and social affairs ( molisa ) to provide special assistance to vietnamese presumed to be suffering from conditions related to exposure to agent orange .

people who have certain medical conditions are eligible to receive a disability stipend from vietnam's ao central payments programme ( see details below ) of up to 300,000 vietnamese dong ( $20 ) per month .

according to one source , the vietnamese government categorizes people eligible for income supplements into three groups: ( 1 ) those who have partially or totally lost the ability to work ; ( 2 ) children with deformities or who have lost the ability to work ; and ( 3 ) orphans with deformities or who are unable to work .

one study estimated the total vietnamese budget for agent orange income supplements in 2000 at $41 million .

another source reports that the vietnamese government is paying about $76 million per year in income supplements to people with disabilities caused by agent orange / dioxin .

the annual cost of providing a $20 per month stipend to all of vietnam's estimated 2.1 million - 4.8 million "victims" of agent orange would be $500 million to $1.2 billion .

vietnam's central government also works closely with private and provincial government agencies providing assistance to people with medical conditions associated with agent orange / dioxin exposure .

on july 24 , 1998 , the vrc established the agent orange victims protection fund .

various national organizations , such as vietnam association of veterans , confederation of vietnam labour unions , vietnam farmers association , vietnam women's union , vietnam lawyers association , and the ho chi minh youth union , contributed to the central fund .

in addition , there are 57 agent orange victims protection funds at the provincial level .

between 1998 and 2004 , the vrc fund raised 23 billion dong ( $1.4 million ) and provincial funds raised 50 billion dong ( $3.1 million ) for programs to provide aid to people who were exposed to dioxin .

prior to the early 1990s , there was little domestic or international non - governmental involvement in assisting those with ao - related diseases .

in recent years , support specifically for people exposed to ao / dioxin has grown , mostly provided by non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

inside vietnam , several agent orange - related organizations have been formed to raise funds via charity events and celebrity concerts .

in addition , a number of vietnamese programs for people with disabilities or the handicapped have provided medical assistance to people with conditions associated with exposure to agent orange / dioxin , as well as advocacy work for the rights of the disabled .

outside of vietnam , a variety of ngos have offered technical assistance and financial support for the provision of medical care for agent orange victims .

over the last 10 years or so , economic and security trade issues have gained priority over war legacy issues in u.s. - vietnam relations .

although war legacy issues in the united states complicated and held up efforts to normalize relations between the two countries , the perceived mutual benefits of bilateral trade currently exert more influence on overall u.s. - vietnam relations .

however , there still remains the risk that the mismanagement of war legacy issues — such as the status of vietnam's "victims" of agent orange — could derail or delay further progress in bilateral relations .

for the vietnamese government , it appears that economic and strategic considerations will continue to take priority over u.s. assistance in cleaning up dioxin and providing assistance to people with illnesses thought to be related to dioxin exposure .

vietnam is actively seeking acceptance into the u.s. generalized system of preference ( gsp ) program , which would remove tariffs on u.s. imports of selected goods from vietnam , and is a party to the ongoing trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations .

additionally , since the middle of the decade , vietnam has been seeking to expand its security relations with the united states , perhaps due to china's growing influence in southeast asia .

within vietnam , however , there is widespread concern about the living conditions of its estimated 2.1 million - 4.8 million people who were exposed to agent orange and the already identified 3 million people with medical conditions the vietnamese government attributes to that exposure .

much of that concern is focused on the physical problems of vietnam's children who have medical conditions associated with direct or indirect exposure to dioxin .

some observers think the vietnamese people's generally positive attitude about the united states could change for the worse if the u.s. government is perceived to be insensitive or intransigent about agent orange and its associated problems .

for the u.s. government , the past policy was to deny legal responsibility for any health effects of agent orange / dioxin while providing some assistance with the assessment , containment , and cleaning up of any agent orange - related dioxin found in vietnam .

as a result , the united states has been unwilling to provide medical or financial assistance to programs specifically targeted at purported victims of agent orange .

for the present , the governments of both nations apparently welcome u.s. involvement in the identification , containment , and cleanup of dioxin "hot spots. .

at the current pace of funding , it could take several more years before all of the major dioxin "hot spots" have been remediated .

it is likely public attention will shift to caring for people exposed to agent orange once the cleanup is done , raising the risk of the emergence of bilateral tensions .

the vietnamese government would like to see greater u.s. support for upgrading social services to people with disabilities associated with exposure to agent orange / dioxin .

the vietnamese government and people see some inconsistencies between the u.s. government's reluctance to provide aid to vietnamese victims of agent orange and its generous support programs for u.s. veterans who claim their medical problems are agent orange related .

whereas u.s. vietnam veterans are presumed to have been exposed to agent orange , and thereby automatically qualify for various benefits for a range of medical conditions , the u.s. government continues to claim that there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that the medical conditions of vietnamese who were exposed to agent orange are a consequence of their exposure to the herbicide and its dioxin .

in the same vein , the willingness of the united states to provide aid to vietnamese who lost limbs to land mines while refusing to provide help directly to people exposed to agent orange can be difficult to explain to vietnamese officials and civilians .

these apparent inconsistencies in u.s. policy could pose future problems for bilateral relations .

conversely , there is a concern in the united states that if the u.s. government were to seemingly accept some legal or moral responsibility for the vietnamese "victims" of agent orange , it could have undesirable implications for future military conflicts .

in this view , for the u.s. government , it remains important that any and all assistance being provided to address the aftereffects of the use of agent orange in vietnam be seen as a humanitarian act , and not an admission of culpability .

for over three decades , the effects of agent orange and its accompanying dioxin , tcdd , on the people and the environment of vietnam have remained in the background of u.s. - vietnamese relations .

currently , through fora such as the joint advisory committee ( jac ) and the dialogue group , u.s. and vietnamese officials , as well as prominent citizens of both countries , are meeting and discussing ways to jointly address the "war legacy" issues of agent orange , including scientific research , environmental remediation , public awareness , and health care .

assuming that recent patterns of economic and security issues taking precedence over war legacy issues continue , as well as the comparatively positive dynamics in the jac and the dialogue group , it could be argued that there is no need for congressional involvement at this time .

at least two bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that would directly or indirectly result in the appropriation of additional funds to finance the cleanup of agent orange / dioxin in vietnam and / or provide assistance to vietnamese victims of agent orange / dioxin .

the victims of agent orange relief act of 2011 ( h.r .

2634 ) would require the secretary of state to develop a plan to address the health care needs of vietnamese nationals exposed to agent orange during the designated exposure period , or their progeny .

the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2013 ( s. 3241 ) would appropriate not less than $20 million for "remediation of dioxin contaminated sites in vietnam," and not less than $5 million for "health / disability activities in areas sprayed or otherwise contaminated with dioxin. .

in s.rept .

112-172 associated with s. 3241 , the senate committee on appropriations recommended the appropriation of not less than $20,000,000 for site analysis and environmental remediation of dioxin contamination at the bien hoa and phu cat hot spots , and not less than $5,000,000 under the ghp [global health programs] heading for disability surveys , monitoring , and related health activities in areas that were heavily sprayed with agent orange or are otherwise contaminated with dioxin.… the house version of the appropriations bill , h.r .

5857 , contains no provisions pertaining to either environmental remediation or health and / or disability activities in areas of vietnam sprayed or contaminated with dioxin .

both h.r .

5857 and s. 3241 were approved by their respective committees of jurisdiction in may 2012 , but neither of them have been passed by their respective chambers of congress .

if congress addresses the issues related to agent orange , there are several aspects of u.s. policy it could examine and consider .

the most immediate issue may be to obtain more information on how the appropriated and obligated funds have been and will be used .

although the state department and usaid have released information on the grants awarded out of those funds , they have not provided detailed information on how these funds are being used and to what extent the grantees have achieved their expected results .

one option for congress is to exercise oversight to ascertain the status of usaid's progress , including requesting that the government accountability office ( gao ) conduct an audit of u.s. agent orange assistance in vietnam .

in addition , congress may choose to consider the appropriation of additional funds for exposure assessment research , dioxin remediation , and / or humanitarian assistance to vietnamese nationals allegedly suffering from medical conditions related to exposure to agent orange .

although past cooperative efforts in exposure assessment research encountered problems , more research can be done and the estimated cost of such research would exceed vietnam's current budgetary capacity .

similarly , the projected cost of containing and removing the residual dioxin in and around vietnam's agent orange "hot spots" is beyond the vietnamese government's resources .

according to usaid , the estimated cost of decontaminating the da nang airport site exceeds the amount already appropriated .

the precedent for u.s. financial and technical assistance with dioxin remediation is already established , making the appropriation of additional funding potentially less problematic .

appropriations for medical assistance specifically for purported agent orange "victims" in vietnam may be more problematic .

although there exists a precedent , critics remain concerned about the possible implications for future conflicts .

in addition , cambodia and laos may insist on similar treatment for their purported agent orange "victims" ( given that parts of their nations were also sprayed during the vietnam war ) , raising the potential overall cost and the administrative difficulties of addressing this war legacy issue .

however , past and existing humanitarian aid programs in vietnam , addressing victims of land mines and hiv / aids , demonstrate the provision of aid need not imply legal or moral responsibility .

one potentially less contentious area for medical assistance may be technical support with the development of a national birth defects registry and other efforts to develop a more comprehensive assessment of the size and scope of vietnam's disabled population .

another alternative for congress would be the development of a multi - year policy on the general issue of agent orange and dioxin in vietnam .

this policy could take the form of legislation that addresses all aspects of the issue — research on the level of dioxin in vietnam , general population studies to determine the level of dioxin exposure in vietnam , dioxin containment and remediation , and medical care for people with medical conditions related to dioxin exposure .

one model multi - year plan has been proposed by the dialogue group .

the development of such a program would likely necessitate consultation with the obama administration , as well as the vietnamese government , in order to ensure its effective implementation .

one potential benefit of the development of a comprehensive policy on agent orange in vietnam could be the enhancement of u.s. "soft power" in southeast asia .

to some analysts , u.s. global influence is being challenged by china ( and other nations ) by the use of non - military engagement — "soft power" — to encourage other countries to adopt policies or stances consistent with the goals and objectives of the nation employing these policies .

it has been postulated that the u.s. military interventions in afghanistan and iraq have undermined its global image , and that to restore its image , the united states should more actively engage in "soft power" exercises , such as humanitarian assistance to vietnam to address its "war legacy" problems .

in addition , relations between china and vietnam since 1975 have ranged from hostile to cool , but more recently china has sought to foster more friendly ties with its neighbors .

increased u.s. assistance for vietnam's agent orange "victims" could strengthen u.s. - vietnam relations , and encourage vietnam to be a stronger partner to the united states in other diplomatic and security areas .

