in the national security field , publication of strategies serves a number of purposes .

strategies alert congress , government agencies , the public , and foreign nations to the general direction of policy in a specific arena , and help clarify policy goals , objectives , and threat perception .

they also assist congress in identifying and prioritizing funding priorities , any potential need for legislative changes to reflect policy direction , and issues for oversight activity .

on september 5 , 2006 , the white house released the 2006 national strategy for combating terrorism ( nsct or "strategy" ) .

the 2006 nsct complements the national security strategy of the united states , released by the white house in march 2006 .

subsequently , on may 31 , 2007 , the bush administration released a public diplomacy strategy that addressed the issue of counterterrorism and set up a rapid response counterterrorism communications center .

in june 2007 , the administration released a national implementation plan ( nip ) .

the document , according to press reports , designates lead and subordinate agencies to carry out a multitude of tasks to include destroying al qaeda ; enlisting support from allies ; and training experts in foreign languages and cultures with emphasis on gaining a better understanding of islam .

its overarching goals reportedly are to ( 1 ) defeat terrorism as a threat to america's way of life as a free and open society , and ( 2 ) create an environment inhospitable to terrorism worldwide .

the white house subsequently released an updated ( second ) national strategy for homeland security on october 9 , 2007 .

it is described as "a companion to the [2006] national strategy for combating terrorism," since both strategies include sections on preventing and disrupting terrorist attacks that are complementary and reinforcing .

in addition , unclassified key judgments of national intelligence estimates that address issues relevant to counterterrrorism strategy , were released by the administration in april 2006 , january 2007 and july 2007 .

the 2006 national strategy for combating terrorism strategy follows on an earlier strategy released by the bush administration in 2003 .

the 2006 strategy differs from the 2003 document in a number of strategic and tactical areas .

this report examines the 2006 national strategy in the context of its predecessor in 2003 , and identifies issues and options for consideration by congress .

the 2006 national strategy for combating terrorism : provides a framework for protecting the united states and its allies from terrorist attacks .

core components of the strategy include disrupting and disabling terrorist networks across the globe and fostering international cooperation .

creating a global environment intolerant of terrorism is central as well .

emphasizes the need to engage actively in the "war of ideas" ( i.e. , to combat and counter the dissemination of terrorist ideology and to promote international intolerance of terrorists and of terrorism as a tactic ) .

international cooperation and support to bring about such a worldwide ideological shift are seen as crucial to the success of such efforts .

shares the same major goals as its 2003 predecessor: protecting the homeland , disabling terrorist networks , and creating an international community intolerant of violent extremism .

like its 2003 edition , calls for utilization of all elements of u.s. power to combat international terrorism: diplomatic , economic , law enforcement , financial , intelligence , military , and information dissemination .

it also reiterates the importance of preemptive action against terrorist groups and their sponsors in conjunction with measures which seek to deny sanctuary , funding , and arms to terrorists .

however , the 2006 strategy differs from the 2003 version primarily in that it sets different priorities for the strategic elements designed to achieve those ultimate goals .

perhaps the most significant of these differences is a major increase in emphasis in the 2006 document on democratization as a method of combating terrorism .

additionally , the 2006 strategy places greater emphasis on denying terrorists sanctuary in underdeveloped , failed , and rogue states .

the use of economic and political tools to strengthen nations vulnerable to the spread of terrorist influence appears to receive less emphasis in the 2006 strategy than in the 2003 version .

the 2006 strategy is broadly divided into short - term and long - term objectives .

the short - term objectives address the immediate problem of violent extremism ; whereas the long - term objectives concern the eradication of terrorism in the future .

reasonable minds can differ on the approaches to countering terror including the role for democratization in a counterterrorism strategy , and how to effectively deal with rogue states .

however , a central question remains: to what degree does the strategy's approach adequately characterize and respond to the terrorist threat and the current forces driving it ? .

congress may wish to further examine this issue , to determine whether possible adjustments to the strategy , its funding , and its implementation are warranted .

