both tax and campaign finance laws are relevant in analyzing whether churches and other houses of worship may engage in campaign activity .

under the tax laws , houses of worship that benefit from 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) tax - exempt status may not participate in such activity .

they are also subject to regulation under campaign finance laws .

houses of worship are among the organizations described in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

benefits that arise from this status include exemption from federal income taxes and eligibility to receive tax - deductible contributions .

in return , 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations may not "participate in , or intervene in ( including the publishing or distributing of statements ) , any political campaign on behalf of ( or in opposition to ) any candidate for public office. .

this is an absolute prohibition .

a house of worship with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status that engages in any amount of campaign activity may have its 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status revoked by the irs .

it may also , either in addition to or in lieu of revocation , be taxed on its political expenditures .

in 2002 , the irs indicated that only two churches have lost their 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status due to campaign intervention .

one of these is the church at pierce creek in binghamton , new york , which took out newspaper advertisements opposing a presidential candidate four days before the 1992 election .

the identity of the second is not clear .

several non - church religious organizations have also had their 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status revoked , including christian echoes national ministry .

it has been reported that the way international , christian broadcasting network , and old time gospel hour came to settlement agreements with the irs which included revocations for certain years .

the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , which regulates the raising and spending of campaign funds , is separate and distinct from the tax code .

feca prohibits corporations — including incorporated 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) religious entities — from using general treasury funds to make contributions in connection with federal elections .

while feca does not prohibit unincorporated 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations from making such contributions , the irc prohibits all 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations , regardless of corporate status , from making such contributions , as discussed above .

in its ruling in citizens united v. fec , the supreme court invalidated the prohibitions in feca on corporations and labor unions using their general treasury funds to make "independent expenditures," which are communications "expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate" that are not coordinated with any candidate or party , and "electioneering communications," which are broadcast , cable , or satellite transmissions that refer to a clearly identified federal candidate and aired within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

the court determined that these prohibitions constitute a "ban on speech" in violation of the first amendment .

due to the tax code prohibition discussed above , houses of worship with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status are generally not permitted to engage in the activities regulated by feca , and thus the citizens united decision does not appear to impact them in a significant manner .

it should be noted that the activities that constitute electioneering under the irc and feca are not necessarily identical .

for example , it is possible that an issue advocacy communication , depending on its timing and content , might be an electioneering communication under feca , but might not be treated as campaign intervention under the irc .

such a communication would need to comply with feca disclosure requirements for electioneering communications meeting certain monetary thresholds , if applicable .

in the 112 th congress , legislation , h.r .

3600 , has been introduced that would repeal the irc provision that prohibits 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations from engaging in campaign activity .

if the bill were enacted into law , houses of worship with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) tax - exempt status would be able to engage in campaign activity without jeopardizing their tax - exemption so long as the other criteria for such status were met .

this means that even if the bill were enacted into law , campaign activity ( and any other non - exempt purpose activity ) could not be the houses of worship's primary activity , and an entity that significantly benefited partisan interests could still jeopardize its tax - exempt status .

the bill would not change the current irc reporting requirements .

houses of worship , unlike most tax - exempt organizations , are not required to file an annual information return ( form 990 ) with the irs .

tax - exempt organizations permitted to engage in political activities must generally report information about those activities on the form's schedule c. thus , while the bill would permit houses of worship to engage in campaign activities , it would not require them to report to the irs on those activities .

finally , the bill expressly provides that its provisions "shall not invalidate or limit any provision of the federal election campaign act of 1971. .

in prior congresses , there were bills that took different approaches to permitting houses of worship to engage in some level of campaign activity .

for analysis of this legislation , see crs report rl32973 , churches and campaign activity: analysis of the houses of worship free speech restoration act and similar legislation , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

