over 95% of the prison population today will be released at some point in the future .

between 1990 and 2014 an average of 594,600 inmates were released annually from state and federal prisons .

the department of justice's ( doj's ) bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) has estimated that nearly three - quarters of all released prisoners will be rearrested within five years of their release and about 6 in 10 will be reconvicted .

many studies have indicated that reentry initiatives that combine work training and placement with counseling and housing assistance can reduce recidivism rates .

offender reentry includes all the activities and programming conducted to prepare ex - convicts to return safely to the community and to live as law - abiding citizens .

reentry programs are typically divided into three phases: programs that prepare offenders to reenter society while they are in prison , programs that connect ex - offenders with services immediately after they are released from prison , and programs that provide long - term support and supervision for ex - offenders as they settle into communities permanently .

offender reentry programs vary widely in range , scope , and methodology .

the best - designed programs , according to the research in the field , are those that span all three phases .

to understand the issue of offender reentry , one must first understand the ways in which ex - offenders are released into the community .

it is also worthwhile to analyze the population of individuals serving sentences in correctional facilities , because the number of offenders re - entering the community is necessarily related to the number and type of offenders serving prison sentences .

this section analyzes national data on the nation's correctional system .

the vast majority of prisoners currently being detained in secure facilities will , someday , be released into the community , and more offenders are transitioning into the community today than ever before .

offender reentry is a complex issue that touches on a wide range of social and governmental networks and programs .

offender reentry policies can vary significantly from state to state , and from community to community within particular states .

the policies affecting prisoners and the kinds of programs available to them both in and out of prison depend on a variety of factors , including the availability of funding for social programs within states and communities and the number of private nonprofit and religious organizations operating in a given community .

the federal government plays a supporting role through the numerous grant funding opportunities ( discussed below ) .

complicating factors affecting how offender reentry works in a given community can include the varying types of sentences handed down , the different kinds of release mechanisms available to judges , the types of programs provided in prisons by correctional systems , the intensity of supervision provided or required by the parole or releasing agency , the family and community support available to the offender , the kinds of social services available in the offender's community , and the status of the local economy and the offender's ability to obtain employment .

following is a brief description of the main federal programs that have been used to help state and local entities fund activities relating to the reintegration of ex - offenders into local communities .

some of these programs may no longer be receiving funding ; these programs are identified below .

other programs that are currently funded may not provide funding for offender reentry purposes every fiscal year .

nevertheless , these programs have been included to provide a comprehensive look at the universe of federal resources that could be used for offender reentry purposes .

over the past two and a half decades , the increasing number of ex - offenders entering the community has put pressure on public policymakers to provide treatments and services that will smooth the reintegration process while reducing recidivism .

when deciding what programs to fund , policymakers often focus on reducing recidivism .

the focus on reducing recidivism , however , is complicated by the fact that there are different definitions of recidivism .

for example , the most recent major national - level study showed that within five years of their release three - quarters of ex - offenders came into contact with the legal system and about half were back in prison for either a new conviction or a violation of the terms of their release .

however , only a quarter of the ex - offenders ended up in prison for having committed new crimes .

whether technical violations should be considered a measure of recidivism or whether recidivism should be confined to the commission of new crimes has engendered much debate within the criminal justice field .

while the emphasis on reducing recidivism is important , programs can also be evaluated based on other outcome measures such as their ability to connect ex - offenders with jobs , services , and institutions in their communities .

the best available research has shown that there are a number of services that can help ex - offenders reconnect with their communities and lower recidivism , including programs focusing on providing vocational training , substance abuse prevention , mental health services , and housing .

the reportedly most successful programs focus on high - risk offenders , are intensive in nature , begin during institutional placement , and take place mostly in the community .

however , a relative lack of scientifically rigorous research has made it difficult to draw definitive conclusions about which programs are most effective .

as congress considers this issue , a number of policy issues may be assessed , including whether the current federal grant programs are adequate or whether new programs should be created , whether there is a need for more regular national - level recidivism data ( there were almost 20 years between the bjs's two reports on recidivism ) , whether enough coordination of the many programs that may be used to help ex - offenders is occurring within the federal government , whether more evaluations of offender reentry programs are needed , and whether funding will be appropriated for the programs and activities that were authorized by the second chance act .

