is the u.s. strategic architecture in asia well - suited to adjust to the evolving correlates of power in asia ? .

the region is now facing an array of changes: deepening trade links , the formation of new regional institutions , and increased attention to the threat of islamic terrorism .

some analysts have questioned whether u.s. security interests are best served by the existing framework of bilateral alliances , while others believe the basic architecture is sound and may only require some relatively minor changes and / or additions to meet emerging challenges .

calls for a revision of america's security architecture in asia may be a reaction to the development of new regional groups that exclude the united states .

the goals of america's strategic architecture in asia have traditionally included preventing the dominance of asia by any single power or coalition of powers ; maintaining a system of alliances to facilitate the projection of american power when needed ; and securing sea lanes of communication to facilitate american commercial access and the free flow of trade in the region .

american power can also be used to promote american values such as democratic governments or provision of humanitarian and disaster assistance .

china's rise has had a clear impact on existing and nascent defense relationships in the asia - pacific region .

this section provides a brief assessment of the state of bilateral relationships among the united states , australia , japan , and india .

some defense ties are well - established and multi - layered , while others are embryonic .

each section examines the history of ties , current political climate , rationales for engagement , and challenges to cooperation .

as the bush administration has pursued stronger defense relations with australia , japan , and india , initiatives for trilateral efforts among the nations has emerged .

nascent three - way cooperation has built on existing bilateral alliances to further u.s. goals in the region by combining forces among partners and allies .

as trilateral initiatives have taken shape , talk of a quadrilateral grouping — which would tie together the united states , japan , australia , and india — has emerged .

advocates for expanding quadrilateral cooperation have pointed to the "regional core group" that formed in the aftermath of the 2004 indian ocean tsunami as a model .

former japanese prime minister abe was perhaps the most vocal supporter of the four - way forum .

incoming prime minister rudd , however , may have doubts about a quadrilateral grouping .

because of the fall from power or declining political fortunes of the leaders who supported the quad , it is uncertain that enthusiasm will remain for building a stronger arrangement .

despite initial enthusiasm for forming trilateral and / or quadrilateral security arrangements , the conservative leaders who originally supported the idea have all been compromised by their own domestic political situations .

abe left office precipitously in september 2007 after his party suffered a major parliamentary defeat ; howard was soundly defeated in november 2007 in the australian parliamentarian elections ; singh's ruling coalition has struggled to stay intact ; and president bush faces political challenges and low public approval ratings .

maintaining the momentum for the multilateral initiatives may be challenging , depending on the inclinations of incoming administrations .

currently , the quadrilateral grouping appears to be on hold , and it remains to be seen if geopolitical forces will push cooperation forward .

despite abe's strong support for expanding security ties with india and australia , japan's involvement in any multilateral security fora will be restricted , both legally because of article 9 and socially because of the public's pacifist sentiments which — while declining — still remain strong .

japan's approach to the principle of "collective self - defense" has in the past been considered an obstacle to close defense cooperation .

the term comes from article 51 of the u.n. charter , which provides that member nations may exercise the rights of both individual and collective self - defense if an armed attack occurs .

a 1960 decision by japan's cabinet legislation bureau interpreted the constitution to forbid collective actions because it would require considering the defense of other countries , not just the safety of japan itself .

abe convened a special commission to study whether the constitutional interpretation should be changed , and the members were widely expected to recommend that collective self - defense be allowed .

as a result of abe's resignation in 2007 , the campaign to adjust the constitutional interpretation will likely stall , as new prime minister yasuo fukuda is considered unsupportive of the move .

u.s. officials have pressured the japanese government to allow collective self - defense , particularly in terms of allowing japan to intercept missiles aimed at u.s. targets .

military engagement with other regional powers is likely to meet with more public and bureaucratic resistance than furthering cooperation with the united states .

america's key policy challenge in its alliance relationship with australia will , according to some analysts , be to keep this staunch ally from shifting to a position where canberra sees its role as a mediator between the united states and china rather than focused on working unambiguously with the united states .

this may involve countering chinese attempts to drive a wedge between the united states and australia .

the unpopularity of the bush administration in australia and its perceived unilateralist policies , including in iraq , and the degree to which australia's economy is benefitting from exports to china are key factors in this calculus .

australia may increasingly seek to develop its own independent ties with asian powers , without appearing to be simply an american ally in the region .

australia's desire for a more independent foreign and strategic policy may be part of its efforts to reach out to other states such as japan , singapore , and india .

canberra is also reluctant to offend china , which may place limits on its relationship with the united states .

in july 2007 , australian minister for defence brendon nelson stated that "we do not wish to have formal quadrilateral strategic dialogue in defence and security matters.... we do not want to do anything which ... may otherwise cause concern in some countries , particularly china. .

india's rising economic and political power makes it an increasingly appealing partner for the united states , in terms of both its democratic values and its geo - strategic location .

obstacles to a closer bilateral relationship — most recently , the apparent faltering of the civilian nuclear deal in the indian parliament — remain prominent .

further , some see india as somewhat mired in its identity as a member of the non - aligned movement ( nam ) , a cold - war era organization of states resisting great power politics .

through various statements , officials in new delhi have indicated their desire to balance powers and create a "multipolar" asia , suggesting that it may not agree with the u.s. goal of remaining the pre - eminent power in east asia .

though india is wary of china's increasing strength , and therefore more open to cooperation with other powers , it has been insistent that it does not intend to "choose sides," and is opposed to any formal regional defense alliance .

in addition , india has participated as an observer in the shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ) meetings .

for u.s. policymakers , the key challenge is to develop a strategic posture in the region that can accommodate china's peaceful economic rise while sending the signal that the united states is not leaving a geopolitical vacuum for china to fill .

developing joint capabilities through enhanced defense partnerships with like - minded states may discourage china from asserting itself in ways that harm u.s. interests .

on the other hand , it risks creating a dangerous cycle of mutual hedging , in which beijing is tempted to exhibit more aggressive behavior .

this atmosphere would not be conducive to engaging china more fully as a "responsible stakeholder" in the international system .

developing multilateral groupings poses its own challenges , as all states must harmonize their approach to beijing: at times , it may be difficult to reconcile a more conciliatory new delhi or canberra with a potentially more threatened tokyo .

washington must carefully calibrate its diplomatic and military approach as it adjusts its asia - pacific presence to accommodate a range of competing interests .

many observers concur that the united states needs to be forward thinking and open to active and engaged partnerships and cooperation with key regional states while not pushing such cooperation to the point that it is destabilizing or unattractive to regional states .

such cooperation could better position the united states and like - minded countries to look after their shared interests through a focus on capacity building while not being formalized in a way that such cooperation appears to be aimed at containing china .

an agenda aimed at the containment of china is not likely to attract regional states and could create a hostile security environment in asia that would likely undermine u.s. and others' interests .

the united states must be particularly careful not to isolate other existing allies , such as south korea , the philippines , and thailand , as it pursues new partnerships in asia .

some observers think that the election of lee myung - bak as south korean president , who is considered likely to improve relations with both the united states and japan , could provide an opening for drawing seoul in a multilateral regional framework .

