m ortgage debt cancellation occurs when lenders engage in loss - mitigation solutions that either ( 1 ) restructure the loan and reduce the principal balance or ( 2 ) sell the property , either in advance , or as a result of foreclosure proceedings .

under current law , the canceled debt ( sometimes referred to as discharge of indebtedness ) may be income subject to taxation .

the mortgage forgiveness debt relief act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-142 ) signed into law on december 20 , 2007 , temporarily excluded qualified cod income .

thus , the act allowed taxpayers who did not qualify for the existing exceptions to exclude cod income .

the provision was effective for debt discharged before january 1 , 2010 .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) extended the exclusion of cod income to debt discharged before january 1 , 2013 .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) subsequently extended the exclusion through the end of 2013 .

the tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) extended the exclusion through the end of 2014 .

the exclusion was extended again through the end of 2016 by division q of p.l .

114-113 — the protecting americans from tax hikes act ( or "path" act ) .

most recently , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) retroactively extended the exclusion through the end of 2017 .

the extension also allowed for debt discharged after 2017 to be excluded from income if the taxpayer had entered into a binding written agreement before january 1 , 2018 .

the rationales for this change are to minimize hardship for households in distress and to ensure that non - tax - related homeowner retention efforts are not thwarted by tax policy .

critics argue that the exclusion could encourage homeowners to be less responsible about fulfilling debt obligations .

critics may also argue that owner - occupied housing is sufficiently subsidized even without a cod income exclusion .

this report begins with an overview and analysis of the historical tax treatment of canceled debt income .

next , the changes enacted by p.l .

110-142 , p.l .

110-343 , p.l .

112-240 , p.l .

113-295 , p.l .

114-113 , and p.l .

115-123 are reviewed .

a discussion of policy options concludes .

for federal income tax purposes , there are two types of income that may arise when an individual's mortgage is fully or partially canceled: cancellation of indebtedness income and gain from the disposition of property .

on december 20 , 2007 , the mortgage forgiveness debt relief act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-142 ) was signed into law .

the act , among other things , excluded discharged qualified residential debt from gross income .

qualified indebtedness is defined as debt , limited to $2 million ( $1 million if married filing separately ) , incurred in acquiring , constructing , or substantially improving the taxpayer's principal residence that is secured by such residence .

it also includes refinancing of this debt , to the extent that the refinancing does not exceed the amount of refinanced indebtedness .

the taxpayer was required to reduce the basis in their principal residence by the amount of the excluded income .

the provision did not apply if the discharge was on account of services performed for the lender or any other factor not directly related to a decline in the residence's value or to the taxpayer's financial condition .

the provision applied to debt discharges that are made on or after january 1 , 2007 , and before january 1 , 2010 .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) extended the exclusion described above through the end of 2012 .

subsequently , the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) extended the exclusion through the end of 2013 .

the tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) extended the exclusion through the end of 2014 .

the exclusion was extended again through the end of 2016 by division q of p.l .

114-113 — the protecting americans from tax hikes act ( or "path" act ) .

most recently , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) retroactively extended the exclusion through the end of 2017 .

the extension also allowed for debt discharged after 2017 to be excluded from income if the taxpayer had entered into a binding written agreement before january 1 , 2018 .

in order to evaluate the policy of including discharged debt as income , it is helpful to understand why it exists .

according to economic theory , one way of defining income is as the change ( over the period in question ) in a person's net worth — that is , the change in the value of the person's assets minus the change in their liabilities .

by this definition , a forgiven loan is income: a canceled debt reduces a taxpayer's liabilities , and thus increases net worth .

in the past , tax law has generally adhered to this concept by providing that if the obligation to repay the lender is forgiven , the amount of loan proceeds that is forgiven is reportable income subject to tax .

this portion of the report provides analysis of the issues associated with the tax treatment of canceled mortgage debt income .

the changes enacted by p.l .

110-142 and then extended by p.l .

110-343 , p.l .

112-240 , p.l .

113-295 , p.l .

114-113 , and p.l .

115-123 are temporary and are scheduled to expire at the end of 2017 .

congress may choose to allow the latest extension to expire , thus subjecting canceled mortgage debt income to its traditional tax treatment after 2017 .

if this were to happen , canceled debt income would be subject to taxation unless the taxpayer meets a qualified exception ( eg , the taxpayer is insolvent ) .

if the exclusion on canceled debt income were to expire , improving awareness about the existing exclusions for canceled debt , such as for insolvency or bankruptcy , may be an option to pursue .

congress may choose to extend the exclusion of canceled debt income again , either temporarily or permanently , possibly with some modifications .

which modifications , if any , are enacted will depend on the goal of policymakers .

one consideration for congress is whether the exclusion provision should be temporary or permanent .

some argue that housing market conditions have improved significantly since conditions bottomed , and therefore warrant a temporary solution for those still feeling the lingering effects of the crash .

a temporary exclusion of canceled debt income would appear to be consistent with a policy of minimizing adverse consequences associated with loan renegotiations in the short term .

it could also be argued that the temporary exclusion of residential cod income is preferable because owner - occupied housing is already heavily subsidized even without a cod exclusion .

three principal tax provisions for owner - occupied housing currently exist in the tax code: the deduction for mortgage interest , the exclusion of gain on the sales of homes , and the deduction of state and local real estate taxes .

when combined these three provisions result in over $125 billion in reduced federal revenue annually .

some economists feel that this preferential tax treatment encourages households to overinvest in housing and less in business investments that might contribute more to increasing the nation's productivity and output .

on the other hand , some analysts might argue that the provision should be permanent .

a case could be made that a temporary provision is unfair because there is no difference between an individual experiencing canceled debt income in 2010 , when foreclosure rates were relatively high compared to three or four years from now , when foreclosure rates may be lower .

if the intent is to minimize hardship when taxpayers experience distress , then making the provision permanent would seem consistent with that objective .

several options are possible for determining in what situations canceled mortgage debt income may be excluded from taxation .

the broadest modification would exclude all canceled residential debt from income .

currently , only debt associated with the primary ( or principal ) residence of a taxpayer may be excluded and not vacation homes or investment property .

some policy analysts have suggested disallowing second liens as qualified residential debt .

second liens are not directly ineligible for the exclusion , although currently , qualified debt is restricted to include debt incurred in acquiring , constructing , or substantially improving the taxpayer's principal residence .

for some individuals , second liens may be home equity lines of credit ; for others , second liens may be debt incurred as part of the purchase of the home .

to the extent that home equity lines of credit are used to enhance the home and make capital improvements , it may be consistent with stated policy goals to include this debt as eligible for the exclusion .

yet , home equity lines of credit can also be used to finance consumption , such as vacations or paying off other debt .

it may not be consistent with the stated policy goals , some might argue , to include this type of debt in the exclusion .

congress may also wish to consider changing the limit on the amount of canceled debt that can be excluded from income .

p.l .

110-142 imposed a limit of $2 million ( $1 million if married filing separate returns ) .

increasing the limit would likely increase revenue loss associated with the exclusion , while decreasing the limit would have the opposite effect .

decreasing the exclusion limit might also reduce the benefit to upper - income taxpayers .

policymakers could modify homeowner eligibility requirements based on ownership tenure or income .

the exclusion for canceled debt income could be limited to homeowners who meet certain ownership and / or use tests similar to other housing - related tax provisions .

for example , a homeowner must meet both an ownership and use test in order to claim the exclusion for gain on owner - occupied housing that is available under irc section 121 .

the ownership test requires the taxpayer to have owned the house for two of the last five years , while the use test requires the owner to have lived in the house for at least two years out of the last five years .

limiting the exclusion of capital gains in this manner was designed to minimize the possibility that investors , rather than owner - occupants , would exclude capital gains from taxation .

if an ownership and / or use test were applied to an exclusion of cod income , the number of tax filers eligible to claim the exclusion might be reduced .

this reduction in filers may result in lower revenue loss .

this policy option would add complexity to the reporting and filing processes and thus the tax code .

in addition , it could be argued that tenure is not relevant to the stated policy goals of mortgage debt cancellation .

some policymakers have suggested that foreclosure assistance be provided only to households with low and moderate incomes .

as with other housing tax incentives , such as the mortgage revenue bond program and the first - time homebuyer tax credit for district of columbia residents , income levels could be capped and the exclusion made unavailable to those households with income above the ceiling .

it would seem that income and foreclosure would be highly correlated because lower - income taxpayers may be more financially constrained than higher - income taxpayers .

regardless of whether this is true , it could be argued that household income is not relevant to the stated policy goals for the legislation .

this option could reduce the revenue loss associated with the provision , but would add complexity to the administration and tax filing process .

as discussed above , current law requires that taxpayers who exclude cod income must "return" some tax benefit by reducing other tax attributes , such as basis in property .

several policy issues arise from this rule .

the first is which tax attributes , if any , should be adjusted to account for excluded canceled mortgage debt income .

one option is that there be no "attribute reduction" requirement .

alternatively , homeowners could be required to reduce specified tax attributes that include , but are not limited to , basis in the residence ( eg , taxpayers would be able to reduce basis in property other than the home subject to the discharged mortgage ) .

a third option would be to require basis reduction in the taxpayer's residence .

all taxpayers would benefit from the first option by not accounting for the excluded cod income .

taxpayer preference between the second option and the third option would depend on his or her circumstances ( eg , whether the taxpayer has basis in other property that would have to be reduced in the event of insufficient basis in the residence ) .

the temporary exclusion of cod income enacted by p.l .

110-142 uses the third option — homeowners are required to reduce basis in the principal residence to account for the excluded cod income .

another issue is when tax attributes should be adjusted .

if basis is adjusted , one option could be to make the proposal consistent with current law , under which basis adjustment occurs in the year following discharge of the debt .

alternatively , basis adjustment could occur earlier ( eg , at the time of discharge or exclusion ) .

if basis adjustment occurred in the year after discharge , homeowners losing their home at the time of debt cancellation would have already disposed of the property .

the requirement that a basis adjustment in the amount of cancelled debt suggests a desire by policymakers for homeowners to account for the benefit of the cancelled debt .

basis adjustment results in the taxation of cancelled debt income to the extent that gain from the disposition of the home is taxable ; however , the timing of the basis adjustment may result in different tax consequences for taxpayers who lose their home .

the exclusion of cod income may result in differential treatment of taxpayers depending on basis adjustment timing , eligibility for exclusion of gain from the disposition of the residence , and homeownership retention .

policymakers may wish to account for that differential treatment , although doing so may add complexity and administrative cost to the proposal relative to its current state .

