congress's contempt power is the means by which congress responds to certain acts that in its view obstruct the legislative process .

contempt may be used either to coerce compliance , to punish the contemnor , and / or to remove the obstruction .

although any action that directly obstructs the effort of congress to exercise its constitutional powers may arguably constitute a contempt , in recent decades the contempt power has most often been employed in response to the refusal of a witness to comply with a congressional subpoena — whether in the form of a refusal to provide testimony , or a refusal to produce requested documents .

congress has three formal methods by which it can combat non - compliance with a duly issued subpoena .

each of these methods invokes the authority of a separate branch of government .

first , the long dormant inherent contempt power permits congress to rely on its own constitutional authority to detain and imprison a contemnor until the individual complies with congressional demands .

because the contemnor is generally released once the terms of the subpoena are met , inherent contempt serves the purposes of encouraging compliance with a congressional directive .

second , the criminal contempt statute permits congress to certify a contempt citation to the executive branch for the criminal prosecution of the contemnor .

criminal contempt serves as punishment for non - compliance with a congressional subpoena , but does not necessarily encourage subsequent acquiescence .

once convicted , the contemnor is not excused from criminal liability if he later chooses to comply with the subpoena .

finally , congress may rely on the judicial branch to enforce a congressional subpoena .

under this procedure , congress may seek a civil judgment from a federal court declaring that the individual in question is legally obligated to comply with the congressional subpoena .

if the court finds that the party is legally obligated to comply , continued non - compliance may result in the party being held in contempt of court .

where the target of the subpoena is an executive branch official , civil enforcement may be the only practical means by which congress can effectively ensure compliance with its own subpoena .

this report examines the source of the contempt power ; reviews the historical development of the early case law ; discusses noteworthy contempt proceedings ; outlines the statutory , common law , and constitutional limitations on the contempt power ; and analyzes the procedures associated with inherent contempt , criminal contempt , and the civil enforcement of congressional subpoenas .

the power of congress to punish for contempt is inextricably related to the power of congress to investigate .

generally speaking , congress's authority to investigate and obtain information , including but not limited to confidential information , is extremely broad .

while there is no express provision of the constitution or specific statute authorizing the conduct of congressional oversight or investigations , the supreme court has firmly established that such power is essential to the legislative function as to be implied from the general vesting of legislative powers in congress .

the broad legislative authority to seek and enforce informational demands was unequivocally established in two supreme court rulings arising out of the 1920's teapot dome scandal .

in mcgrain v. daugherty , which arose out of the exercise of the senate's inherent contempt power , the supreme court described the power of inquiry , with the accompanying process to enforce it , as "an essential and appropriate auxiliary to the legislative function. .

the court explained: a legislative body cannot legislate wisely or effectively in the absence of information respecting the conditions which the legislation is intended to affect or change ; and where the legislative body does not itself possess the requisite information — which not infrequently is true — recourse must be had to others who possess it .

experience has taught that mere requests for such information often are unavailing , and also that information which is volunteered is not always accurate or complete ; so some means of compulsion are essential to obtain that which is needed .

all this was true before and when the constitution was framed and adopted .

in that period the power of inquiry — with enforcing process — was regarded and employed as a necessary and appropriate attribute of the power to legislate — indeed , was treated as inhering in it .

thus there is ample warrant for thinking , as we do , that the constitutional provisions which commit the legislative function to the two houses are intended to include this attribute to the end that the function may be effectively exercised .

in sinclair v. united states , a different witness at the congressional hearings refused to provide answers , and was prosecuted for contempt of congress .

the witness had noted that a lawsuit had been commenced between the government and the mammoth oil company , and declared , "i shall reserve any evidence i may be able to give for those courts ... and shall respectfully decline to answer any questions propounded by your committee. .

the supreme court upheld the witness's conviction for contempt of congress .

the court considered and rejected in unequivocal terms the witness's contention that the pendency of lawsuits provided an excuse for withholding information .

neither the laws directing that such lawsuits be instituted , nor the lawsuits themselves , "operated to divest the senate , or the committee , of power further to investigate the actual administration of the land laws. .

the court further explained that "[i]t may be conceded that congress is without authority to compel disclosure for the purpose of aiding the prosecution of pending suits ; but the authority of that body , directly or through its committees to require pertinent disclosures in aid of its own constitutional power is not abridged because the information sought to be elicited may also be of use in such suits. .

subsequent supreme court rulings have consistently reiterated and reinforced the breadth of congress's investigative authority .

for example , in eastland v. united states servicemen's fund , the court explained that "[t]he scope of [congress's] power of inquiry ... is as penetrating and far - reaching as the potential power to enact and appropriate under the constitution. .

in addition , the court in watkins v. united states described the breadth of the power of inquiry .

according to the court , congress's power "to conduct investigations is inherent in the legislative process .

that power is broad .

it encompasses inquiries concerning the administration of existing laws as well as proposed or possibly needed statutes. .

the court did not limit the power of congressional inquiry to cases of "wrongdoing. .

it emphasized , however , that congress's investigative power is at its peak when the subject is alleged waste , fraud , abuse , or maladministration within a government department .

the investigative power , the court stated , "comprehends probes into departments of the federal government to expose corruption , inefficiency , or waste. .

"[t]he first congresses" held "inquiries dealing with suspected corruption or mismanagement by government officials" and subsequently , in a series of decisions , "[t]he court recognized the danger to effective and honest conduct of the government if the legislative power to probe corruption in the executive branch were unduly hampered. .

accordingly , the court now clearly recognizes "the power of the congress to inquire into and publicize corruption , maladministration , or inefficiencies in the agencies of government. .

the inherent contempt power is not specified in a statute or constitutional provision , but has been deemed implicit in the constitution's grant to congress of all legislative powers .

in an inherent contempt proceeding , the offender is tried at the bar of the house or senate and can be held in custody until such time as the contemnor provides the testimony or documents sought , or until the end of the session .

inherent contempt was most often used as a means of coercion , not punishment .

a statutory criminal contempt provision was first enacted by congress in 1857 , in part because of the inadequacies of proceedings under the inherent power .

in cases of criminal contempt , the offender is cited by the subcommittee , the committee , and the full house or senate , with subsequent indictment by a grand jury and prosecution by the u.s. attorney .

criminal contempt , unlike inherent contempt , is intended as a means of punishing the contemnor for non - compliance rather than to obtain the information sought .

a statutory civil enforcement procedure , applicable only to the senate , was enacted in 1978 .

under that procedure , a witness , who refuses to testify before a senate committee or provide documents sought by the committee can , after being served with a court order , be held in contempt of court and incarcerated until he agrees to testify .

moreover , the house and senate have authorized standing or special committees to seek civil enforcement of subpoenas .

while the contempt power was exercised both by the english parliament and by the american colonial assemblies , congress's first assertion of its contempt authority occurred in 1795 , shortly after the ratification of the constitution .

at the time , three members of the house of representatives reported that they had been offered what they interpreted to be a bribe by men named robert randall and charles whitney .

the house of representatives interpreted these allegations as sufficient evidence of an attempt to corrupt its proceedings and reported a resolution ordering their arrest and detention by the sergeant - at - arms , pending further action by the house .

the matter was then referred to a special committee on privileges which reported out a resolution recommending that formal proceedings be instituted against messrs. randall and whitney at the bar of the house .

in addition , the resolution provided that the accused be questioned by written interrogatories submitted by the speaker of the house with both the questions and the answers entered into the house minutes .

the resolution also provided that individual members could submit written questions to the accused .

upon adopting the resolution and after considerable debate , the house determined that the following procedures be adhered to: first , the complaining members were to submit a written signed information to the accused and for publication in the house journal .

in addition , the accused were to be provided counsel , the right to call witnesses on their behalf , the right to cross - examination of the complaining members through written questions submitted to the speaker , and adequate time to prepare a defense .

a proceeding was held at the bar of the house , and on january 4 , 1796 , the house , by a vote of 78-17 , adopted a resolution finding mr. randall guilty of "a contempt to , and a breach of the privileges of , this house by attempting to corrupt the integrity of its members in the manner laid to his charge. .

the house ordered mr. randall to be brought to the bar , reprimanded by the speaker , and held in custody until further resolution of the house .

mr. randall was detained until january 13 , 1796 , when he was discharged by house resolution .

mr. whitney , on the other hand , was absolved of any wrongdoing as the house determined that his actions were against a "member - elect," and had taken place "away from the seat of government. .

of additional significance is the fact that the records indicate that almost no question was raised with respect to the power of congress to punish a non - member for contempt .

according to one commentator , who noted that many of the members of the early congress were also members of the constitutional convention and , thus , fully aware of the legislative practices of the time , it was "substantially agreed that the grant of the legislative power to congress carried with it by implication the power to punish for contempt. .

four years later , the senate exercised its contempt power against william duane , who , as editor of the aurora newspaper , was charged with the publication of a libelous article concerning the senate and one of its committees .

mr. duane was ordered by senate resolution to appear before the bar of the senate and "make any proper defense for his conduct in publishing the aforesaid false , defamatory , scandalous , and malicious assertions and pretended information. .

at his initial appearance before the senate , mr. duane requested , and was granted , the assistance of counsel and ordered to appear again two days later .

instead of appearing before the senate as ordered , mr. duane submitted a letter indicating he did not believe he could receive a fair trial before the senate .

mr. duane was subsequently held in contempt of the senate for his failure to appear , not for his alleged libelous and defamatory publications .

as a result , he was held in the custody of the senate for several weeks before the senate , by resolution , instructed that he be released and tried by the courts .

the senate's contempt of mr. duane generated considerably more debate concerning congress's contempt authority .

a majority of senators argued that the senate's contempt power was an inherent right of legislative bodies , derived not specifically from the constitution , but rather from "the principle of self - preservation , which results to every public body from necessity and from the nature of the case. .

moreover , senators supportive of this position argued that their reasoning was firmly supported by english and colonial practices , as well as the practice of the state legislatures .

finally , the majority asserted that if congress did not possess a contempt power it would be vulnerable to the disruption of its proceedings by outside intruders .

while the senate's exercise of its contempt power was not without precedent , many senators disputed these claims , arguing that all powers sought to be exercised by congress must be specifically derived from the constitution ; that because the contempt power is not among the enumerated powers given to congress , the power is reserved to the states and the people .

in addition , the minority argued that congress , unlike the english parliament or state legislatures , was intentionally not granted the plenary powers of sovereignty by the constitution and , thus , could not claim any inherent right to self - preservation .

as an alternative , the minority proposed that congress , which has the power to "make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers" had sufficient authority to enact a statute that would protect the integrity of its proceedings .

moreover , the minority argued that disruptions of congressional proceedings would continue to be subject to the criminal laws .

after mr. duane's contempt by the senate , it appeared that the subject of the congress's inherent contempt power was settled .

the authority , however , was not used again for another 12 years .

in 1812 , the house issued a contempt resolution against mr. nathaniel rounsavell , who had refused to answer a select committee's questions concerning which representative had given him information regarding secret sessions .

however , before mr. rounsavell was brought before the bar of the house a member admitted his indiscretion and the matter was not pursued .

congress's inherent contempt power was not used again until 1818 , where it eventually made its way to the supreme court for adjudication .

congress's inherent contempt power is not specifically granted by the constitution , but is considered necessary to investigate and legislate effectively .

the validity of the inherent contempt power was upheld in the early supreme court decision in anderson v. dunn and reiterated in mcgrain v. daugherty .

under the inherent contempt power the individual is brought before the house or senate by the sergeant - at - arms , tried at the bar of the body , and can be imprisoned or detained in the capitol or perhaps elsewhere .

the purpose of the imprisonment or other sanction may be either punitive or coercive .

thus , the witness can be imprisoned for a specified period of time as punishment , or for an indefinite period ( but not , at least by the house , beyond the end of a session of the congress ) until he agrees to comply .

one commentator has concluded that the procedure followed by the house in the contempt citation that was at issue in anderson v. dunn is typical of that employed in the inherent contempt cases .

these traditional methods may be explained by using as an illustration anderson v. dunn .

.. .

in 1818 , a member of the house of representatives accused anderson , a non - member , of trying to bribe him .

.. .

the house adopted a resolution pursuant to which the speaker ordered the sergeant - at - arms to arrest anderson and bring him before the bar of the house ( to answer the charge ) .

when anderson appeared , the speaker informed him why he had been brought before the house and asked if he had any requests for assistance in answering the charge .

anderson stated his requests , and the house granted him counsel , compulsory process for defense witnesses , and a copy , of the accusatory letter .

anderson called his witnesses ; the house heard and questioned them and him .

it then passed a resolution finding him guilty of contempt and directing the speaker to reprimand him and then to discharge him from custody .

the pattern was thereby established of attachment by the sergeant - at - arms ; appearance before the bar ; provision for specification of charges , identification of the accuser , compulsory process , counsel , and a hearing ; determination of guilt ; imposition of penalty .

when a witness is cited for contempt under the inherent contempt process , prompt judicial review appears to be available by means of a petition for a writ of habeas corpus .

in such a habeas proceeding , the issues decided by the court might be limited to ( a ) whether the house or senate acted in a manner within its jurisdiction , and ( b ) whether the contempt proceedings complied with minimum due process standards .

while congress would not have to afford a contemnor the whole panoply of procedural rights available to a defendant in criminal proceedings , notice and an opportunity to be heard would have to be granted .

also , some of the requirements imposed by the courts under the statutory criminal contempt procedure ( eg , pertinency of the question asked to the committee's investigation ) might be mandated by the due process clause in the case of inherent contempt proceedings .

although many of the inherent contempt precedents have involved incarceration of the contemnor , there may be an argument for the imposition of monetary fines as an alternative .

such a fine would potentially have the advantage of avoiding a court proceeding on habeas corpus grounds , as the contemnor would never be jailed or detained .

drawing on the analogous authority that courts have to inherently impose fines for contemptuous behavior , it appears possible to argue that congress , in its exercise of a similar inherent function could impose fines as opposed to incarceration .

additional support for this argument appears to be contained in dicta from the 1821 supreme court decision in anderson v. dunn .

the court questioned the "extent of the punishing power which the deliberative assemblies of the union may assume and exercise on the principle of self preservation" and responded with the following: analogy , and the nature of the case , furnish the answer — "the least possible power adequate to the end proposed ; " which is the power of imprisonment .

it may , at first view , and from the history of the practice of our legislative bodies , be thought to extend to other inflictions .

but every other will be found to be mere commutation for confinement ; since commitment alone is the alternative where the individual proves contumacious .

finally , in kilbourn v. thompson , the court suggested that in certain cases where the congress had authority to investigate , it may compel testimony in the same manner and by use of the same means as a court of justice in like cases .

specifically , the court noted that "[w]hether the power of punishment in either house by fine or imprisonment goes beyond this or not , we are sure that no person can be punished for contumacy as a witness before either house , unless his testimony is required in a matter into which that house has jurisdiction to inquire.... " while the language of these cases and the analogous power possessed by courts seem to suggest the possibility of levying a fine as punishment for contempt of congress , we are not aware of , and could not locate , any precedent for congress imposing a fine in the contempt context .

in comparison with the other types of contempt proceedings , inherent contempt has the distinction of not requiring the cooperation or assistance of either the executive or judicial branches .

the house or senate can , on its own , conduct summary proceedings and cite the offender for contempt .

furthermore , although the contemnor can seek judicial review by means of a petition for a writ of habeas corpus , the scope of such review may be relatively limited , compared to the plenary review accorded by the courts in cases of conviction under the criminal contempt statute .

there are also certain limitations on the inherent contempt process .

although the contemnor can be incarcerated until he agrees to comply with the subpoena , imprisonment may not extend beyond the end of the current session of congress .

moreover , inherent contempt has been described as "unseemly," cumbersome , time - consuming , and relatively ineffective , especially for a modern congress with a heavy legislative workload that would be interrupted by a trial at the bar .

because of these drawbacks , the inherent contempt process has not been used by either body since 1935 .

proceedings under the inherent contempt power might be facilitated , however , if the initial fact - finding and examination of witnesses were to be held before a special committee — which could be directed to submit findings and recommendations to the full body — with only the final decision as to guilt being made by the full house or senate .

although generally the proceedings in inherent contempt cases appear to have been conducted at the bar of the house of congress involved , in at least a few instances proceedings were conducted initially or primarily before a committee , but with the final decision as to whether to hold the person in contempt being made by the full body .

between 1795 and 1857 , 14 inherent contempt actions were initiated by the house and senate , eight of which can be considered successful in that the contemnor was meted out punishment , agreed to testify , or produced documents .

such inherent contempt proceedings , however , involved a trial at the bar of the chamber concerned and , therefore , were seen by some as time - consuming , cumbersome , and in some instances ineffective — because punishment could not be extended beyond a house's adjournment date .

in 1857 , a statutory criminal contempt procedure was enacted , largely as a result of a particular proceeding brought in the house of representatives that year .

the statute provides for judicial trial of the contemnor by a united states attorney rather than a trial at the bar of the house or senate .

it is clear from the floor debates and the subsequent practice of both houses that the legislation was intended as an alternative to the inherent contempt procedure , not as a substitute for it .

a criminal contempt referral was made in the case of john w. wolcott in 1858 , but in the ensuing two decades after its enactment most contempt proceedings continued to be handled at the bar of the house , rather than by the criminal contempt method , apparently because members felt that they would not be able to obtain the desired information from the witness after the criminal proceedings had been instituted .

with only minor amendments , those statutory provisions are codified today as 2 u.s.c .

§§192 and 194 , which state the following: every person who having been summoned as a witness by the authority of either house of congress to give testimony or to produce papers upon any matter under inquiry before either house , or any joint committee established by a joint or concurrent resolution of the two houses of congress , or any committee of either house of congress , willfully makes default , or who , having appeared , refuses to answer any question pertinent to the question under inquiry , shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor , punishable by a fine of not more than [$100,000] nor less than $100 and imprisonment in a common jail for not less than one month nor more than twelve months .

whenever a witness summoned as mentioned in section 192 of this title fails to appear to testify or fails to produce any books , papers , records , or documents , as required , or whenever any witness so summoned refuses to answer any question pertinent to the subject under inquiry before either house , or any joint committee established by a joint or concurrent resolution of the two houses of congress , or any committee or subcommittee of either house of congress , and the fact of such failure or failures is reported to either house while congress is in session or when congress is not in session , a statement of fact constituting such failure is reported to and filed with the president of the senate or the speaker of the house , it shall be the duty of the said president of the senate or speaker of the house , as the case may be , to certify , and he shall so certify , the statement of facts aforesaid under the seal of the senate or house , as the case may be , to the appropriate united states attorney , whose duty it shall be to bring the matter before the grand jury for its action .

the legislative debate over the criminal contempt statute reveals that it was prompted by the obstruction of a house select committee's investigation into allegations of misconduct that had been made against several members of the house of representatives .

according to reports , the investigation was hindered by the refusal of a newspaper reporter , james w. simonton , to provide answers to certain questions posed by the committee .

the select committee responded by reporting a resolution citing mr. simonton for contempt , as well as introducing a bill that was intended "to more effectually ... enforce the attendance of witnesses on the summons of either house of congress , and to compel them to discover testimony. .

it appears that there were no printed house or senate committee reports on the measure , though it was considered in the house by the select committee and in the senate by the judiciary committee .

according to the legislative debate records and commentators , there was opposition to the bill on several fronts .

some members proposed an amendment expressly codifying congress's contempt power for failure to comply with requests for documents or testimony , thereby resurrecting the view that congress did not possess any inherent power to punish for contempt .

others argued that congress's inherent contempt powers rendered the proposed bill unnecessary .

still other members opposed the bill on the grounds that it violated the fourth and fifth amendments of the constitution , because it sanctioned unreasonable searches and seizures , compelled persons to incriminate themselves , and violated the prohibition on persons being punished twice for the same offense ( double jeopardy ) .

in response to arguments that such a statute was unnecessary given congress's inherent authority to hold individuals in contempt , supporters made clear that the proposed bill was not intended in any way to diminish congress's inherent contempt authority .

rather , supporters of the bill saw it as designed to give congress "additional authority , and to impose additional penalties on a witness who fails to appear before an investigating committee of either house , or who , appearing , fails to answer any question. .

the main concern of proponents seems to have been congress's ability to impose adequate punishments for contempts that occur near the end of a session , especially in the house , where the prevailing view was that the court's opinion in anderson v. dunn prohibited terms of incarceration that extended beyond the adjournment of a session .

with respect to the arguments surrounding the fourth and fifth amendments , supporters asserted that the bill provided the protection of the judiciary , via a judicial trial , for the potential contumacious witnesses .

moreover , supporters argued that the bill removed such witnesses "from the passions and excitement of the hall — where partisans may frequently , in political questions , carry into the measures of punishment their party hostilities. .

the bill was ultimately passed by both the house and the senate .

according to one commentator , the bill was adopted for three reasons: [f]irst , to increase the power of either house of congress to punish for contempt in cases of contumacy of witnesses , ... second , to compel criminating testimony .

a third reason , although undoubtedly a minor one , was that the effect of the enactment of this legislation would be to remove the trial of cases of contempt of either house of congress from their respective bars to the courts , where passion and partisanship would not influence the decision against the prisoner and where he would have a trial by jury and all the other constitutional safeguards of court proceedings .

under 2 u.s.c .

§192 , a person who has been "summoned as a witness" by either house or a committee thereof to testify or to produce documents and who fails to do so , or who appears but refuses to respond to questions , is guilty of a misdemeanor , punishable by a fine of up to $100,000 and imprisonment for up to one year .

2 u.s.c .

§194 establishes the procedure to be followed by the house or senate if it chooses to refer a recalcitrant witness to the courts for criminal prosecution rather than try him at the bar of the house or senate .

under the procedure outlined in section 194 , "the following steps precede judicial proceedings under [the statute]: ( 1 ) approval by committee ; ( 2 ) calling up and reading the committee report on the floor ; ( 3 ) either ( if congress is in session ) house approval of a resolution authorizing the speaker to certify the report to the u.s. attorney for prosecution , or ( if congress is not in session ) an independent determination by the speaker to certify the report ; [and] ( 4 ) certification by the speaker to the appropriate u.s. attorney for prosecution. .

the criminal contempt statute and corresponding procedure are punitive in nature .

it is used when the house or senate wants to punish a recalcitrant witness and , by doing so , to deter others from similar contumacious conduct .

the criminal sanction is not coercive because the witness generally will not be able to purge himself by testifying or supplying subpoenaed documents after he has been voted in contempt by the committee and the house or senate .

consequently , once a witness has been voted in contempt , he lacks an incentive for cooperating with the committee .

however , although the courts have rejected arguments that defendants had purged themselves , in a few instances the house has certified to the u.s. attorney that further proceedings concerning contempts were not necessary where compliance with subpoenas occurred after contempt citations had been voted but before referral of the cases to grand juries .

under the statute , after a contempt has been certified by the president of the senate or the speaker , it is the "duty" of the united states attorney "to bring the matter before the grand jury for its action. .

it remains unclear whether the "duty" of the u.s. attorney to present the contempt to the grand jury is mandatory or discretionary .

the case law that is most relevant to the question provides conflicting guidance .

in ex parte frankfeld , the district court for the district of columbia granted petitions for writs of habeas corpus sought by two witnesses before the house committee on un - american activities .

the witnesses were charged with violating 2 u.s.c .

§192 , and were being held on a warrant based on the affidavit of a committee staff member .

the court ordered the witnesses released since the procedure , described as "mandatory" by the court , had not been followed .

the court , in dicta , not central to the holding of the case , observed that congress prescribed that when a committee such as this was confronted with an obdurate witness , a willful witness , perhaps , the committee would report the fact to the house , if it be a house committee , or to the senate , if it be a senate committee , and that the speaker of the house or the president of the senate should then certify the facts to the district attorney .

it seems quite apparent that congress intended to leave no measure of discretion to either the speaker of the house or the president of the senate , under such circumstances , but made the certification of facts to the district attorney a mandatory proceeding , and it left no discretion with the district attorney as to what he should do about it .

he is required , under the language of the statute , to submit the facts to the grand jury .

similarly , in united states v. united states house of representatives , a case that involved the applicability of the section 192 contempt procedure to an executive branch official , the same district court observed , again in dicta , that after the contempt citation is delivered to the u.s. attorney , he "is then required to bring the matter before the grand jury. .

conversely , in wilson v. united states , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit concluded , based in part on the legislative history of the contempt statute and congressional practice under the law , that the "duty" of the speaker when certifying contempt citations to the united states attorney during adjournments is a discretionary , not a mandatory , one .

the court reasoned that despite its mandatory language , the statute had been implemented in a manner that made clear congress's view that , when it is in session , a committee's contempt resolution can be referred to the u.s. attorney only after approval by the parent body .

when congress is not in session , review of a committee's contempt citation is provided by the speaker or president of the senate , rather than by the full house or senate .

this review of a committee's contempt citation , according to the court , may be inherently discretionary in nature , whereas the prosecutor is simply carrying out congress's directions in seeking a grand jury indictment .

in wilson , the defendants' convictions were reversed because the speaker had certified the contempt citations without exercising his discretion .

from this holding it may be possible to argue that because the statute uses similar language when discussing the speaker's "duty" and the "duty" of the u.s. attorney , that the u.s. attorney's function is discretionary as well , and not mandatory as other courts have concluded .

alternatively , despite the similarity in the statutory language , there is an argument that the functions of the speaker and the president of the senate are so different in nature under the statutory scheme from those of the u.s. attorney that to conclude that the function of the prosecutor was intended to be discretionary simply because that is the interpretation given to the function of the presiding officers is contrary to the understanding and intent of the 1857 congress that drafted the language .

nevertheless , it should be noted that the courts have generally afforded u.s .

attorneys broad prosecutorial discretion , even where a statute uses mandatory language .

prosecutorial discretion was the principal basis of the u.s. attorney's decision not to present the grand jury with the contempt citations of environmental protection agency administrator anne gorsuch burford in 1982 , former white house counsel harriet miers and white house chief of staff joshua bolten in 2008 , and attorney general eric holder in 2012 .

finally , while upholding the validity of 2 u.s.c .

§§192 and 194 , the courts have recognized that they are criminal provisions and have reversed convictions for contempt where limitations dictated by the language of the statute itself or the constitution have been exceeded .

where the use of inherent or criminal contempt is unavailable or unwarranted , congress may invoke the authority of the judicial branch in an effort to enforce a congressional subpoena .

civil enforcement entails a single house or committee of congress filing suit in federal district court seeking a declaration that the individual in question is legally obligated to comply with the congressional subpoena .

if the court finds that such an obligation exists and issues an order to that effect , continued non - compliance may result in contempt of court — as opposed to contempt of congress .

although the senate has existing statutory authority to pursue such an action , there is no corresponding provision applicable to the house .

however , the house has previously pursued civil enforcement pursuant to an authorizing resolution .

although the doj appears to have acknowledged that properly authorized procedures for seeking civil enforcement provide the preferred method of enforcing a subpoena directed against an executive branch official , the executive branch has consistently taken the position that congress cannot , as a matter of statutory or constitutional law , invoke either its inherent contempt authority or the criminal contempt of congress procedures against an executive branch official acting on instructions by the president to assert executive privilege in response to a congressional subpoena .

under such circumstances , the attorney general has previously directed the u.s. attorney to refrain from pursuing a criminal contempt prosecution under 2 u.s.c .

§§192 , 194 .

this view is most fully articulated in two opinions by the doj's office of legal counsel ( olc ) from the mid - 1980s , and further evidenced by actions taken by the doj in the burford , miers , and holder disputes , discussed below .

as a result , when an executive branch official is invoking executive privilege at the behest of the president , the criminal contempt provision may prove ineffective , forcing congress to rely on other avenues to enforce subpoenas , including civil enforcement through the federal courts .

the supreme court has observed that "congress , in common with all branches of the government , must exercise its powers subject to the limitations placed by the constitution on governmental action , more particularly in the context of this case , the relevant limitations of the bill of rights. .

there are constitutional limits not only on congress's legislative powers , but also on its investigative powers .

although the first amendment , by its terms , is expressly applicable only to legislation that abridges freedom of speech , press , or assembly , the court has held that the amendment also restricts congress in conducting investigations .

in the leading case involving the application of first amendment rights in a congressional investigation , barenblatt v. united states , the court held that "where first amendment rights are asserted to bar government interrogation resolution of the issue always involves a balancing by the courts of the competing private and public interests at stake in the particular circumstances shown. .

thus , unlike the fifth amendment privilege against self - incrimination , the first amendment does not give a witness an absolute right to refuse to respond to congressional demands for information .

the court has held that in balancing the personal interest in privacy against the congressional need for information , "the critical element is the existence of , and the weight to be ascribed to , the interest of the congress in demanding disclosure from an unwilling witness. .

to protect the rights of witnesses , in cases involving the first amendment , the courts have emphasized the requirements discussed above concerning authorization for the investigation , delegation of power to investigate to the committee involved , and the existence of a legislative purpose .

while the court has recognized the application of the first amendment to congressional investigations , and although the amendment has frequently been asserted by witnesses as grounds for not complying with congressional demands for information , the court has never relied on the first amendment as grounds for reversing a criminal contempt of congress conviction .

however , the court has narrowly construed the scope of a committee's authority so as to avoid reaching a first amendment issue .

in addition , the court has ruled in favor of a witness who invoked his first amendment rights in response to questioning by a state legislative committee .

in a 1976 investigation of the unauthorized publication in the press of the report of the house select committee on intelligence , the committee on standards of official conduct subpoenaed four news media representatives , including daniel schorr .

the standards of official conduct committee concluded that mr. schorr had obtained a copy of the select committee's report and had made it available for publication .

although the ethics committee found that "mr. schorr's role in publishing the report was a defiant act in disregard of the expressed will of the house of representatives to preclude publication of highly classified national security information," it declined to cite him for contempt for his refusal to disclose his source .

the desire to avoid a clash over first amendment rights apparently was a major factor in the committee's decision on the contempt matter .

in another first amendment dispute , the special subcommittee on investigations of the house committee on interstate and foreign commerce , in the course of its probe of allegations that deceptive editing practices were employed in the production of the television news documentary program the selling of the pentagon , subpoenaed frank stanton , the president of cbs , directing him to deliver to the subcommittee the "outtakes" relating to the program .

when , on first amendment grounds , stanton declined to provide the subpoenaed materials , the subcommittee unanimously voted a contempt citation , and the full committee by a vote of 25-13 recommended to the house that stanton be held in contempt .

after extensive debate , the house failed to adopt the committee report , voting instead to recommit the matter to the committee .

during the debate , several members expressed concern that approval of the contempt citation would have a "chilling effect" on the press and would unconstitutionally involve the government in the regulation of the press .

in a more recent case , carl ferrer , the chief executive officer of backpage.com , an online website for classified ads , refused on first amendment grounds to comply with a subpoena issued by the permanent subcommittee on investigations of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

the subcommittee had requested documents concerning backpage.com's screening practices against internet sex trafficking .

following mr. ferrer's refusal to provide the requested documents , the senate sued to enforce the subpoena in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

before the court , mr. ferrer argued that the subpoena violated the first amendment because it constituted an abuse of the investigative process ; it was part of a "sustained , coordinated , and targeted campaign" to punish protected speech ; and it was an "overly broad and unduly burdensome" measure that produced a chilling effect on speech .

the district court rejected mr. ferrer's arguments .

the court determined that mr. ferrer "[did] not possess an absolute right to be free from government investigation when there are valid justifications for the inquiry," and that he failed to show , beyond conclusory allegations , that the subpoena intruded into his first amendment rights .

in this respect , the court concluded that enforcement of the subpoena did not directly regulate the content of any protected speech because it only requested information on backpage.com's efforts to screen out sex trafficking from commercial advertisements on its website .

under these circumstances , the court explained , merely searching for the requested documents had no "impermissible chilling effect" on protected speech .

the court noted , moreover , that "[u]nderstanding the magnitude of internet sex trafficking and how to stop it substantially outweigh[ed] mr. ferrer's undefined interests. .

the court thus determined that the subpoena served a valid legislative purpose that did not simply seek to punish backpage.com .

finally , the court stated that , while producing documents in response to the subpoena entailed some burden , "[t]here is nothing unusual , unreasonable , or overly broad about requiring a party to search for all responsive documents on a specific subject or topic," particularly where the requested information is relevant to a stated legislative purpose .

accordingly , the court granted the subcommittee's application to enforce the subpoena duces tecum .

although the first amendment may limit the manner in which congress may exercise its investigatory authority , this limitation is not absolute .

the courts will likely balance a person's right to protected speech against congress's inherent constitutional authority to obtain information relevant to an investigation .

and when congress uses its investigatory function to advance a valid governmental interest , a person's private interests may be outweighed by the public interest in securing that information .

several opinions of the supreme court indicate that the fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures is applicable to congressional committees ; however , there has not been an opinion directly addressing the issue .

it appears that there must be a legitimate legislative or oversight - related basis for the issuance of a congressional subpoena .

the fourth amendment protects a congressional witness against a subpoena which is unreasonably broad or burdensome .

the court has outlined the standard to be used in judging the reasonableness of a congressional subpoena: petitioner contends that the subpoena was so broad as to constitute an unreasonable search and seizure in violation of the fourth amendment.... 'adequacy or excess in the breath of the subpoena are matters variable in relation to the nature , purposes , and scope of the inquiry'... .

the subcommittee' s inquiry here was a relative1y broad one ... and the permissible scope of materials that could reasonably be sought was necessarily equally broad .

it was not reasonable to suppose that the subcommittee knew precisely what books and records were kept by the civil rights congress , and therefore the subpoena could only ' specify ... with reasonable particularity , the subjects to which the documents ... relate.... 'the call of the subpoena for 'all records , correspondence and memoranda' of the civil rights congress relating to the specified subject describes them 'with all of the particularity the nature of the inquiry and the [subcommittee's] situation would permit.... 'the description contained in the subpoena was sufficient to enable [petitioner] to know what particular documents were required and to select them adequately .

if a witness has a legal objection to a subpoena duces tecum or is for some reason unable to comply with a demand for documents , he must give the grounds for his non - compliance upon the return of the subpoena .

as the d.c .

circuit stated: if [the witness] felt he could refuse compliance because he considered the subpoena so broad as to constitute an unreasonable search and seizure within the prohibition of the fourth amendment , then to avoid contempt for complete noncompliance he was under [an] obligation to inform the subcommittee of his position .

the subcommittee would then have had the choice of adhering to the subpoena as formulated or of meeting the objection in light of any pertinent representations made by [the witness] .

similarly , if a subpoenaed party is in doubt as to what records are required by a subpoena or believes that it calls for documents not related to the investigation , he must inform the committee .

where a witness is unable to produce documents he will not be held in contempt "unless he is responsible for their unavailability ... or is impeding justice by not explaining what happened to them. .

the application of the exclusionary rule to congressional committee investigation is in some doubt and appears to depend on the precise facts of the situation .

it seems that documents which were unlawfully seized at the direction of a congressional investigating committee may not be admitted into evidence in a subsequent unrelated criminal prosecution because of the command of the exclusionary rule .

in the absence of a supreme court ruling , it remains unclear whether the exclusionary rule bars the admission into evidence in a contempt prosecution of a congressional subpoena which was issued on the basis of documents obtained by the committee following their unlawful seizure by another investigating body ( such as a state prosecutor ) .

despite the provision's express application to "criminal case[s]" the supreme court has indicated that the privilege against self - incrimination afforded by the fifth amendment to be available to a witness appearing before a congressional committee .

the privilege is personal in nature , and may not be invoked on behalf of a corporation , small partnership , labor union , or other "artificial" organizations .

the privilege protects a witness against being compelled to testify but generally not against a subpoena for existing documentary evidence .

however , where compliance with a subpoena duces tecum would constitute implicit testimonial authentication of the documents produced , the privilege may apply .

there is no required verbal formula for invoking the privilege ; nor does there appear to be necessary a warning by the committee .

a committee should recognize any reasonable indication , such as "the fifth amendment," that the witness is asserting his privilege .

where a committee is uncertain whether the witness is in fact invoking the privilege against self - incrimination or is claiming some other basis for declining to answer , the committee should direct the witness to specify his privilege or objection .

the committee can review the assertion of the privilege by a witness to determine its validity , but the witness is not required to articulate the precise hazard that he fears .

in regard to the assertion of the privilege in judicial proceedings , the supreme court has advised: to sustain the privilege , it need only be evident , from the implications of the question , in the setting in which it is asked , that a responsive answer to the question or an explanation of why it cannot be answered might be dangerous because injurious disclosure could result.... to reject a claim , it should be 'perfectly clear , from a careful consideration of all the circumstances of the case , that the witness is mistaken , and that the answers cannot possibly have a tendency' to incriminate .

the basis for asserting the privilege was elaborated upon in a lower court decision: the privilege may only be asserted when there is reasonable apprehension on the part of the witness that his answer would furnish some evidence upon which he could be convicted of a criminal offense ... or which would reveal sources from which evidence could be obtained that would lead to such conviction or to prosecution therefore ... .once it has become apparent that the answers to a question would expose a witness to the danger of conviction or prosecution , wider latitude is permitted the witness in refusing to answer other questions .

the privilege against self - incrimination may be waived by declining to assert it , specifically disclaiming it , or testifying on the same matters as to which the privilege is later asserted .

however , because of the importance of the privilege , a court will not construe an ambiguous statement of a witness before a committee as a waiver .

where a witness asserts the privilege , the full house or the committee conducting the investigation may seek a court order which ( a ) directs the witness to testify and ( b ) grants him immunity against the use of his testimony , or other evidence derived from his testimony , in a subsequent criminal prosecution .

the immunity that is granted is "use" immunity , not "transactional" immunity .

neither the immunized testimony that the witness gives , nor evidence derived therefrom , may be used against him in a subsequent criminal prosecution , except one for perjury or contempt relating to his testimony .

however , he may be convicted of the crime ( the "transaction" ) on the basis of other evidence .

the application for the judicial immunity order must be approved by a majority of the house or senate or by a two - thirds vote of the full committee seeking the order .

the attorney general must be notified at least ten days prior to the request for the order , and he can request a delay of twenty days in issuing the order .

although the order to testify may be issued before the witness's appearance , it does not become legally effective until the witness has been asked the question , invoked his privilege , and been presented with the court order .

the role of the court in issuing the order has been held to be ministerial and , thus , if the procedural requirements under the immunity statute have been met , the court may not refuse to issue the order or impose conditions on the grant of immunity .

in practice , there have been two recent occasions that a person subject to a congressional subpoena invoked the fifth amendment privilege .

as discussed in the preceding section regarding the enforcement of criminal contempt resolutions against executive branch officials , former irs director of exempt organizations lois lerner , in 2013 , invoked her fifth amendment privilege in response to a subpoena requesting her testimony on the agency's policy of targeting conservative political groups .

the house committee on oversight and government reform , which had issued the subpoena , determined that ms. lerner waived the privilege when she made an opening statement denying her involvement in any unlawful activity .

ultimately , after the house had voted to adopt the committee's contempt resolution , the doj declined to pursue a criminal contempt charge against ms. lerner because , in the agency's view , the fifth amendment would have foreclosed a successful prosecution against her .

not long after the lerner case , in 2015 , the house committee on oversight and government reform investigated former secretary of state hillary clinton's use of a private email server to conduct government business during her tenure at the state department .

the committee requested the testimony of bryan pagliano , a former senior advisor in the bureau of information resource management at the state department , who helped set up and maintain secretary clinton's private server .

after mr. pagliano , through counsel , invoked his fifth amendment privilege , committee chairman jason chaffetz issued a subpoena compelling him to appear before the committee on september 13 , 2016 .

citing his fifth amendment privilege , mr. pagliano refused to testify before the committee and did not appear at the hearing .

chairman chaffetz subsequently issued another subpoena compelling mr. pagliano's appearance on september 22 , 2016 .

mr. pagliano again refused to appear at the hearing .

on september 27 , 2016 , after finding that mr. pagliano "willfully failed to comply with a duly issued subpoena," the committee voted 19-15 for a resolution recommending that the house find mr. pagliano in contempt of congress .

the members of the committee who opposed the resolution argued that "no legitimate legislative purpose" would be served by forcing mr. pagliano to appear before the committee and invoke his fifth amendment privilege , when he had previously asserted that right in separate investigations and there was no credible expectation that he would waive it before the committee or that the chairman would seek immunity for mr. pagliano .

the house has not yet voted to adopt the resolution , but chairman chaffetz sent a letter to attorney general jeff sessions on february 16 , 2017 , requesting the doj to "bring the matter before a grand jury for its action or file an information charging pagliano with violating" the criminal contempt provision .

finally , another recent case demonstrates how congress's immunity power could be used to eliminate a fifth amendment privilege to refuse to comply with a subpoena .

following the 2016 presidential election , congress began to investigate allegations that russia influenced the outcome of the election .

on february 13 , 2017 , michael flynn , who was serving as president trump's national security advisor , resigned after revelations that he had failed to inform the vice president and other white house officials that he had particular discussions with the russian ambassador to the united states shortly after the election .

in march 2017 , mr. flynn reportedly offered to provide testimony to house and senate investigators in exchange for immunity from prosecution .

for the time being , congress has not entered into an immunity deal with mr. flynn .

however , on may 10 , 2017 , the senate select committee on intelligence issued a subpoena requesting that mr. flynn provide documents related to the panel's inquiry into alleged russian meddling in the election .

if congress decides to seek immunity , mr. flynn may be compelled to produce those documents and any requested testimony , and mr. flynn would not be able to invoke his fifth amendment privilege .

the due process clause of the fifth amendment requires that "the pertinency of the interrogation to the topic under the ... committee's inquiry must be brought home to the witness at the time the questions are put to him. .

"unless the subject matter has been made to appear with undisputable clarity , it is the duty of the investigative body , upon objection of the witness on grounds of pertinency , to state for the record the subject under inquiry at that time and the manner in which the propounded questions are pertinent thereto. .

additionally , to satisfy both the requirement of due process as well as the statutory requirement that a refusal to answer be "willful," a witness should be informed of the committee's ruling on any objections he raises or privileges which he asserts .

the tables below contain information on contempt resolutions in the house and senate and civil enforcement resolutions in the senate since 1980 .

the tables include contextual information such as the individuals or organizations charged , the recommending committee , resolution number , and roll call votes related to various actions .

summarized descriptions of the allegations and committee actions are derived from the identified house or senate report .

crs has attempted to make the table as comprehensive as possible ; however , some relevant citations may not have been identified by crs's searches .

