while farm commodity issues may occupy center stage in policy discussions of the periodic omnibus farm bills , rural community and economic development are also topics of congressional concern and a separate title within the farm bill .

since 1973 , omnibus farm bills have included a rural development title .

the most recent is title vi of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

positioning rural areas to better compete in a global economic environment is one of the key issues framing the current debate about the future of rural america .

when agricultural production and related businesses dominated rural economies , policies that strengthened and improved agriculture tended to strengthen and improve the well - being of most of america's small communities and rural residents .

as the strength of this linkage has declined , the need for new sources of rural economic development has become more apparent to policymakers and rural development practitioners .

congressional interest in rural policy encompasses a wide range of issues , including agriculture , forestry , and mining , community infrastructure , natural resource conservation and management , medical care , bioenergy and economic development .

current challenges to and reform of existing federal rural policies are evolving in an environment of increasing concern about economic competitiveness , a shift away from agriculture toward manufacturing and services , new federal political strategies , and the emergence of new political interests in farm bill deliberations .

a changing rural america is also producing pressures for different policies and raising new questions about what congress's role should be in shaping rural policy .

both agriculture and manufacturing issues are increasingly seen as elements of global and regional restructuring , which have significant implications for rural areas , especially those areas where these production sectors remain dominant .

today , nearly 90% of total farm household income comes from off - farm sources .

manufacturing now accounts for about 25% of rural private sector earnings and about 12% of all rural jobs .

the service sector , as with the u.s. domestic economy as a whole , now dominates the rural labor market , although the rural service sector differs from the metropolitan service sector in terms of job categories , skills , and wages .

the rural development title of farm bills generally supports ( 1 ) the infrastructure of rural areas , with traditional assistance for housing , electrical generation and transmission , water and wastewater , and community capacity , ( 2 ) agricultural development , and ( 3 ) rural business creation and expansion .

more recently , policymakers have pushed for programs that support innovative and alternative business development , and innovative mechanisms to finance it .

pressure for such alternative approaches is expected to continue as policymakers recognize the changing structure of agriculture and the great diversity among rural communities , with some rural areas growing and prospering , and others falling further behind as their primary industries ( including agriculture ) either decline or adapt to a global economy .

such adaptation and dislocation over the past decade has often meant fewer rural employment opportunities and significant population outmigration for many rural communities .

to emphasize the importance of agricultural production in the local economies that still characterize many rural areas , legislative support for technologies to help farmers with planting decisions and local investments in industries that will add value to their products have become important aspects of rural development policy .

research is also increasingly focused on improvements in agricultural waste management and environmental protections .

traditional strategies , notably value - added agriculture ( eg , regional food processing plants , cooperatives , organic farming , biofuels ) are being promoted by many in the farm sector .

while holding promise for agriculture and surrounding communities , there remain limits on the extent to which agriculture and other mature industries can become a significant engine for renewed rural economic prosperity .

while commodity policy dominates much of the debate and most of the funding , production agriculture remains a comparatively small and shrinking part of the rural economy , with less than 8% of the rural population employed in agriculture .

there is growing recognition that farmers in many rural areas depend more on a healthy rural economy than the rural economy is dependent on farmers for its vitality .

the need to strengthen the capacity of rural areas more generally to compete in a global economy is becoming more widely appreciated as the limitations of commodity subsidies , peripheral manufacturing , and physical infrastructure as mainstays of rural development policy become more obvious .

emerging policy issues surround the question of whether current farm policies , which rely heavily on commodity support payments and subsidies to a few production sectors , help , hinder , or have little impact on the future development of economically viable rural communities .

rural manufacturing , which tends to be lower - skilled and lower - waged , is also undergoing restructuring with the loss of manufacturing to foreign competition .

while transformation to a service economy continues in rural america , service employment in many rural areas tends to be in lower - wage personal services rather than business and producer services .

continuing population and economic decline in many farming and rural areas is compelling policymakers and rural areas to create new sources of competitive advantage , innovative ways of providing public services to sparse populations , and new ways of integrating agriculture into changing rural economies .

more recently , economic development efforts in some areas have targeted various entrepreneurial strategies and microenterprise development .

these approaches attempt to capitalize on a particular area's distinctive social , economic , and environmental assets and advantages to build endogenously on existing local and regional strengths .

developing a local and regional entrepreneurial culture seems to be an important approach in these efforts' successes .

linking public and private sources to build "business incubators" is a common strategy , as is developing new commercial ties with area colleges and universities .

communities are also applying such entrepreneurial energy to making their local governments , schools , and hospitals more efficient through , for example , telecommunication innovations .

the trends noted above suggest a range of issues that are important in shaping the provisions of the rural development title of the 2008: conservation and environmental restoration as rural employment opportunities ; stemming rural population out - migration ; vertical integration and coordination of agriculture into supply networks and their implication for rural areas ; developing rural entrepreneurial capacity ; rebuilding an aging rural physical infrastructure ; public service delivery innovations in sparsely populated areas ; increasing suburbanization and the conflicts between agriculture and suburban development ; human capital deficiencies in rural areas ; regional - based efforts for economic development .

connecting businesses and rural communities with broadband telecommunications infrastructure the rural development title of the 2008 farm bill has taken shape against this backdrop of shifts in the rural economy , widespread and long - term poverty in some rural areas , outmigration in other rural areas , dwindling economic opportunity in rural areas , gaps in critical infrastructure , and a growing appreciation in many quarters of the limits of existing rural development programs to respond to the great diversity of rural places and socioeconomic circumstances .

such issues give rise to several policy relevant questions .

how effective are current federal programs in improving the competitive position of rural areas ? .

can broad - based federal rural programs be better targeted to the critical needs of particular rural areas ? .

how might regional funding approaches be better integrated into federal policy for rural areas ? .

how can federal policies better assist entrepreneurial efforts in rural communities ? .

how might the biofuels emphasis in the upcoming farm bill be connected to rural development programs ? .

more than 88 programs administered by 16 different federal agencies target rural economic development .

the rural development policy act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-355 ) , however , named usda as the lead federal agency for rural development .

usda administers most of the existing rural development programs and has the highest average of program funds going directly to rural counties ( approximately 50% ) .

three agencies are responsible for usda's rural development mission area: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) .

an office of community development provides community development support through rural development's field offices .

it is important to note that most loan and grant programs administered by usda rural development are funded through annual ( discretionary ) appropriations .

the rural development title of omnibus farm bills does not address every program administered by the three usda mission agencies .

many of these programs are "permanently" authorized , often through amendments to the consolidated farm and rural development act of 1972 ( the conact , p.l .

87-128 ) or the rural electrification act of 1936 and are funded through annual appropriations .

the 1996 farm bill ( p.l .

104-127 ) authorized the first provision in the rural development title funded by mandatory spending , the fund for rural america , which expired in 2002 .

the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) authorized six new programs supported through mandatory spending .

mandatory funding for most of these programs , however , was largely blocked by appropriators between 2002 and 2007 .

several of the programs were funded instead through discretionary appropriations , although in amounts less than the original authorization .

the 2008 farm bill has several provisions supported by mandatory spending , although in lesser amounts than were proposed in the house and senate - passed versions of the farm bill .

several programs authorized in the 2002 farm bill are reauthorized in the two bills .

the appendix provides a complete side - by - side comparison of current law with the provisions in the house and senate bills and the enacted bill .

unlike the 2002 farm bill , the rural development provisions of p.l .

110-246 contain only three programs with mandatory funding: value - added product grants ( $15 million ) ; the microenterprise assistance program ( $15 million ) ; and a one - time funding of pending water and waste water projects ( $120 million ) .

several programs that were authorized to receive mandatory funding in the 2002 farm bill were reauthorized in p.l .

110-246 with discretionary funding ( eg , the rural strategic investment program and the rural firefighters and emergency medical personnel program ) .

concerns about how effectively usda targets its rural development loan and grant assistance have been a recurring consideration by policymakers and rural development practitioners .

the general concern is that rural development funding may not be targeted to the neediest rural communities because of the way rural is defined .

section 6018 directs the secretary to assess the varying definitions of "rural" used by usda and to describe the effects these different definitions have on usda rural development programs .

the provision directs the secretary to make recommendations for ways to better target rural development funds .

section 6018 further establishes a new definition of "areas rural in character" that specifies the characteristics of eligible rural areas lying within a bureau of the census - defined "urban area. .

the provision also permits the under secretary for rural development discretion in determining whether individual rural areas should fall under the new definition .

other new provisions in the rural development title include the following programs .

section 6015 authorizes loans and loan guarantees for locally or regionally produced agricultural food products — those products that travel less than 400 miles between production and marketing .

priority is given to projects benefitting underserved communities , i.e. , those with limited access to affordable , healthy foods and with high rates of poverty or food insecurity .

section 6022 authorizes a rural microentrepreneur assistance program .

the program will provide financial assistance to microenterprises ( sole proprietorships or businesses with fewer than 10 full - time employees ) .

the program will target economically disadvantaged microentrepreneurs , i.e. , those who could compete in the private sector but have been impaired because of lack of credit opportunities and limited equity capital options .

grants will be provided to microenterprise development organizations to support the development of entrepreneurial activities in rural areas .

these qualified organizations are required to match at least 15% of the federal grant .

mandatory funding is authorized at $4 million annually for fy2009-fy2011 , $3 million for fy2012 , and discretionary spending at $40 million annually ( fy2009-fy2012 ) .

sections 6301-6305 establish the housing assistance council authorization act .

this authorizes $10 million annually ( fy2009-fy2011 ) for the department of housing and urban development to provide financial assistance to the housing assistance council ( hac ) to assist community - based housing development organizations in undertaking community development and affordable housing projects in rural areas .

the hac is an independent , nonprofit organization that has supported local organizations in rural housing development since 1971 .

section 6028 authorizes a rural collaborative business investment program and provides $135 million in spending .

the provision would create regional investment strategy grants , rural innovation grants , and a rural endowment loan program .

the provision also directs the secretary to appoint a national rural investment board , create a rural philanthropic institute , and a national institute on regional rural competitiveness and entrepreneurship .

the program would provide rural regions with a financial vehicle to develop and implement local strategies for innovation .

in addition to these newly authorized programs , the rural development title also includes other provisions to create or to reauthorize and / or amend a wide variety of loan and grant programs that provide further assistance in four key areas: ( 1 ) broadband and telecommunications , ( 2 ) rural utilities infrastructure , ( 3 ) business and community development , and ( 4 ) regional development .

section 6110 reauthorizes the access to broadband telecommunications services in rural areas .

the program was originally authorized in the 2002 farm bill ( section 6103 ) and funded by mandatory authorization .

its effectiveness , however , was limited by difficulties in implementation .

the provision makes changes in defining eligible rural communities , makes provisions for prioritizing loans , and reduces equity requirement on broadband providers offering service to unserved areas .

appropriations are authorized at $25 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) .

the provision also requires annual reporting on the extent of participation in the loan and loan guarantee program .

the measure further authorizes the secretary to designate a national center for rural telecommunications assessment and authorizes discretionary funding for the center at $1 million annually ( section 6111 ) .

section 6201 reauthorizes the distance learning and telemedicine loan and grant program , which provides funding to educational and medical facilities .

the provision will also emphasize library connectivity as an objective of program funding .

section 6112 authorizes a comprehensive rural broadband strategy .

the provision directs the secretary of agriculture to develop a comprehensive strategy for enhancing broadband service to rural areas .

section 6001 reauthorizes water , waste disposal and wastewater facility grants through 2012 .

discretionary funding is provided under the utilities account of rural community advancement program ( rcap ) .

this is the largest program in the rcap portfolio .

section 6011 amends the current interest rate schedule for water and waste water loans by setting rates to a proportion of a municipal bond index .

 .

section 6006 reauthorizes the rural water and wastewater circuit rider program , which provides technical assistance to rural water systems .

funding is authorized at $25 million annually ( fy2008-2012 ) .

section 6008 reauthorizes the emergency and imminent community water assistance grant program , which provides funding to rural communities facing threats to the provision of potable water .

it is also funded under the utilities account of rcap .

section 6009 reauthorizes water systems for rural and native villages in alaska .

this provision targets funding under the utilities account of rcap for alaskan native communities .

section 6008 reauthorizes grants to nonprofit organizations for the construction and refurbishing of household well water systems .

the program targets well systems for low - income individuals in rural areas .

section 6029 provides $120 million in mandatory funding for pending water and wastewater loan and grant applications .

this would be a one - time expenditure designed to remove some of the current backlog of applications .

section 6003 reauthorize rural business opportunity grants , which are used for economic planning and technical support and training for rural businesses .

section 6007 reauthorize tribal college and university essential community facilities through 2012 .

this program targets funding under the community facilities program , an rcap account , to tribal facilities .

essential facilities include those that support public safety infrastructure and provide community health care .

section 6013 reauthorizes rural cooperative development grants .

this provision permits multi - year grants ( up to three years ) for awards to rural cooperative centers .

it provides a 20% set - aside for rural centers working with socially disadvantaged communities when the appropriation level exceeds $7.5 million .

section 6016 reauthorizes the appropriate technology transfer for rural areas program ( attra ) .

the program supports a cooperative agreement between the rural business - cooperative service and the university of arkansas to provide information and technical support for sustainable and organic agricultural production .

authorize $5 million annually .

section 6204 reauthorizes the rural firefighters and emergency medical service assistance program .

originally authorized by the 2002 farm bill , the measure provides grants to enable entities to provide improved emergency medical assistance in rural areas .

it also provides grants to pay the cost of training emergency personnel to respond to hazardous materials and bioagents in rural areas .

unlike the 2002 farm bill , which provided mandatory funding , the provision is authorized for discretionary funding up to $30 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) .

section 6202 reauthorizes the value - added agricultural market development program .

this provision targets funding for "mid - tier value chains" which are local and regional supply networks linking independent producers with businesses and cooperatives .

it also reserves 10% of the value - added products grants for projects benefitting beginning or socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers .

mandatory funding is authorized at $15 million to be available until expended .

an additional $40 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) in discretionary funding is also authorized .

the measure also prioritizes loans that contribute to opportunities for beginning farmers and ranchers , socially disadvantaged farmers or ranchers , and small and medium - size family farms .

other provisions include $2 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) in grants to nonprofit organizations for expansion of employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities in rural areas ( section 6023 ) .

section 6027 reauthorizes the rural business investment program through 2012 .

this program was authorized in the 2002 farm bill and given mandatory spending .

the reauthorization provides a total of $50 million .

section 6025 reauthorizes the delta regional authority , a federal - state partnership serving a 240-county / parish area in an eight - state region of the mississippi delta .

section 6024 authorizes $3 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) for grants to support health care services , health education programs , health care job training programs , and development and expansion of public health - related facilities in the delta region .

section 6026 reauthorizes the northern great plains regional authority ( ngpra ) , which covers iowa , north and south dakota , minnesota , and nebraska .

the provision authorizes the ngpra to organize and operate without a federal member if no such individual is nominated within 180 days of enacting the bill .

the provision also eliminates prioritization of activities to be funded by the program and the requirement that 75% of the authority's funding go to "distressed counties and isolated areas. .

section 6206 directs the secretary of agriculture , in coordination with the secretary of transportation , to conduct a study of rural transportation issues regarding the movement of agricultural products , renewable fuels , and economic development in rural america .

while not a provision of title vi , section 14217 authorizes the creation of three new regional economic development and infrastructure commissions: ( 1 ) the northern border regional commission ; ( 2 ) the southeast crescent regional commission ; and ( 3 ) the southwest border regional commission .

funding is authorized at $30 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) for each commission .

