there is a broad agreement in the scientific community that the earth's climate is changing and that the primary cause over the past few decades is an increasing concentration of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) in the atmosphere .

most climate scientists have concluded that human activities — eg , fossil fuel combustion , land clearing , and industrial and agricultural operations — have played a central role in climate change , particularly in recent decades .

a variety of efforts that seek to address climate change are currently underway or being developed on the international , national , and sub - national level ( eg , individual state actions or regional partnerships ) .

these efforts cover a wide spectrum , from research initiatives to ghg emission reduction regimes .

if congress establishes a federal program to manage or reduce ghg emissions , the emission requirements would likely impact different states differently .

however , predicting the different impacts of policies is a complicated task , because multiple factors play a role .

such factors include alternative design elements of a ghg emissions reduction program , the availability and relative cost of mitigation options , and the regulated entities' abilities to pass compliance costs on to consumers .

underlying climate change policy discussions are ghg emissions and the factors that determine their levels and growth .

one of the primary factors is ghg emissions intensity .

in this report , ghg emissions intensity is a measure of ghg emissions from state sources divided by the state's overall economic output , or gross state product .

because carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) is the primary ghg in the vast majority of states , the report focuses on co 2 emissions intensity and its determining factors .

these factors vary significantly across state lines .

an analysis of these factors and how they compare among the states may contribute to a more informed debate regarding potential policy approaches .

three broad factors influence ghg emission levels in a nation or state: population , per capita income , and ghg emissions intensity of the economy .

a state's ghg emission levels can be approximated by multiplying together these three variables .

equation 1 expresses this relationship: the equation indicates that each of the variables can play a significant role in shaping a state's ghg emissions .

for instance , if one of these variables increases , while the other two remain constant , ghg emissions will increase .

the three emissions drivers do not operate independently of one another: a change in one variable may influence another variable .

the three variables — population , per capita income , and ghg emissions intensity — differ substantially among the states and play varying roles when determining a state's ghg emissions .

table 1 shows this relationship for the 10 u.s. states with the highest ghg emission levels in 2003 .

these 10 states accounted for almost 50% of total u.s. ghg emissions in 2003 .

a similar table for all 50 states is included in the appendix to this report .

table 1 provides a snapshot of information .

annual changes ( or growth rates , which can be either positive or negative ) in the ghg emission drivers will influence whether ghg emissions rise or fall .

in order to reduce emissions , the sum of the three variable rates — population , income , and intensity — must be negative .

to put this goal in perspective , consider the annual average rates of change for the united states between 1990 and 2000 ( table 2 ) : table 2 reveals that the growth rates were positive for both u.s. population and per capita income during the 1990s .

although ghg intensity decreased during that time period , the decline was not enough to offset the increases from the other two variables , and ghg emission levels increased by 1.4% annually .

annual growth rates for ghg emissions and the emission drivers vary significantly among the u.s. states .

the appendix contains a table listing the growth rates for all 50 states .

in some states , ghg intensity declines were well above average declines , but these annual reductions were offset by increases in population , per capita income , or a combination of the two .

of the three ghg emission drivers — population , per capita income , and ghg emissions intensity — the most relevant in terms of climate change policy is ghg intensity .

decreases in population and / or per capita income would contribute to lowering a state's ghg emissions .

however , growth in population and personal income is generally considered a positive social outcome , and policies that would seek to directly limit these emissions drivers are essentially outside the bounds of public policy .

ghg intensity is a simple measure of ghg emissions per unit of output .

although most ghg reduction regimes address actual emissions , the national target in the united states — as announced by the bush administration — aims to reduce the ghg emissions intensity of the national economy .

in 2002 , the bush administration set a voluntary target of reducing the ratio of u.s. ghg emissions to the u.s .

gross domestic product ( gdp ) by 18% by 2012 .

according to the administration , meeting this target would reduce intensity beyond that of intensity reductions expected under a business - as - usual scenario .

based on data available in 2002 , ghg emissions intensity was projected to decline by 14% under a business - as - usual scenario .

critics of the administration's intensity target have pointed out that ( 1 ) the intensity target is more precisely quantified at 17.5% ; and ( 2 ) more recent data indicate that the u.s. intensity declined by 16.2% between 1990 and 2002 .

thus , some observers have described the effect of the intensity target as "negligible. .

intensity targets are sometimes viewed with skepticism , because the intensity target proponents may imprecisely describe ( or overstate ) how reductions in emissions intensity would affect actual emission levels .

for example , the administration has stated that meeting the u.s. emissions intensity target would lead to ghg emission reductions .

arguably , such a description can be misleading , because the reductions would occur within the context of increasing u.s. emissions .

in other words , u.s. emissions would continue to increase , but if the intensity target is met , the emissions increase would be less than business - as - usual .

moreover , there is some uncertainty as to whether the "reductions" will be achieved at all .

the administration's projected reductions are based on gdp forecasts .

if the gdp increases at higher than projected rates , absolute emissions can increase beyond business - as - usual scenario , while still meeting the intensity target .

although some have questioned the environmental efficacy of intensity targets ( i.e. , their ability to lower ghgs ) , the effectiveness of an emissions target depends primarily on its stringency , not whether it applies to emissions intensity or absolute emissions .

meeting an aggressive intensity target can result in actual emission reductions , if the intensity decrease outpaces the combined increases in population and per capita income .

in fact , if the united states is to reduce its emissions , while maintaining population and per capita income growth rates , a stringent reduction in ghg emissions intensity would be required .

approximately 98% of the u.s. co 2 emissions in 2003 were from energy use .

the primary factors that determine co 2 emissions intensity in a state are its energy intensity and the carbon content of its energy use ( or fuel mix ) .

the relationship between co 2 emissions intensity , energy intensity and carbon content of energy use is shown in equation 2 .

as noted above , the states have , in some cases , vastly different levels of ghg emissions intensity and related underlying variables .

if congress were to enact a federal ghg emissions reduction program , these differences may lead to a wide range of impacts in the states .

the range of impacts would depend on the logistics of the emissions reduction program and the ability of regulated entities to spread compliance costs .

if congress creates a mandatory ghg emissions reduction regime , the program would assign ( directly or indirectly ) a cost to emissions of carbon ( or carbon - equivalents in the case of some ghgs ) .

the stringency , scope , and design of the reduction regime would play a large role in determining costs and how the costs are distributed .

for instance , congress could include specific provisions — eg , a safety - valve or revenue recycling — that would control costs or ease the burden on particular groups .

regardless of how congress might design a ghg reduction program , a mandatory ghg reduction regime would affect states differently .

in particular , the states' different energy intensities and carbon content of energy use indicate the states would experience different effects .

states with relatively high levels of carbon content in their energy use ( table 7 ) would likely see higher energy prices .

these states typically use a high percentage of coal to generate electricity , thus electricity prices would likely increase in these states .

the consumers' responses to these price increases would help determine impacts .

consumers may choose to conserve energy use or switch to alternative sources .

the carbon price imposed by the emission reduction regime would provide incentives to switch from high - carbon to low - carbon fuel ( eg , from coal to natural gas ) .

however , such a switch may be limited by the technology and infrastructure existing in a state , particularly in the electricity generation sector .

conventional coal - fired power plants in operation today , which account for approximately 50% of all electricity generation , cannot simply switch to another fuel source .

the producers of coal - fired electricity may be able to pass along the additional carbon costs to consumers , but some state regulations may hinder a company's ability to include the additional costs in electricity prices .

differences in the states' regulatory structures may influence which groups ultimately pay for the additional carbon costs .

in states with tighter regulatory control over prices , power companies may bear a relatively higher cost ; in other states , consumers of electricity may bear a higher percentage of the costs , where companies are less constrained in passing costs along to customers in the form of higher prices .

depending on particular design elements of the emissions reduction program , some of these potential disproportionate effects might be alleviated .

for example , if producers are expected to pay a higher percentage of the additional carbon costs , some of the emission allowances might be provided for free .

if consumers are anticipated to pay a higher proportionate cost , the allowances could be auctioned .

the auction's revenues could be returned to consumers , particularly to low - income households , which would be especially impacted by higher electricity bills .

as discussed above , a state's import / export ratio of electricity may influence its carbon content of energy use ( or fuel mix ) .

this component adds a further layer of complexity when assessing the potential impacts of a carbon price .

for example , depending on how emission allowances might be distributed under a federal cap - and - trade system , states that are net energy providers may receive financial gains , at least in the short - term .

for instance , if power plants can pass along the mitigation costs ( of carbon reduction ) in higher electricity prices and receive their emission allowances for free ( often referred to as "grandfathering" ) the companies may benefit financially .

these potential gains to the likely regulated entities ( eg , coal - fired power plants ) have been described as "windfall profits," and have been recently observed in the european union's emission trading system .

the gains would be temporary , because under most cap - and - trade proposals , the cap decreases over time ; thus , regulated entities would receive fewer allowances as the program progresses .

if congress enacts an emissions reduction program , states with high levels of energy intensity are likely to face higher costs than states with low energy intensity levels .

as table 4 shows , the high and low energy intensity levels can differ by a factor of four , which suggests that the impacts between the states at the ends of the spectrum could vary dramatically .

energy intensity levels are shaped by multiple factors .

some of these factors may be based on behavior or actions .

these factors may be altered through public policy .

for example , states could initiate policies or support programs that seek to change the driving behavior ( i.e. , vmt ) of its citizens .

other factors — especially a state's ratio of high and low carbon intensive industries — are more structural , and thus more difficult ( if not impractical ) to alter through public policy .

in addition , depending on the degree to which a state's energy intensity is influenced by its climate , a newly - imposed carbon price may have a greater impact .

in these states , the demand for energy may be less elastic ( i.e. , responsive to price changes ) than other states , because energy is more critical for daily life necessities , such as home heating .

low - income citizens may face a disproportionate burden , as a share of income , of price increases in states with substantial heating and / or cooling needs .

states with high energy intensity may have a high percentage of carbon - intensive industries ( eg , manufacturing ) .

these industries would likely see an increase in their operational costs due to the new carbon price , but they may be able to include the additional carbon costs in the price of their products ( eg , paper , cement , steel ) , thus spreading the costs to consumers in other states .

however , passing along the carbon price to consumers may not be financially viable for producers .

the ability of producers to pass along the carbon price would be determined by the competitiveness of the market and consumers' willingness to pay higher prices or forego purchases for a particular good .

consumers may seek out product substitutes or lower cost suppliers ( which could include foreign producers not subject to a domestic carbon price ) .

from another perspective , higher levels in emissions drivers , particularly the energy intensity variable , may suggest a state has comparatively more "low hanging fruit" or lower - cost options to meet emission reduction requirements .

as noted above , the states with high energy intensities were also ranked poorly by aceee's energy efficiency scorecard .

although these states' energy intensity levels are primarily due to economic structure , there may be room for improvement — via "no regrets" energy efficiency policies — within the framework of their economic structure .

along these lines , states that currently use a substantial percentage of high - carbon fuels for energy purposes ( particularly for electricity generation ) may have more options in a carbon - constrained regime than states that are already utilizing a high percentage of low - carbon energy sources .

for instance , if states in both categories were required to reduce current emissions by a set percentage , states using high - carbon fuels may seek low - carbon fuel substitutes , but states using low - carbon fuels would be limited in this regard .

this comparison does not suggest that switching to low - carbon fuels will be easy ( or inexpensive ) , but these states may have more ways to find emission reductions .

moreover , low - carbon fuel substitutes may not be distributed evenly across the states .

some states that currently use large proportions of high - carbon energy sources may be in better positions — in terms of natural resource endowments and geography — than other states looking for low - carbon substitutes .

for example , there is more wind energy potential in the western and mid - western states than in states in the southeast .

the above comparison also highlights the importance of selecting a baseline year for an emission reduction program .

if emissions caps are compared to 1990 levels , it would reward states for reductions made during the 1990s .

if the reduction program's baseline is 2000 , for example , the reductions made before that year would not count , and these states may have more difficulty finding lower - cost options .

several members in the 110 th congress have introduced proposals that would establish a nation - wide ghg reduction program .

any emissions reduction regime would necessitate declines in ghg intensity .

the declines needed would depend on the level of absolute reductions mandated by the enacted program .

to stabilize national ghg emission growth , the entire united states would need to achieve annual reductions in ghg intensity of approximately 3% ( assuming population and income continue to grow at a combined rate of 3% ) .

only four states — delaware ( 3.7% ) , new mexico ( 3.7% ) , utah ( 3.4% ) , and arizona ( 3.3% ) — exceeded this annual rate of decline between 1990 and 2003 ; the average decline among all states was 1.7% .

reducing ghg emissions in the united states would necessitate further declines in ghg intensity .

several legislative proposals in the 110 th congress would require ghg emissions to return to 1990 levels by 2020 .

to meet this objective , national ghg intensity would need to decline annually ( starting in 2010 ) by 5.0% .

to put this goal in perspective , consider the 10 states that emitted the most ghgs in 2003 ( accounting for approximately 50% of total u.s. emissions ) and the ghg intensity annual average rates of change ( between 1990 and 2003 ) for these states ( table 10 ) .

these states would likely need to make further reductions in ghg intensity if the national ghg intensity levels are to decline annually by 5% starting in 2010 .

many of these states would need to more than double their current annual ghg intensity declines to reach a negative growth rate of 5% .

equation 1 .

