automated political calls generally include prerecorded messages that provide information about candidates or urge voters to go to the polls .

they are also used to announce events and solicit campaign volunteers .

the calls are an inexpensive way to reach large numbers of voters quickly .

the calls can therefore play an important role in get - out - the - vote ( gotv ) and voter - education activities .

those who oppose the calls generally argue that they are intrusive , that too many calls are placed to individual voters , or that they are too often used to convey negative information .

identifying those responsible for calls is also a concern .

the federal election campaign act ( feca ) does not require detailed reporting about automated political calls .

political committees also have few incentives to make information about automated calls public .

in addition to this lack of data from regulators and practitioners , campaign tactics and political consulting receive limited scholarly attention .

academic research that does exist tends to focus on campaign strategists , especially political consultants such as pollsters and media specialists .

by contrast , those providing automated political calls ( so - called "vendors" ) often receive limited attention .

automated calls remain a prominent campaign tactic and continue to appear on the congressional agenda .

thus far , however , legislative developments on the issue have been quieter in the 111 th congress than during the 110 th congress .

several bills introduced in the 110 th congress would have imposed additional regulations on automated political calls , but would not necessarily apply to all circumstances in which the calls are used .

legislation on the topic has also been introduced in the 111 th congress .

many of the concerns surrounding automated political calls are not about the calls themselves , but about how those calls are used .

congress , therefore , has various options for addressing automated political calls , if it chooses to do so at all .

aside from maintaining the status quo , one relatively cautious option would be gathering additional data before choosing a policy approach .

federal agencies and the oversight process could provide such information .

another relatively limited approach would be to encourage voluntary changes by practitioners .

by contrast , if congress chose to require policy changes , it could add political calls to the do not call list or restrict the timing or number of calls .

finally , congress could place additional disclosure or disclaimer requirements on political calls .

some of those options would likely involve difficult questions about which groups and messages are devoted to campaign activities versus policy advocacy .

this report focuses on how automated calls are used during campaigns .

from the outset , however , it is important to remember that not all automated calls containing political information are campaign - related .

although automated campaign calls can be controversial , many members reportedly find official   ( franked ) automated calls useful .

according to one political consultant , official automated calls have been used to announce "town hall" meetings , solicit constituent input on votes , and provide information about federal programs ( eg , student loans ) .

house commission on congressional mailing standards staff reported similar uses for franked calls , which have become increasingly common .

discussion at a december 2007 hearing held by the committee on house administration , subcommittee on elections , suggested a desire among some members to curtail unwanted campaign calls while preserving official calls .

automated political calls are subject to relatively little federal regulation , although approximately 20 states reportedly restrict or ban such calls , or are attempting to do so .

fcc and fec regulations each place different restrictions on automated political calls .

the fec regulations apply only to political committees or individuals engaged in express advocacy , which proposes election or defeat of federal candidates .

by contrast , the fcc regulations appear to apply to all prerecorded or automated calls , regardless of whether they are political or commercial .

regulations promulgated by both agencies require that automated political calls provide certain identifying information .

finally , the federal trade commission's ( ftc ) national do not call registry exempts political calls .

therefore , even individuals whose telephone numbers appear on the registry may still receive automated political calls .

automated calls can be used offensively or defensively , as when criticizing an opponent or responding to criticism .

the calls are often employed in the final days before elections to mobilize ( or discourage ) voters , when it is too late to purchase other services with last - minute campaign contributions .

according to one political consultant , political committees are increasingly also turning to automated calls earlier during election cycles to solicit voter input ( through automated responses ) or to coincide with mailings and other messages .

another consultant noted that automated calls can encourage event - attendance and other grassroots engagement .

automated calls are inexpensive ( a few cents per call ) and can be quickly produced and implemented .

they also provide public officials or other activists with an ability to reach hundreds or thousands of voters in a matter of hours .

however , some campaigns reportedly are beginning to fear a "diminished impact" on voters because of a "flood of auto calls" just before elections .

four bills introduced in the 111 th congress would affect automated political calls , as would have 10 bills introduced in the 110 th congress .

none of the legislation introduced in the 110 th congress received a floor vote .

see table 3 and table 4 for additional details .

bills on the topic generally fall into three categories .

specifically , the bills would: ( 1 ) add political calls to the ftc do not call list ; ( 2 ) revise disclosure or disclaimer requirements or otherwise restrict automated political calls ; or ( 3 ) regulate political calls generally , which could include automated calls .

the " policy options " section below discusses potential ramifications associated with these and other approaches .

the committee on house administration , subcommittee on elections , held an oversight hearing on automated political calls on december 6 , 2007 .

in addition to providing background information about campaign practices , members and witnesses considered whether , or if , automated calls could be constitutionally restricted .

some members also emphasized the value of official ( franked ) automated calls to arrange telephone - based town hall meetings .

the senate rules and administration committee also held a hearing on the calls , and s. 2624 , on february 27 , 2008 .

discussion at that hearing emphasized voter and candidate frustration with the calls , and whether the calls could be constitutionally restricted .

as of this writing , no hearings have substantially addressed automated calls during the 111 th congress .

congress could choose several approaches to regulating automated political calls — or not to do so at all .

this section provides comments on various options .

it also discusses broader issues that are likely to affect whatever policy options congress chooses .

political calls to potential voters are political speech and entitled to the highest degree of protection under the first amendment .

laws or regulations that would burden or prohibit such calls if they use automated dialers or prerecorded messages , therefore , must withstand so - called strict scrutiny in order to be considered constitutional .

under a strict scrutiny analysis , if a governmental restriction is challenged in court , the government must demonstrate that the restriction on automated political calls serves a compelling government interest and is the least restrictive alternative to serve that interest .

a regulation that would ban the use of automated telephone dialing systems or prerecorded messages in political calls may place too high a burden on core political speech to withstand such exacting scrutiny .

the first amendment "protects [a speaker's] right not only to advocate their cause but also to select what they believe to be the most effective means for so doing. .

the supreme court announced this principle in the context of invalidating a state law that prohibited the use of paid workers to obtain signatures on voter - initiative petitions as an impermissible burden on political speech .

the court found that the law restricted "access to the most effective , fundamental , and perhaps economical avenue of political discourse. .

the supreme court also has noted that "[i]t is of no moment that [a statute] does not impose a complete prohibition .

the distinction between laws burdening and laws banning speech is but a matter of degree. .

accordingly , though a ban on the use of prerecorded messages or automated dialing systems would not prohibit all political calls , if a court finds that prohibiting the use of such technology would limit such calls to a lesser degree , such a restriction could be considered an impermissible burden on the first amendment free speech rights of those placing political calls .

governments , however , are permitted to place reasonable restrictions on the time , place , and manner of speech so long as they are content - neutral , narrowly tailored ( though not necessarily the least restrictive means ) , and serve a significant government interest ( though not necessarily a compelling interest ) , and leave open ample alternative channels for communication of the information .

laws that "do not foreclose an entire medium of expression , but merely shift the time , place or manner of its use" likely will be upheld so long as "ample alternative channels for communication" are left open .

in order to qualify for the less exacting "reasonable time , place , and manner" restriction analysis , the law must be content - neutral .

it is important to note that a restriction on the use of automated telephone dialers or prerecorded messages that applied only to political calls would likely be characterized as a content - based restriction on speech , which would require strict scrutiny , as described above .

content - based discrimination could be avoided if the restriction encompassed all speech that utilized these technologies .

there is little case law on this question ; however , at least one federal court has addressed the issue in a decision that was subsequently reversed on unrelated grounds .

the united states district court for the southern district of indiana upheld the constitutionality of an indiana statute that bans the use of automated dialing systems , unless the called party has given prior consent or the message is immediately preceded by a live operator who requests consent to play the message .

the court found that the statute did not violate the first amendment , because it was content - neutral and a reasonable time , place , and manner restriction that left open ample alternative modes of communication .

the court distinguished the provisions at issue from other supreme court decisions that applied strict scrutiny to restrictions on the modes of delivery for speech because the statute applied to all speech regardless of content and did not single out political speech .

the decision of the district court was reversed by the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit .

the seventh circuit held that the district court should have abstained from deciding the case , because the related state court action had been filed first , important state interests were implicated , and state courts were able to afford ample opportunity to address the federal questions raised by the case .

the case now awaits decision in brown county circuit court , an indiana state trial court .

a related case was argued before the indiana supreme court .

the case concerned whether indiana's auto - dialer law applies to all calls ( including political calls ) or only to commercial calls .

on december 23 , 2008 , the court issued its decision holding that the statute applies to all calls placed using autodialers .

the court did not , however , analyze whether the statute is valid under the first amendment .

much remains unknown about automated political calls .

although empirical data are limited , estimates suggest that the calls reach at least a majority of american voters , occur frequently during federal campaigns , and could represent millions of dollars in spending by various political committees .

despite media accounts of strong public disdain for automated political calls , the fec has received few formal complaints on the issue since 2003 .

several bills introduced in the 111 th and 110 th congresses would ( or would have ) impose additional regulations on automated political calls , but would not necessarily apply to all circumstances in which the calls are used .

congress has several policy options for restricting automated political calls , if it chooses to do so .

aside from maintaining the status quo , a relatively cautious option might be gathering additional data before choosing a policy approach .

federal agencies and the oversight process could provide additional information .

another relatively limited approach would be to encourage voluntary changes by practitioners .

by contrast , if congress chooses to require policy changes , it could add political calls to the do not call framework or restrict the timing or number of calls .

finally , congress could place additional disclosure or disclaimer requirements on political calls .

some of those options would likely involve sensitive questions about which groups and messages should be covered by campaign finance law .

constitutional considerations could also be a factor .

as this report discusses , publicly available data about automated political calls are virtually nonexistent .

feca does not require detailed reporting about automated political calls .

political committees also have few incentives to make information about automated calls public because doing so potentially alerts opposing candidates , groups , and the media to campaign strategy .

in addition to this lack of data from regulators and practitioners , scholarly literature is limited .

academic research that does exist tends to focus on campaign strategists , such as media consultants and pollsters , but not on vendors who provide technical services such as automated calls .

automated calls as a campaign tactic have also received limited scholarly attention .

given the limited publicly available information about automated political calls , crs employed a broad research strategy designed to gather as much information as possible .

this included consultations with staff at the fcc , fec , prominent political scientists , staff from the four national congressional campaign committees , the american association of political consultants ( aapc ) , individual political consultants , and a political journalist .

crs also conducted keyword searches in databases that provide archives of news sources , scholarly journals , dissertations , and polling data ( eg , lexisnexis , proquest , jstor , polling the nations , etc. ) .

the primary author also conducted telephone interviews with three political consultants and analyzed disclosure and enforcement data provided by the fec .

use of individual data sources is documented in the text of this report .

finally , internet research revealed many political web log ( "blog" ) references to automated political calls in recent elections .

many of these entries contained claims about allegedly unethical or illegal campaign practices .

because crs cannot verify the information contained in these blogs , it is not included in this analysis .

