the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) is a federal corporation established under title iv of the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa , p.l .

93-406 ) .

the pbgc insures private pension beneficiaries against the complete loss of accrued benefits if their defined benefit pension plan is terminated without adequate funding .

the pbgc receives no appropriations from general revenue .

its operations are financed by insurance premiums set by congress and paid by sponsors of defined benefit plans , investment income from the assets in its trust fund , and recoveries from the companies formerly responsible for the trusteed plans .

the pbgc's decision in 2008 to reduce asset - liability matching in favor of a strategy aimed at generating higher expected returns was driven in part by the agency's concerns about its deficit .

the pbgc's previous investment policy was not designed to maximize investment income , but to keep the agency's deficit from deteriorating further while policymakers pursued reforms to address pbgc's funding deficit .

however , even after the ppa was enacted , the president's budget for fy2009 noted that "neither the single - employer nor multiemployer program has the resources to satisfy fully the agency's long - term obligations to plan participants. .

the pbgc has limited authority to adopt policies that could directly affect its financial condition .

unlike insurers in the private sector , it has no authority to set the premiums for the insurance it provides .

it cannot strengthen the funding requirements for insured plans , reduce the amount of pension benefits that it insures , or reject companies that it deems excessively risky to insure .

all of these authorities rest exclusively with the united states congress .

the companies that sponsor defined benefit pension plans have a financial interest in lobbying congress to persuade it not to make pbgc premiums too high or plan funding requirements too onerous , because increases in premiums and stricter funding standards directly affect these firms' annual profit - and - loss statements .

the pbgc is required by law to invest its income from premiums in securities backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government .

it has the legal authority , however , to invest its trust fund , consisting mainly of the assets of underfunded plans for which the pbgc has become the trustee , in assets of its choice .

in announcing the new investment policy adopted in 2008 , the pbgc stated its desire to maximize its investment income , and thus reduce its deficit .

however , while the pbgc has asserted that its new policy will be less risky in the long - term than its previous policy , some of the assumptions underlying that assertion are open to question .

the pbgc adopted its new investment policy in part in response to an analysis of investment options conducted for the agency by rocaton investment advisors , llc .

the conclusions reached in that analysis are sensitive to the methods and assumptions on which they were based .

an assessment of the relative risks of the pbgc's previous investment policy and its new policy , for example , depends largely on how the risk associated with each class of assets in the portfolio is measured , and on the relative weights of each class of asset in the old and new portfolios .

the risk associated with holding a given financial asset is that the actual rate of return will deviate from the expected rate of return .

this risk is measured as the standard deviation of the rate of return .

the more volatile the asset — that is , the more widely actual annual rates of return are dispersed around the average — the greater the standard deviation .

in its study for the pbgc , rocaton assumed that the rate of return on long - term treasury bonds ( with a 15-year average duration ) will have a standard deviation of 11.2% .

crs examined rates of return on long - term treasury bonds over the period from 1926 through 2007 and found the standard deviation around the mean real rate of return to be 8.4% for 10-year treasury bonds and 11.2% for 30-year treasury bonds .

the rocaton study assumed that the rate of return on u.s. equities would have a standard deviation of 15% .

crs examined rates of return on u.s. equities as measured by the standard & poor's 500 index over the period from 1926 through 2007 and found the standard deviation around the mean annual real rate of return to be 20% .

rocaton's lower estimate of the volatility of returns on stocks could be significant to the extent that it could appear to make investments in stocks less risky than the historical data indicate .

a determination as to whether the pbgc's new , more equity - heavy investment policy will be less risky than the previous , more bond - heavy investment policy depends in part on the estimated volatility of the rates of return on stocks and bonds .

it is not clear from the report prepared by rocaton whether the analysts conducted a sensitivity analysis in which the key assumptions — such as the standard deviations of the rates of return on stocks and bonds — were changed to evaluate the effect on the results of the analysis .

to the extent that the relative riskiness of the pbgc's new investment policy compared to its previous policy is directly influenced by these and other key assumptions , it would be prudent for the model used by rocaton to be subjected to a sensitivity analysis .

it is possible that the shift away from asset - liability matching to an investment policy focused on earning higher rates of return on investment could increase the risk that the pbgc will experience a decline in the value of its investments at the same time that the plans it insures are becoming increasingly underfunded .

in a stock market downturn , the plans that pbgc stands to inherit are likely to have experienced a drop in the value of their assets .

if it were more heavily invested in equities , the pbgc would be exposed to the same investment losses as the plans that it insures , effectively giving the pbgc "double - exposure" to the effect of a stock market decline as the agency's liabilities were increasing .

although the pbgc's statements about the new investment policy have emphasized the corporation's long - term investment horizon , the pbgc still needs access to cash in the short - run to pay the benefits of beneficiaries in the plans it has trusteed .

when looking at the pbgc's current and potential future cash needs , rocaton noted that the duration of the pbgc's current liabilities allows the corporation to weather short - term volatility in its investment portfolio .

however , rocaton did not examine pbgc's contingent liabilities — the liabilities that the pbgc has not yet assumed from underfunded plans that have yet to terminate — noting only that these liabilities are uncertain in both timing and magnitude .

in contrast to the pbgc's new investment policy , the asset allocation strategy of the pension protection fund ( ppf ) , the government - sponsored guarantor of defined benefit pensions in the united kingdom , attempts to mitigate the risk of the fund's assets declining concurrently with an increase in the under - funding of the pension plans it insures .

as table 5 shows , the ppf is invested predominantly in fixed income securities .

the pbgc's previous asset - liability matching investment strategy had very little chance of eliminating the pbgc's deficit .

according to pbgc's former director , steven kandarian , the previous investment strategy was a tool to keep the program from falling further into deficit while policymakers pursued long - term solutions to the problem of pension underfunding .

the new policy will likely generate higher average annual returns than the previous policy .

however , it also increases the likelihood that the pbgc will suffer investment losses concurrently with an increase in the underfunding of the plans that it insures .

if the pbgc's new investment policy generates higher expected returns , accompanied by reduced risk — as the pbgc and rocaton have asserted — then u.s. taxpayers , as the de facto guarantors of pbgc insurance , will be better off .

if the higher returns are accompanied by commensurately higher risk , then taxpayers are neither better nor worse off , because the pbgc's true financial condition will not have changed .

however , if that higher risk results in investment losses that the agency would not have experienced under the previous policy , and the pbgc's deficit grows , then taxpayers will be worse off .

taxpayers also could be worse off if higher investment returns forestall fundamental reforms in pbgc financing , such as adopting risk - based premiums , that could improve the long - term financial condition of the agency and reduce the risk that they will at some point in the future have to bail out an insolvent pbgc .

