climate change issues have generated interest and debate over the past two decades .

in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

arguably , in recent years the primary issues under debate have shifted from science — such as the role of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from human activities — to policy .

for instance , a 2005 sense of the senate resolution on climate change stated: it is the sense of the senate that congress should enact a comprehensive and effective national program of mandatory , market - based limits and incentives on emissions of greenhouse gases that slow , stop , and reverse the growth of such emissions at a rate and in a manner that , no .

1 , will not significantly harm the u.s. economy and , no .

2 , will encourage other action and key contributors to global emissions .

in the 110 th congress , members have introduced several bills that would establish a market - based , mandatory ghg emission reduction program .

most of these proposals would establish some type of cap - and - trade system to regulate ghg emissions .

for a brief primer on cap - and - trade systems , see appendix a .

in designing a cap - and - trade program , one of the more controversial and challenging questions for policymakers is how , to whom , and for what purpose to distribute the emission allowances .

concerning the question of how to distribute allowances , policymakers could ( 1 ) sell the allowances through an auction process ( 2 ) allocate the allowances at no cost to covered sources , ( 3 ) provide allowances to non - covered sources , who would , in turn , sell them to covered sources via the emissions trading market , or ( 4 ) use some combination of these methods .

regardless of the method of distribution , emission allowances would have monetary value in a carbon - constrained regime , such as a cap - and - trade program .

if an auction is used , policymakers could distribute auction revenues to a wide range of parties to support various policy objectives .

likewise , policymakers could allot allowances at no cost to non - covered entities — for example , federal or state agencies , among others — to promote the same ( or different ) objectives .

by addressing the question of how , to whom , and for what purpose to distribute the emission allowances , policymakers would craft an allocation strategy .

the strategy would not affect the environmental integrity of the emissions cap .

in addition , covered entities would generally face the same emission reduction decisions under either allocation strategy .

a "common misconception" is that if covered sources receive allowances at no cost , the sources would behave differently from sources who purchased allowances through an auction .

economists point out "free allowances" have value , and when covered entities submit an allowance for compliance purposes , the entities forgo the opportunity to sell the unused allowance in the emissions trading market .

the first two sections of this report discuss the primary emission allowance distribution methods : auctions and no - cost distribution to covered sources .

these sections examine the potential benefits and concerns of these allocation mechanisms .

the final section identifies different options and policy considerations for congress when determining to whom and for what purpose to distribute the value of the emission allowances .

the allocation strategy would have substantial consequences for the cost of the cap - and - trade program and how the costs are apportioned .

in recent years , the use of auctions to allocate emission allowances has generated considerable interest .

several of the cap - and - trade proposals from the 110 th congress — including s. 2191 , which was reported from the senate environment and public works committee on may 20 , 2008 — would use auctions to allocate an increasing percentage of the cap's emission allowances .

this section describes the potential benefits that auctions may provide , if used to distribute allowances to covered sources in a cap - and - trade program .

in addition , this section discusses auction design issues and considerations for policymakers .

emission trading programs , in the united states and abroad , have generally distributed the vast majority of allowances at no cost to sources directly subject to a cap .

in recent years , however , support for auctions has gained momentum .

this momentum likely reflects a better understanding of the benefits of using auctions , as well as increased scrutiny of the effects of distributing allowances at no cost .

this section discusses the potential benefits and concerns of allotting allowances to covered sources at no cost .

by limiting the annual number of emission allowances available for compliance purposes , a cap - and - trade system creates emission allowances .

emission allowances would become a valuable new commodity , potentially accounting — in aggregate — for tens or hundreds of billions of dollars ( table 1 and surrounding discussion ) .

to whom and for what purpose the value of allowances is distributed would affect ( 1 ) the overall cost to society of a cap - and - trade program and ( 2 ) which parties bear the costs of the program .

policymakers would face a choice between minimizing the costs imposed on the entire economy ( society's costs ) or using the allowance value for other purposes .

the latter choice covers a range of options .

congress could choose to provide assistance to specific industries or groups , or choose to distribute the allowance value to support various objectives .

to provide an example , appendix b of this report identifies the allowance and auction revenue distribution strategies proposed by s. 2191 .

the first part of this section provides an overview of some key concepts and an estimate of the total allowance value that may be available for distribution in a cap - and - trade program .

the second part examines the range of options for distributing allowance value .

this is followed by a discussion of policy considerations .

a cap - and - trade program would impose costs: covered entities would comply by reducing their own emissions , purchasing emission reductions ( credits ) from other covered entities , or ( if allowed ) buying offsets from non - covered sources that have reduced , avoided , or sequestered emissions .

the combined costs of these activities are the "compliance costs" of the cap - and - trade program .

the compliance costs are different from the aggregate value of emission allowances .

in the early years of a cap - and - trade program , the aggregate value of allowances would likely dwarf the costs of making ( or finding ) emission reductions .

figure 3 depicts this contrast: the area under the emissions cap curve represents the number of allowances ; the area between the emissions cap curve and the business - as - usual curve represents the required reductions .

the former area will be larger as long as the emission reduction target is less than 50% of the emissions baseline .

the compliance costs represent the sum of the costs of each ton of reduction , and the cost of each reduced ton will vary .

for example , some projects may present "low - hanging fruit" reduction opportunities , whereas investments in extra capital ( eg , carbon capture technology ) may represent a more expensive reduction option .

consider a simplified example: policymakers set a 7-ton cap on an economy that currently emits 10 tons .

the 3 tons that must be reduced cost $1 , $5 , and $10 , respectively .

the cost of the last , most expensive ton — the marginal cost — is $10 .

because the marginal cost largely establishes the market price of emission allowances in a cap - and - trade , each emission allowance has a value that is approximate to the marginal cost .

therefore , in this example , the value of the allowances would equal $70 , but the compliance costs would be only $16 .

whether or not congress sells the allowances through an auction ( and generates revenues ) or distributes the allowances at no cost , the allowances would have monetary value .

to put the allowance value in context , consider the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2008 ( s. 2191 ) , an "economy - wide" cap - and - trade proposal that was reported out of the senate environment and public works committee may 20 , 2008 .

at the request of senators lieberman and warner , epa prepared an economic analysis of provisions of s. 2191 .

one of the primary results of the analysis is the estimated price range for emission allowances .

from these price estimates , potential auction revenues can be identified , because the legislation specifies the percentage of allowances to be auctioned in each compliance year .

table 1 lists the estimated annual action revenues that would be generated under provisions of s. 2191 .

in addition , the table provides an estimate of revenues that would be generated if 100% of the emission allowances were auctioned .

this latter estimate represents an approximation of the aggregate value of the emission allowances in a given year .

to put the auction revenues / allowance value in context , consider the federal net tax revenue from the three largest revenue sources for fiscal year 2007: individual income tax: $1,118 billion ; employment taxes: $838 billion ; corporate income taxes: $368 billion .

several economic studies have estimated the percentage of allowances ( a comparable amount of auction revenues could also be used ) that would provide compensation for projected profit losses to specific carbon - intensive industries .

the findings include the following: goulder found that 13% of the emission allowances would compensate the fossil fuel producing industry ( coal mining , oil and natural gas extraction ) for lost profits .

burtraw and palmer concluded that the electric - generating industry ' s estimated profit losses could be offset with 6% of the emission allowances .

smith and ross estimated that 21% of the allowances would compensate the combined losses of primary energy producers and electric utilities ( i.e. , a combination of the sectors examined in the other two studies ) .

although these studies analyzed the net effects to certain economic sectors , there are likely to be winners and losers within the sectors , particularly in electricity generation .

for instance , some facilities , such as coal - fired plants , are expected to see greater losses , while others — hydroelectric or renewable energy plants — may see a gain in profits .

the above estimates consider that allowances would be provided to covered sources in perpetuity .

however , some cap - and - trade proposals in the 110 th congress ( eg , s. 2191 and s. 1766 ) would generally phase - out free allocation as the percentage of allowances to be auctioned increases .

as such , the initial percentage of allowances provided at no cost in these bills is higher than estimates that provide for indefinite distribution at a set percentage .

for example , during the first five years of the program established by s. 2191 , fossil fuel - fired power plants would receive 19% of the emission allowances at no cost .

this percentage would gradually decline to zero by 2031 .

economic theory generally supports a tax policy that would reduce taxes on favored activities ( increased employment or personal income ) and increase taxes on less desirable behavior ( increased pollution ) .

auction revenues could be used to offset reductions in the taxes that apply to desirable activities .

using auction proceeds in this manner has been described as yielding a double - dividend: ( 1 ) reduced ghg emissions and ( 2 ) reduced market distortions from the taxes on desirable behavior .

in the early 1990s , some economists suggested that the double - dividend effect would be strong enough to keep the overall costs to society relatively small or even negative .

however , more recent economic studies indicate that the costs imposed by the cap - and - trade program could act as an additional tax , which would most likely ( at least in the united states ) exceed the benefits of revenue recycling .

several economic studies have estimated the cost savings to society that auction revenues could provide .

a cap - and - trade program is expected to impose an economic cost on society .

a frequently cited study found that auctioning allowances could reduce the projected costs between 21% and 47% .

the range of potential cost savings reflects different uses of the auction revenues .

if policymakers were to distribute the revenues to u.s. households in "lump - sum" payments — for example , increase the standard tax deduction or mail payments to households — the cost savings would be on the lower end of the spectrum .

alternatively , if congress decided to use the revenues to reduce taxes on labor or investment , society's costs would be minimized .

figure 4 shows the relative differences in society costs when different allocation strategies are used .

non - covered entities may receive free allowances ( sometimes referred to as "set - asides" ) or a percentage of the auction revenues .

for example , congress may decide to allot allowance value to electricity consumers , particularly those in low - income households .

the rationale for this distribution policy is that specific subsets of society are expected to bear a disproportionate percentage of the costs of a cap - and - trade program .

whether covered sources receive allowances at no cost or purchase them through an auction , economic principles predict that covered sources would pass along their opportunity costs or purchase costs , respectively , in the same manner as an actual expense: for example , installing more efficient technology or switching to more expensive ( but less carbon - intensive ) fuels .

covered sources have demonstrated this behavior in two cap - and - trade programs , in which the vast majority of allowances was provided at no cost: the european union's emission trading system ( eu - ets ) and the u.s. sulfur dioxide emissions trading program .

because of cost pass - through , consumers , particularly households , are ultimately expected to bear the majority of the costs associated with a cap - and - trade program .

figure 5 illustrates the relative distribution of costs to different groups in a cap - and - trade program .

the figure is based on a cap - and - trade scenario that would auction 100% of the emission allowances to fossil fuel producers ( often referred to as "upstream" sources ) .

households and businesses experience the vast majority ( 89% ) of the costs .

moreover , the household percentage is potentially understated , because many businesses would likely pass through some of their increased energy / electricity costs in the form of higher prices for their goods and services .

the figure is instructive for the allocation debate , because it shows a starting point for cost distribution .

however , the cost percentages depicted in figure 5 do not account for distribution of auction revenues .

in a real cap - and - trade system that employs an auction , auction revenues would be used to support specific objectives , or allotted to various parties .

policymakers may also consider distributing a percentage of the allowances or auction revenues to support a range of objectives , including: technology development: promotion of emission mitigation technology is widely recognized as a vital step towards making substantial ghg emission reductions .

s. 2191 would distribute the majority of its auction revenues ( approximately 52% ) to promote energy - related technologies: low - carbon energy sources , carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) , and cellulosic biofuels .

energy efficiency: improvements in energy efficiency could make considerable contributions in achieving ghg emission reductions .

although energy efficiency may involve technology advancements , new technologies must be used in order to realize the efficiency gains .

in some cases , parties may need incentives beyond the efficiency gains to induce behavioral changes .

for example , allowance value could be distributed to support efficiency gains at places — residences , commercial buildings — that are unlikely to be covered by an emissions cap .

biological sequestration: trees , plants , and soils sequester carbon , removing it from the earth's atmosphere .

allowance values could be allotted to provide financial incentives for landowners to engage in activity — for example , conservation tillage , reforestation — that would increase sequestration on their land .

although some of these actions may qualify as offsets ( if allowed in a cap - and - trade program ) , some activities may need additional incentives or be unable to satisfy the offset approval process .

adaptation efforts: some level of global warming ( and associated effects ) will occur regardless of emission reduction efforts taken today , because previous and current ghg emissions will have long term climate impacts .

therefore , some contend that investment ( eg , allowance value ) should focus on preparing communities to adapt to the effects of a changing climate .

deficit reduction: another proposal for the use of allowances or auction revenue is to address a budget deficit that may result from a cap - and - trade program .

a portion of the allowances or auction proceeds could be set aside to offset projected revenue shortfalls .

this option is sometimes described as making the program "revenue - neutral. .

in addition , congress may consider using allowance value to offset shortfalls beyond those that are related to the cap - and - trade program .

the distribution of allowance value would present policymakers with a series of trade - offs .

the primary options for applying the allowance value involve ( 1 ) minimizing the overall costs of the cap - and - trade program imposed on society ; ( 2 ) alleviating the disproportionate costs borne by subgroups in society ; and ( 3 ) providing funding to support other policy objectives , such as technological development .

intertwined among these options is a trade - off between regressive or progressive impacts .

economic studies indicate that using auction revenues ( i.e. , revenue recycling ) to offset reductions in distortionary taxes ( labor , income ) would be the most efficient use of the revenues and yield the greatest benefit to society as a whole .

these studies show that if the revenues are used for other purposes , economic efficiency would suffer and the overall cost of the program would be higher ( figure 4 ) .

the opportunity to substantially lower overall costs is a unique attribute of the auction allocation strategy .

some argue that using auction revenues to offset tax reductions is an unlikely outcome .

in general , when the government obtains new revenue , it tends to fund new or existing programs rather than reduce existing taxes .

indeed , none of the cap - and - trade bills in the 110 th congress has proposed to use revenues in this manner .

moreover , the most efficient manner of revenue recycling would generally spread the cost reductions throughout the economy , while certain groups would be expected to bear a disproportionate percentage of the costs of a cap - and - trade program .

in particular , industries that cannot pass along their increased costs ( for competitive reasons or otherwise ) would face higher costs compared to other economic sectors .

ultimately , consumers are expected to absorb the vast majority of the program costs .

as discussed above , policymakers may consider compensating — through free allowances or auction revenues — specific industries and / or providing assistance to households that would face higher energy ( eg , electricity and gasoline ) prices .

such compensation would forgo the opportunity to reduce the overall cost of the emission program .

using allowance value for other purposes — for example , technology development — would impart a trade - off .

while such allotments would limit the allowances available for the purposes described above — reduced overall costs or relief for disproportionate impacts — new technologies , in particular , could have a considerable impact on the costs of an emissions reduction program .

this is particularly the case if technologies can be commercialized ahead of their projected schedules or if unanticipated low - or zero - carbon alternatives can be developed .

the amount of funding allotted to technology development under s. 2191 would represent a substantial increase , compared to current federal funding for emission reduction and low - carbon technologies .

although allocating allowance value to technological development could yield considerable gain , the return in terms of additional investment to promote technology improvements remains uncertain .

in a recent study , the author found: while academics have extensively studied how revenues from auctions can be used to make the tax system more efficient , they have not done much research on examining the impact of using such revenues for retiring debt or increasing government investment .

in short , if allowance value is used to increase funding to existing programs or provide funding for new programs , the return on investment is uncertain .

for example , some programs may be operating at full capacity , and additional funding may not provide comparable impacts .

moreover , the marketplace already provides incentive for technological change , and a cap - and - trade program would increase the incentive to develop low - carbon or zero - carbon energy alternatives .

another trade - off for policymakers is whether the emission allocation strategy would produce regressive or progressive economic results .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) analyzed the distributional effects of a cap - and - trade program under four different scenarios: allowances auctioned and auction revenues distributed to households in a lump - sum payment ; allowances provided to covered sources at no cost ; allowances auctioned and revenues are used to cut corporate income taxes ; and allowances auctioned and revenues used to cut payroll income taxes .

the results are presented in figure 6 .

as the figure indicates , an auction that distributed the revenues to households in a lump - sum payment would yield the most progressive results .

in contrast , the most regressive result occurs when allowances are provided to covered sources at no cost .

the two other options that would cut tax rates would also produce regressive results .

however , these two strategies would substantially lower the overall cost of the cap - and - trade program , a result not captured by figure 6 .

appendix a .

what is a cap - and - trade system ? .

a cap - and - trade system would create an overall limit ( i.e. , a cap ) on ghg emissions from the emission sources covered by the program .

cap - and - trade programs can vary by the sources covered .

the covered sources are likely to include major emitting sectors ( eg , power plants and carbon - intensive industries ) , fuel producers / processors ( eg , coal mines or petroleum refineries ) , or some combination of both .

the emissions cap is partitioned into emission allowances .

typically , one emission allowance represents the authority to emit one ( metric ) ton of carbon dioxide - equivalent ( tco 2 - e ) .

the "equivalent" is necessary , because ghgs other than co 2 — methane , nitrous oxide , sulfur hexafluoride , hydrofluorocarbons , and perfluorocarbons — vary in their global warming potential ( gwp ) .

thus , ghg emissions are presented in a standard form of measure ( co 2 - e ) .

in general , policymakers may decide to distribute the emission allowances to covered entities at no cost ( based on , for example , previous years' emissions ) , sell the allowances through an auction , or use some combination of these strategies .

this report examines issues associated with these allocation options .

covered entities that face relatively low emission - reduction costs would have an incentive to make reductions beyond what is required , because these further reductions could be sold ( i.e. , traded ) as emission credits to entities that face higher emission - reduction costs .

other mechanisms , such as banking or offsets , may be included to increase the flexibility of the program .

at the end of each established compliance period ( eg , a calendar year ) , covered sources would be required to surrender emission allowances to cover the number of tons emitted .

if a source did not have enough allowances to cover its emissions , the source would be subject to penalties .

for more information , see u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , office of air and radiation , tools of the trade: a guide to designing and operating a cap and trade program for pollution control ( 2003 ) ; crs report rl33799 , climate change: design approaches for a greenhouse gas reduction program , by [author name scrubbed] .

appendix b. allowance allocation strategy under s. 2191 ( as reported ) .

