since enactment of the refugee act of 1980 , the immigration and nationality act has contained a designation for a group of children termed as "unaccompanied refugee minors" ( urms ) : refugee children in the united states under the age of 18 , without a parent or close relative willing or able to care for them .

the state department identifies refugee children overseas who are eligible for resettlement in the united states but who do not have a parent or guardian .

these children comprise an especially vulnerable population because they are both fleeing persecution and entering the united states without a parent or custodian .

consequently , the office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) is tasked with caring for these children until they are either reunited with their families or reach the age of 18 .

once in orr's custody , a urm will be placed in the agency's urm program , wherein orr works with state and local service providers , as well as volunteer agencies , to provide the urm with foster placement , services , and any needed care .

since 1980 , approximately 12,000 urms have been handled by orr .

the divide over urm policy in the united states generally falls between two groups: advocates of increased urm inflows and supporters of current levels .

groups that support greater urm inflows note the rising levels of refugees worldwide , along with media accounts of numerous urms in regions such as darfur .

proponents of refugee inflows under the current urm policy point out that the united states already has one of the highest refugee admission levels of any advanced industrialized country .

the central policy question for congress in the urm debate revolves around the number of urms being identified abroad and brought to the united states .

this report covers the background of urm policy in the united states and provides a description of current agencies involved and resources available in the care of urms .

analysis of urm trends and statistics , along with discussions concerning potential future sources of urms , is also included .

finally , recent legislation concerning urm is listed and summarized .

this report will be updated as developments warrant .

the emergence of unaccompanied refugee minors as an issue has followed a pattern in the united states that dates back to at least world war ii .

this pattern has historically emerged from two overlapping factors: ( 1 ) the generation of large refugee flows from a conflict or oppressive regime and ( 2 ) significant u.s. involvement , either militarily or diplomatically , with the conflict or regime .

generally , these factors have contributed to both the creation of a notable supply of unaccompanied refugee children eligible to relocate to the united states , as well as a growth in public pressure on the federal government to provide assistance to these children .

under regulation , an unaccompanied refugee minor ( urm ) is a child who is under the age of 18 , and "who entered the united states unaccompanied by and not destined to ( a ) a parent or ( b ) a close nonparental adult relative who is willing and able to care for the child or ( c ) an adult with a clear and court verifiable claim to custody of the minor ; and who has no parent ( s ) in the united states. .

moreover , to be placed in the urm program , children must be considered refugees , victims of trafficking , cuban / haitian entrants , or have been granted asylum .

although urms are more commonly identified abroad by the department of state for u.s. resettlement , some children categorized as urms are already present in the united states when deemed eligible by authorities .

in addition to handling urms , orr is tasked with caring for "unaccompanied alien children" ( uac ) .

uacs are those children who are detained by immigration authorities in the united states for unauthorized presence in the united states and who are deemed to be unaccompanied .

the main distinction between urms and uacs is that urms are considered legally present in the united states under the ina .

moreover , uacs are statutorily defined under the homeland security act of 2002 , whereas regulations dictate the definition of urm .

the urm program and the uac program are technically two distinct program administered by orr .

in practice , however , they operate in a joint fashion , as the congressional intent was to model the uac program on its urm predecessor .

occasionally , refugee children in the urm program will initially arrive in the united states accompanied by a parent or guardian .

however , family circumstances may undergo drastic changes , resulting in requests for orr to reclassify a child as "unaccompanied" and place him or her in the urm program .

according to agency guidelines , orr will reclassify a minor to unaccompanied status if a certain set of conditions are met .

however , reclassification is considered on a case - by - case basis , and the orr director has discretion as to whether certain criteria may be waived to accommodate given circumstances .

despite representing only a fraction of the immigrant and refugee populations in the united states , the vulnerability of unaccompanied refugee children makes their few numbers nonetheless notable .

presented below are several figures and tables depicting the urm population from fy1999 through fy2005 , with fy2005 being the most recent fiscal year of data made available to crs .

during this time period , there were a cumulative total of 782 new urms admitted to the united states .

with an annual average of approximately 112 children , the annual rate has fluctuated between a low of 35 children in fy1999 to a high of 212 in fy2001 .

figure 1 demonstrates that the gender composition of the urm population is disproportionately male .

the lowest annual percentage of males in the urm population during the time period was in fy2005 , when they represented 66% .

in fy1999 and fy2001 , males constituted 83% and 82% of the urm population , respectively .

the annual stock of the population in fy2005 was 49% lower than its seven - year peak in fy2001 , but was 209% higher than the seven - year low in fy1999 .

table 1 shows the residential placement of new urms by year and state of residential placement .

among the 16 states where urm are enrolled in state social service programs , the largest cumulative number of urms between fy1999 and fy2005 were placed in michigan .

the 212 urms placed in the michigan system during this time period accounted for 27% of the urm total .

the only other states with more than 70 cumulative placements in that time period were virginia and washington , which had 99 and 80 placements , respectively .

these two states thus accounted for 23% of the cumulative urm placements from fy1999 to fy2005 .

moreover , while some years , such as fy2001 and fy2002 , witnessed more concentrated distributions of urm to states , fy2005 saw a greater level of dispersion among the states .

consequently , programs such as those in michigan , massachusetts , and washington experienced a reduced burden from fy2004 to fy2005 , while the share of children in states such as new york and texas increased by more than 50% .

as a means of placing urms , orr and its partnering state and volunteer services have a number of options at their disposal .

as depicted in figure 2 , the most frequent placement option pursued for fy1999-fy2005 was foster homes .

as with cases involving other unaccompanied children , placing urms in foster care is often seen as the most desirable outcome because doing so offers children a structured environment that replicates a family setting .

in fy2005 , 50.9% of urms were placed in foster homes , falling between the seven - year high of 55.1% in fy2000 and seven - year low of 40.1% in fy2004 .

the majority of the remaining urms were placed in either independent or semi - independent living arrangements .

for most of the time period in figure 2 , independent living was the more common of these options , peaking in fy2003 with 34.2% .

this type of placement experienced an upward trend from fy2000 to fy2003 but then declined in both fy2004 and fy2005 .

semi - independent placements also declined from a seven - year high of 18.4% in fy2000 to a seven - year low of 11.8% in fy2004 .

in fy2005 , semi - independent placements accounted for 17.6% of placements , while independent living represented 13.9% of placements .

group homes , residential treatment facilities , and homes of relatives are less common options for urm placement .

in fy2005 , these three options combined for 17.6% of placements .

the cumulative percentages of placements for each category from fy1999 to fy2005 were as follows: foster home , 47.1% ; independent living , 24.6% ; semi - independent living , 14.6% ; group home , 6.9% ; relative , 5.5% ; and residential treatment , 1.4% .

as previously noted , the urm population is composed not only of refugee children but also of other classifications of unaccompanied minors .

figure 3 presents the cumulative distribution of the urm population from fy1999 to fy2005 .

with a share of 88.7% , refugee children constituted the vast majority of the urm population during this time period .

the remaining 11.3% of the population was distributed relatively evenly between five other classifications .

child asylum seekers constituted 2.3% of the cumulative urm population , whereas cuban - haitian entrants represented 2.7% .

refugee children whose families experienced a breakdown and were consequently left unaccompanied accounted for 2.6% of the cumulative urm population from fy1999 to fy2005 .

an additional 2.2% were trafficking victims and therefore were classified as urms rather than unaccompanied alien children .

lastly , 1.5% of children in the urm program during this time period were reclassified as urm subsequent to age determinations .

in such cases , the child usually purports to be an adult , but subsequent interviews and tests reveal the child to be under the age of 18 .

the country sources for urms from fy1999 to fy2005 , which are listed in table 2 , mostly fell geographically within one of three regions: sub - saharan africa , central america and the caribbean , and the middle east ( with a few notable exceptions such as vietnam and russia ) .

not surprisingly , many of the urms came from countries within these regions that were either impoverished or engaged in some form of domestic or international conflict .

the most stark example of these characteristics was sudan , which accounted for 407 urms between fy1999 and fy2005 , representing roughly 52% of urms to the united states in that time span .

the other countries with more than 30 urms during this same period were liberia , haiti , and honduras , which were the source countries for 63 , 56 , and 39 urms , respectively .

thus , each of these countries contributed 5% - 8% of the urm total .

afghanistan was the source country of exactly 30 urms during the fy1999 to fy2005 time period .

the only two countries from which the united states accepted urms every fiscal year during the data range were haiti and sudan .

unlike other immigration - related programs , the unaccompanied refugee minors program has relatively few public critics .

because the program has operated for more than two decades , operational criticisms have largely been dealt with .

moreover , orr has built strong ties with state and volunteer agencies , so that the handling of the urms reflects what most observers believe is in the best interest of the child .

urms are generally recognized as a highly vulnerable population , and the agencies and organizations involved in their care have historically put forth marked efforts to meet the children's needs and ensure their well - being .

consequently , current policy debates regarding the urm program are centered around who should be granted urm status , rather than how the children should be handled once they are in the united states .

because the standard procedure for entering a child into the urm program begins with the department of state ( dos ) identifying a child abroad , some have questioned whether the dos is being sufficiently proactive in seeking out eligible children .

assessing such a criticism , however , is difficult because very little data on unaccompanied refugee children exist .

most information on such children comes from media and anecdotal sources .

one population of concern for u.s. refugee policy is the displaced population in and around iraq — a population containing many children .

iraq has in recent years been marked by a violent insurgency , resulting in the deaths of thousands of iraqi nationals and coalition soldiers .

moreover , large populations of iraqis have attempted or succeeded in fleeing the violence by crossing the borders into neighboring countries such as syria .

according to estimates published by the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , the iraqi population constitutes one of the largest populations of concern for the agency .

unhcr believes that there are now almost 2.3 million iraqis living in neighboring countries as refugees .

consequently , nearly 8% of the iraqi population are refugees .

although there are no official estimates , it is likely that some unaccompanied children constitute a portion of this population .

children have been cited as a particularly affected group among the iraqi refugees , because many of them reportedly lack access to services such as education .

numerous groups have advocated for amendments to u.s. policy that would allow more iraqi nationals to be granted refugee status .

in response to the mounting refugee situation , the united states pledged to admit at least 12,000 iraqi refugees in fy2008 .

a second notable situation is the refugee crisis that exists for afghan nationals .

most of these refugees fled their homeland following the marxist people's democratic party of afghanistan ( pdpa ) overthrow of the government in 1978 and the subsequent soviet invasion of the country in 1979 .

later internal conflicts between various mujahideen and the u.s. - led invasion of october 2001 resulted in subsequent waves of refugees and internally displaced persons .

at the end of 2007 , the unhcr estimated that there was a population - of - concern of roughly 3.6 million , of which 1.9 million were refugees .

another refugee situation that has gained notable amounts of media attention is the movement of large numbers of individuals fleeing the darfur region of sudan .

numerous advocacy groups have called on the u.s. government to increase efforts to aid the displaced populations that have been persecuted by the janjaweed militia forces .

media reports have noted that a number of these refugees are children whose families have been killed during the violence .

at the end of 2007 , the unhcr estimated that there was a population - of - concern of roughly 2 million in the sudanese region .

this population included approximately 500,000 refugees ( mostly in the neighboring country of chad ) .

the george w. bush administration declared the actions of the janjaweed militia to be a genocide .

despite such condemnation , the violence has continued and few refugees have been resettled into advanced industrial countries such as the united states .

in recent years the united states has not filled the full allotment for refugees .

since fy2002 , the highest level of refugee admissions was achieved in fy2005 , with 53,738 , despite an annual admissions ceiling of 70,000 that same year .

in fy2007 , the refugee admission level was 48,281 .

in fy2008 , the refugee ceiling was increased to 80,000 .

yet critics note that the unhcr has identified a worldwide refugee population of approximately 9.7 million refugees at the end of 2007 .

thus , for many critics , questions arise over whether the united states is being active enough in seeking qualifying refugees ( particularly children ) , and whether it is admitting its "fair share" of the refugee population .

in terms of absolute refugee levels , however , the u.s. refugee admission level is one of the highest in the world .

in the 111 th congress , no legislation has been introduced relating to unaccompanied refugee minors .

however , one piece of legislation was introduced in the 110 th congress that had been proposed in previous congresses and is likely to be re - introduced in the current congress .

in the senate , senator diane feinstein sponsored the unaccompanied alien child protection act of 2007 ( s. 844 ) .

this legislation would have provided for several statutory changes , including the , criteria for treatment and detention of all unaccompanied alien minors ( including refugees ) , and the preference order of child placement .

the legislation additionally would have granted orr access to children in dhs's custody to determine the child's age .

notably , the legislation also would have provided for the appointment of child advocates for unaccompanied alien minors , including counsel for all children in the custody of dhs that are not being repatriated to a contiguous country .

these advocates would largely serve on a pro bono basis .

senator feinstein introduced this same legislation as s.amdt .

1146 to s. 1348 ( which was the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2007 ) , and the amendment passed the senate by a voice vote .

the same provisions were also included in title viii of the "a place to call home act" ( h.r .

3409 ) , which was introduced as comprehensive legislation dealing with youth - related issues .

