in 1973 , the smaller , largely english - speaking countries of the eastern caribbean launched the caribbean community and common market ( caricom ) , an integration plan intended to coordinate and enhance their collective economic and social development .

initially designed as an intraregional free trade area with expectations that it would become a common market , caricom integration has unfolded slowly and been limited to a partial customs union .

caricom's strategy for finally achieving a "single economic space" rests on implementing the caribbean single market and economy ( csme ) , formally established on january 1 , 2006 and intended to be fully in place by 2015 .

caricom is a highly trade dependent region undergoing major changes to its economic relationship with the world .

adjusting to these changes through the csme is its primary development challenge .

to fulfill the csme vision , its members would have to adopt considerably deeper commitments to economic integration .

the caribbean basin has been a longstanding interest of the united states , and the success of caricom directly affects stability in the region .

it therefore has important implications for u.s. trade , investment , immigration , drug interdiction , and national security policies .

although small in size , caricom's trade and investment relationship with the united states may be poised to become a more prominent issue as the region adjusts to the changing external environment , not the least of which includes the ongoing erosion of trade preferences with europe and the united states , as well as the concomitant rise of bilateral and regional free trade agreements in the region .

this report evaluates caricom's development and implications for u.s. foreign economic policy .

it will be updated periodically .

the united states has long considered the caribbean basin a strategically important region based on its proximity and unique geographic features .

it straddles the divide between north and south america ( see figure 1 ) , is home to important sea - lanes , raw materials , trade and investment opportunities , and historically has been a first line defense against the encroachment of foreign powers .

a broad range of u.s. interests in the region has been reflected in u.s. foreign policies dating from the monroe doctrine in the early 19 th century , through the cold war era , culminating in the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) in the 1980s , to the current effort to thwart illegal drug trafficking , money laundering , and terrorist activities .

in all cases , the united states has sought to foster social , economic , and political stability in the region , while also maintaining an eye on its own economic , commercial , and strategic interests .

caricom comprises a group of 12 island and 3 larger coastal nations in and around the caribbean sea , bordered by the atlantic ocean to the east , south and central america to the south , the gulf of mexico to the west , and the united states to the north .

although caricom members share many cultural and historical similarities , as seen in table 1 , their population , land size , economies , per capita income , and social indicators ( eg , life expectancy ) can vary considerably , a reality that caricom responded to by designating some of its members as less developed countries ( ldcs ) , making them eligible for "special and differential treatment. .

collectively , these former british , dutch , and french territories constitute a richly diverse cultural mosaic of european , african , and native influences that find themselves , paradoxically , "united by the very sea that also divides them. .

the tension between unity and division is a common theme throughout caribbean society , leading to what might be considered the "caricom challenge:" how to integrate a diverse area in a manner that will meet individual country and regional development goals , in a equitable and mutually supporting way , without negating national identities and aspirations .

the caricom countries inherited narrow production structures from their colonial economic heritage .

as captive producers and consumers for the european states , caribbean economies were developed to "complement" their counterparts across the atlantic ocean .

spawned by foreign investment and sustained by protected trade , plantation economies arose based largely on sugar and banana production .

minerals extraction and tourism came along much later .

the colonies were equally dependent on european imports for manufactured goods and food , a relationship that endured for centuries and carried forward into the post - independence period .

as a result , the caribbean trade regime remained relatively undiversified , sheltered from competition , and poorly linked to domestic food and manufacturing production that could have promoted broader - based development .

the caribbean economies , therefore , were poorly positioned to make the leap to global competition .

as trade preferences eroded , the caribbean's high production costs and tariff rates exposed its lack of competitiveness .

the encroaching global economy , however , began to force change on caricom's trade and investment relationships , irrespective of the region's capacity or willingness to adapt .

the most significant adjustment to the trade regime has been the declining importance of trade preferences with the eu and the united states .

unilateral preferences with the eu are being replaced by a reciprocal economic partnership agreement ( epa ) , while the relative benefit of unilateral trade preferences with the united states continues to erode as multilateral liberalization and u.s. reciprocal trade agreements , beginning with the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) in 1994 , expand .

at the same time , intraregional caricom trade shows little promise for growth and latin america and asia are emerging as increasingly important trade partners in the future .

the implications of these trends for caricom are still unfolding , but at the least suggest that for many countries , particularly the smaller ones , manufacturing and agricultural exports may continue to decline relative to services trade ( tourism , financial , education ) .

these alternatives to traditional production and trade patterns , however , are not developing fast enough to mitigate fully income , employment , and outward migration problems .

economic transition will be the greatest challenge for the csme , and perhaps defines its reason for being .

in this context , changing economic relations with caricom's major partners are explored after a short review of its current trade and investment profile .

caricom views its long - range development strategy as critical for addressing unemployment , poverty , out - migration , and other economic problems that affect political and social stability .

the csme , as a framework for deepening integration both within the region and with the world at large , sits at the center of this strategy .

intraregional integration is incomplete , but plans call for deepening the effort and progress has been made in achieving greater functional cooperation of the public sector .

the trade and investment rules need significant tightening , new public revenue sources to replace lost tariff revenue must be identified , and there is much to be done before a grand scheme of full factor mobility and macroeconomic policy coordination could be realized .

managing the process of "insertion" into the global economy is the overriding task .

as much as caribbean leaders have identified the need for caricom to increase productivity by opening the economies to global competition , the region has hesitated to adopt fast - paced change in its trade regime .

caricom insists on a measured , if not protracted transition to full trade liberalization whether addressing the doha round , epa , or bilateral talks with the united states .

special and differential treatment is considered necessary in all cases .

the region's historically privileged trade relationships with europe and the united states , however , have not helped caricom prepare for trade liberalization with the world .

caricom's insistence on a lengthy transition to full trade liberalization could even delay policy reforms it considers central to the success of the csme .

contradictions such as these are inherent in a diverse region attempting to unify economic policies of 15 countries , and may naturally resolve slowly .

this prospect points to the need for decisive collective action to move ahead meaningfully with the csme .

circumstances may already be forcing the region to action .

choices will have to be made in which a lack of decisiveness can be costly .

adjustment to the recently negotiated epa with the eu will be a challenge and invite procrastination .

similarly , u.s. - caricom trade relations may be redefined for the 21 st century by a lack of clear action on trade policy if nothing is done to renew or adjust to the expiring cbtpa preferences .

these raise potentially important questions for the united states as well , both within and beyond trade and investment policy .

the united states has long turned to trade policy as a foundation for supporting economic development and political stability in the region .

the rationale is predicated on the belief that growth and stability breed conditions conducive for deeper cooperation in such important policy areas as countering illicit drug trafficking , immigration , and terrorist activity .

congress has had , and may continue to have , a deep and broad policy agenda in mind as it contemplates the next step in formulating u.s. trade policy toward caricom .

