in the weeks after the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , the full extent of the pan - asian terrorist network with extensive links to al qaeda was uncovered .

the network , known as jemaah islamiyah ( islamic group ) , was discovered to have cells in indonesia , malaysia , the philippines , singapore , and thailand as well as in australia and pakistan .

since the bali bombing in 2002 , which ji is suspected of carrying out , crackdowns by various governments in the region are believed to have severely weakened the organization .

arrests and killings by indonesian authorities in 2007 are thought to have been particularly effective , as was the reported 2009 killing of noordin mohammed top .

some analysts now believe ji is no longer a regional organization , in that its administrative structure appears to be confined to indonesia .

even there , ji apparently was unable to muster forces to combat a january 2007 crackdown by police in the central sulawesi district of poso that appears to have driven ji from the area .

ji's links to al qaeda reportedly have withered .

most analysts caution , however , that individual ji members remain scattered across the region , are highly trained , and are capable of carrying out acts of violence .

additionally , ji's more moderate factions appear to have refocused on grass - roots education , indoctrination , and other activities they feel are better suited to their long - term goal of instituting sharia law in indonesia .

therefore , ji's activities in the medium to long term bear watching .

ji's goals have ranged from establishing an islamic regime in indonesia , to establishing an islamic caliphate over muslim regions of southeast asia and northern australia , to waging jihad against the west .

until the more militant factions either were eliminated or broke away from the organization in the 2005-2007 period , there appears to have been considerable debate within the organization about which of these goals to pursue and prioritize , with different ji factions preferring different objectives .

jemaah islamiyah leaders have formed alliances with other militant islamist groups to share resources for training , arms procurement , financial assistance , and to promote cooperation in carrying out attacks .

indeed , there is some evidence that such cooperation increased after 2002 , when arrests and other counterterror actions began to take its toll on ji , forcing it to adapt and form closer working relationships with other groups .

within indonesia , some in the network have created and / or trained local radical islamist groups that have been involved in sectarian conflict in the country's outer islands .

additionally , there is considerable evidence that ji has engaged in joint operations and training with filipino groups .

for a time , ji's main partner in the philippines reportedly was the separatist group , the moro islamic liberation front ( milf ) .

there is growing cooperation among the abu sayyaf group , several major milf commands , and elements of ji on mindanao .

according to a 2009 international crisis group report , some ji members appear to have made mindanao a primary base of operations .

others are reportedly working with abu sayyaf in jolo .

in october 2002 , the united states designated ji as a foreign terrorist organization .

thereafter , the united nations security council added the network to its own list of terrorist groups , a move requiring all u.n. members to freeze the organization's assets , deny it access to funding , and prevent its members from entering or traveling through their territories .

since december 2001 , over 250 suspected and admitted ji members , including a number of key leaders , have been arrested .

many of these arrests are credited to more extensive intelligence sharing among national police forces .

the philippines condemned the september 11 , 2001 attacks and offered ports and airports for use by u.s. naval vessels and military aircraft for refueling stops .

philippine president gloria macapagal - arroyo and president bush agreed on the deployment of u.s. military personnel to the southern philippines to train and assist the philippine military against the terrorist abu sayyaf group , making the philippines one of the most extensive examples of u.s. counterterrorism cooperation in southeast asia .

this agreement was reached under a visiting force agreement that the philippines and the united states signed in 1999 that provided for the dispatch of u.s. military forces to the philippines to provide training and other assistance to the philippine armed forces ( afp ) .

thailand has endured a persistent separatist insurgency in its majority - muslim southern provinces , which include the provinces of yala , narathiwat , pattani , and to a lesser extent songhkla , while dealing with deep political instability in its capital .

since january 2004 , sectarian violence between insurgents and security forces in the country's majority - muslim provinces has left over 3,400 people dead , according to press reports .

the groups that have led this surge in violence are generally poorly understood and their motives are difficult to characterize .

groups active in the region are inspired by long - held perceptions that the country's ethnic - thai buddhist majority mistreats the ethnic - malay muslim community .

 ( there are approximately 1.3 million ethnic malays in yala , narathiwat and pattani , 80% of the population of the provinces , through a small fraction of thailand's overall population of 65 million. ) .

there is no evidence of a broader anti - western agenda among the groups active in the region .

most experts believe they are mostly focused on local autonomy .

there is also little evidence that foreign jihadi groups are significantly active in southern thailand , although periodic reports suggest that militants elsewhere in southeast asia have used the plight of thai muslims as inspiration for their own causes , and have offered occasional material support to groups in southern thailand .

attention in bangkok has been diverted by deep - set political turmoil since 2006 , which has made it difficult for successive thai governments to forge a coherent strategy for dealing with the southern insurgency .

a bloodless military coup in september 2006 ousted the democratically - elected prime minister thaksin shinawatra , whose government had pursued an aggressive campaign against militants in the south .

thaksin was followed by a military - led interim government which took control for 15 months .

a civilian government took power after elections were held in december 2007 , and it was in turn replaced in december 2008 after its leader was impeached .

the current coalition government is led by abhisit vejjajiva and the democrat party .

the successive administrations have taken somewhat different approaches to curbing the violence in the south , but none appear to have found a way to resolve the ongoing insurgency .

unlike many of its neighbors in southeast asia , malaysia has no indigenous separatist groups or insurgents that are generally viewed as engaging in terrorist activities .

the purported terrorist groups that do remain in malaysia are generally external in nature , comparatively small and relatively inactive .

following the events of september 11 , 2001 , malaysia was briefly considered a "hot spot" for global terrorism because some of plotters of the attacks reportedly met in kuala lumpur .

because malaysia views itself as a prime example of a moderate muslim nation , it believes it has a better understanding of the causes of and solutions for terrorism than western nations .

during the administrations of former prime ministers mahathir mohammed and abdullah badawi , malaysia maintained that u.s. anti - terrorism policies and strategies were leading to the growth — not the decline — in the membership and popular support for so - called "terrorist groups. .

instead , malaysia advocated an approach that focused on combating what it sees as root causes of terrorism , such as poverty and the denial of human rights .

despite these sharp differences in their policies and strategies , malaysia has historically been supportive of specific u.s. counter - terrorism programs and initiatives in southeast asia .

however , some aspects of malaysia's domestic counter - terrorism programs have been sharply criticized for curtaining civil liberties and providing the malaysian government with tools to suppress political opposition .

the perceived weakness of the malaysia's current leadership following the 2008 elections is contributing to renewed calls for the repeal or reform of malaysia's anti - terrorism laws .

shortly after the september 11 , 2001 attacks in the united states , singaporean authorities launched aggressive operations to counter terrorist activities .

under its internal security act , singapore has arrested dozens of suspected islamic militants , many of whom are alleged to be members or sympathizers of ji .

in 2002 , singaporean authorities reportedly uncovered a ji plot to bomb the u.s. embassy and other western targets in singapore .

authorities claim that many of the suspects have links to the philippines - based moro islamic liberation front ( milf ) .

despite its strong counter - terrorism record , singapore was embarrassed by the february 2008 high - profile prison escape of mas selamat bin kastari , the alleged head of ji in singapore .

mas selamat was accused of plotting the embassy bombing .

a large scale manhunt failed to find him in the ensuing months , but he was apprehended in april 2009 in malaysia , where he remains in detention under malaysia's internal security act .

a singapore government report issued two months after the escape concluded that there had been no inside cooperation in mas selamat's escape from the tightly - guarded whitley detention center .

the joint counter terrorism center ( jctc ) coordinates the multiple agencies and departments of the singaporean government that deal with terrorism , including the intelligence agencies .

since 9 / 11 , singapore has increased intelligence cooperation with regional countries and the united states .

singaporean authorities have shared information gathered from suspected militants held under the internal security act with u.s. officials , reportedly providing detailed insights into ji and al qaeda's structure , methods , and recruiting strategies .

singapore was a founding member of the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) , a program that aims to interdict shipments of weapons of mass destruction - related materials , and was the first asian country to join the container security initiative ( csi ) , a series of bilateral , reciprocal agreements that allow u.s. customs and border patrol officials to pre - screen u.s. - bound containers .

singapore has led other littoral states in southeast asia to jointly protect the critical shipping lanes of the straits of malacca from piracy or terrorist attacks .

singaporean officials maintain that important port facilities and other major targets remain vulnerable and have stepped up protection of these and other critical infrastructure .

measures include camera surveillance of water and power facilities , enhanced security at embassies and prominent public areas , and the deployment of armed personnel at a major petrochemical hub .

singapore has revamped its national security bureaucracy and instituted a "total defense" campaign , which calls on all singaporeans to participate in the national defense .

the government intends to psychologically prepare its public for an attack by framing the question of a terrorist attack as "when , not if. .

a large - scale anti - terrorism exercise in june 2005 involved over 1,000 citizens and public officials and singapore's public transit systems .

the regulation of people and goods across singapore's borders has been intensified through the merging of the border control functions of the customs and immigration services .

to strengthen border security , singapore has introduced a biometric passport holding a chip that provides the owner's facial and fingerprint identification information .

singapore instituted a strategic goods control ( sgc ) system that aims to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and is active in international fora that focus on export control regimes , including the export control and related border security assurance ( exbs ) program organized by the u.s. department of state .

