congress and the administration have increased their interest in foreign assistance programs in the post - 9 / 11 environment , prompting a re - examination of the purposes of assistance , and how best to achieve those objectives .

the renewed interest occurs as the administration has initiated many new programs that introduced performance - based assistance in the form of the millennium challenge account , and sector - specific assistance , largely directed at health programs in africa .

the administration also unveiled in early 2006 a restructuring of foreign aid programs administered by the department of state and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

the restructuring is meant to link aid programs with strategic objectives and to provide more coordination and coherence .

in addition , a number of recent studies have made specific recommendations for both policy and organizational reforms .

congress has been considering these reforms as part of the annual appropriations process .

the 111 th congress may consider some far - reaching reforms in authorizing legislation in 2009 at a time when the obama administration has expressed interest in aid reform .

congress will likely play an integral role in any type of foreign aid reform , by authorizing a new aid infrastructure , appropriating funds for refocused aid programs , or both .

the challenges facing congress include weighing the justifications for foreign aid programs in relation to benefits to the united states that may be provided by such assistance , and to a variety of domestic needs that often put budgetary pressure on foreign aid .

this entails scrutiny of the current level of assistance and proposals to increase aid .

a foreign aid reform effort likely necessitates a review of the current organization of the numerous departments and agencies that provide international assistance programs with an eye toward providing coordination .

this may involve a re - evaluation of the existing statutory framework provided by the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( p.l .

87-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

2151 , et seq .

 ) , and other authorizing legislation , depending on the extent of the reform .

there are a variety of organizational reforms that can be undertaken .

those chosen would depend on what congress perceives to be the major problems besetting u.s. foreign assistance policy , whether those problems are related to goals and strategy ; implementation and effectiveness ; or coordination and coherence .

the following section outlines the criticisms of current aid programs and issues that congress faces in reforming them .

the next section provides a review of proposals for policy options and organizational reform in how foreign aid policy is formulated and how aid programs are administered and managed .

the topic of foreign aid reform and reorganization has existed nearly as long as foreign aid programs themselves .

in fact , the creation of usaid in the kennedy administration was partly an effort to bring coordination to aid programs that had developed across government agencies .

since then , there have been numerous studies of how best to organize foreign aid in order to increase its effectiveness and to support u.s. interests .

there are at least three paths congress can consider with regard to policy options .

one is to maintain the status quo , with all the attributes described herein .

a second is to maintain the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , but further amend it to reflect the challenges of the 21 st century , and possibly to support a different mix of assistance by refocusing goals , strategies , and programs .

as outlined below , those include refocus assistance ; change or better define the role of the department of defense ; change the use of multilateral instruments and organizations ; and create a unified budget .

another path , and arguably a more ambitious one , is to reorganize the current aid infrastructure to achieve congressional objectives .

this could entail a re - write of the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

as outlined below , structural reform options include elevate usaid to a cabinet - level department ; merge usaid into the state department ; create a new aid agency with increased jurisdiction ; and improve interagency coordination .

the recognition that foreign aid serves important national interests , together with annual increases in foreign aid budgets since 9 / 11 , has produced several government - and non - governmental - sponsored studies of how to raise the profile of foreign assistance , provide better coordination , and improve aid effectiveness .

in the last year , several reports from three organizations have generated a considerable amount of interest .

for clarity and comparability , each entity's recommendations , provided below , have been organized by the subject areas of budget , structure , and policy options , although some recommendations have implications for all three areas .

the help commission was created by the helping to enhance the livelihood of people around the globe commission act ( help commission act , 22 usc 2394b ) .

introduced by representative frank wolf in october 2003 , and passed by congress as sec .

637 of the consolidated appropriations act , fy2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) , the act called for a commission to study and report on u.s. foreign development assistance programs .

the commission began operations in 2005 and issued its report , beyond assistance , in december 2007 .

the commission was composed of 21 members: 6 appointed by the president , 4 each appointed by the speaker of the house and senate majority leader , and 3 each appointed by the house minority leader and senate minority leader , with the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development serving as an ex officio member .

the commission was charged with identifying past and present objectives of u.s. development assistance , analyzing whether such assistance should be used as a means to achieve u.s. foreign policy objectives , and considering how to evaluate the performance of aid programs .

the act called for a comprehensive review of policy decisions , delivery obstacles , and best practices .

the commission held a series of meetings with development experts , and conducted study missions to aid recipient countries .

it looked at both the efficiency and effectiveness of aid programs government - wide , including development , security , humanitarian , and food assistance .

major help commission recommendations include the following .

in general , the help commission recommends that there be a recognition that security and development reinforce each other .

rewrite the foreign assistance act of 1961 to reflect current and anticipated world conditions .

build vibrant private sectors by increasing u.s. technical assistance and funding for small and medium businesses that do not have access to private capital .

renew efforts to improve agricultural productivity and related industries in the developing world , including taking actions to minimize the effects of domestic agricultural subsidies and to encourage g - 8 countries to do the same .

increase the local purchase of food aid .

form partnerships with local public and private entities to increase demand - driven programs .

leverage non - governmental actors and growth in philanthropy and private investment through programs like the global development alliance ( gda ) .

align u.s. trade and development policies .

one suggestion is to allow duty - free , quota - free provisions for mcc - eligible countries and for the poorest countries with a per capita gross domestic product below $2,000 .

establish a quadrennial development and humanitarian assistance review .

the help commission did not reach a consensus on an organizational structure , although the majority of commissioners supported a redesigned department of state .

a strong minority also supported the creation of a cabinet - level department for global development .

create a new combined usaid and department of state called the international affairs department to reflect the elevation of development as a pillar of national security .

the new department would have four sub - cabinet agencies reporting to the secretary: economic affairs , development , and trade ; humanitarian services and stabilization ; political and security affairs ; and public diplomacy and consular affairs .

the report argues that this is not to "simply move usaid into the current department of state .

it would completely reorganize these and other agencies and departments by functions to ensure a coordinated , coherent approach. .

 ( page 15 , executive summary. ) .

establish an entity to conduct research and development modeled on the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) that would create and commercialize technological products that would benefit developing countries .

establish a high - level mechanism to coordinate aid policy for all government agencies in the executive office of the president , possibly within the national security council .

strengthen the office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization , and implement the administration proposal for a civilian response corps .

the help commission recommends increases for the international affairs budget that could result in a doubling of foreign assistance funding .

create a unified national security budget combining functions 050 and 150 , and fencing as much as 10% for international affairs activities .

ten percent of such a budget would result in a doubling of current foreign aid levels .

improve the monitoring and evaluation , human resources , and procurement and contracting capabilities of u.s. international affairs agencies .

this includes strengthening staff resources devoted to development and doing away with the operating expense account .

agree on uniform procedures for reprogrammings and congressional holds .

consolidate and realign the foreign aid account structure .

establish a permanent humanitarian crisis response facility funded at $500 million and a transitional security crisis fund .

clarify dod's role in development assistance by ensuring adequate funding for state and usaid programs in areas in which dod is engaged .

the minority of the senate foreign relations committee issued two reports in the last two years on aspects of u.s. foreign assistance programs .

the first , embassies as command posts in the anti - terror campaign ( s. prt .

109-52 ) , was issued in december 2006 and focused on the growing role of the department of defense in foreign assistance programs .

the second , embassies grapple to guide foreign aid ( s. prt .

110-33 ) , was issued in november 2007 and examined the implementation of the new strategic framework for foreign assistance from a field perspective .

both reports made reform recommendations .

similar to the help commission report , the sfrc recommends a strategic approach that incorporates both security components and humanitarian programs .

design a foreign assistance strategy that integrates national security needs and a humanitarian imperative .

congress should move expeditiously on ambassadorial nominations and funding decisions ; overhaul the foreign assistance act of 1961 , and implement a two - year reauthorization schedule ; and agree on reprogramming levels below which congressional notification is not required , on a three - year pilot program .

give ambassadors more decision - making authority over military - related assistance programs .

the senate report recommends separating the dfa and usaid administrator's positions , and to reorganize usaid to give it a voice at higher levels of government , even while the secretary would have enhanced authority over aid programs .

give the secretary of state the authority to ensure all aid , government - wide , is in u.s. foreign policy interest .

secretary should provide strategic direction , transparency , and accountability .

the f process should be redesigned to make decision - making clearer and more accountable ; make the dfa a position on which the senate would advise and consent as deputy secretary of state ; give the dfa authority to prepare a unified aid budget and to referee funding disputes ; expand dfa's responsibility to all government aid programs , including dod ; and create deputy assistant secretary positions for programs at regional levels , similar to the state department's seed coordinator .

usaid should be reorganized to separate the usaid administrator's position from that of dfa ; give the usaid administrator an independent presence on the president's highest level inter - agency councils on foreign aid issues , while still remaining under the policy guidance of the secretary of state ; and give usaid officers more opportunities to achieve ambassadorships .

ambassadors and deputy chiefs of mission ( dcms ) should be trained in foreign assistance .

like the help commission report , the senate report supports the concept of a unified budget and increased resources for both aid programs and usaid operations .

create a unified aid budget managed by the dfa .

strengthen usaid's in - house expertise and increase its resources , including its operating expense account .

increase resources for function 150 accounts to prevent the migration of aid programs to the department of defense .

executive - legislative relations and communication should be improved as a way to lessen the need or motivation for congressional directives and limitations .

the csis commission on smart power , chaired by richard l. armitage and joseph s. nye jr. , issued a report , a smarter , more secure america , in november 2007 .

the report's findings and recommendations are far - reaching and extend beyond foreign assistance .

in general , the report advocates that hard power , as exercised by military might , be integrated with soft power , as conducted through diplomacy and development initiatives , thus resulting in "smart power. .

among the recommendations with regard to foreign assistance are the following .

the csis report recommends a more engaged u.s. foreign policy that encompasses all aspects of international relations .

like both the help commission and sfrc reports , it recognizes the inter - relation between security and development .

make greater investments in multilateral institutions such as the united nations , the world bank , and imf .

with regard to the united nations , the report recommends a greater use of u.n. vehicles in the areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding , counter - terrorism , global health , and energy and climate issues .

strengthen the g - 8 summit process on routinely addressed issues , such as energy and climate , nonproliferation , global health , education , and the world economy .

work with local civil society and the private sector for more agile , innovative , and locally supported aid delivery systems .

the csis report does not endorse a cabinet - level agency , but does recommend that it have a cabinet - level voice .

like both the help and sfrc reports , it endorses the elevation of development within the organizational structure of government in order to improve the coordination of development activities government - wide .

create a cabinet - level voice on global development .

unify all government assistance programs .

create a u.s .

global health corporation to build a more unified approach to development and health .

create a smart power deputy under the national security advisor and the director of the office of management and budget .

improve inter - agency coordination by strengthening department executive secretaries with an adjunct standing coordination center .

establish a quadrennial smart power review .

consistent with both the help and sfrc reports , the csis report recommends increased funding for foreign assistance programs .

elevate the development mission within the u.s. government by increasing the size of the development and humanitarian budget and increasing aid effectiveness .

other organizations and think tanks have studies in various stages of development .

many hope to be able to offer viable options to a new administration and congress .

most of these organizations support both increased resources and an elevated visibility for assistance programs .

disagreement remains on whether a new structure and authorizing legislation is needed , and what any new structure would look like .

