recent mortgage repayment problems and subsequent increases in foreclosures have generated concern in congress as to whether borrowers are taking out high interest loans that they cannot afford .

there are at least four possible explanations why some borrowers receive higher - priced loans .

first , borrowers with weak credit histories may face higher borrowing costs than borrowers with better credit histories if lenders require more compensation for taking on greater credit or default risks .

second , the actual costs of the mortgage may have been hidden or simply not transparent when borrowers entered into the lending transaction .

hidden costs can surprise a borrower and cause financial distress , which may lead to foreclosure .

third , borrowers may have entered into high cost loans as a result of discrimination .

according to the federal reserve board , minorities are still more likely to pay rates above specified pricing thresholds ( prior to controlling for some related borrower characteristics ) .

fourth , recent mortgage repayment problems may reflect a rise in various forms of predatory lending .

in short , borrowers may have obtained expensive mortgage loans for a variety of reasons , which may have resulted in recent repayment problems .

various legislation has been enacted to oversee lending practices in the mortgage market .

the home mortgage disclosure act ( hmda ) of 1975 requires the disclosure of mortgage loan information so regulators can monitor mortgage lending activity .

in addition , the 1994 home ownership equity protection act ( hoepa ) , enacted as an amendment to the truth - in - lending act ( tila ) of 1968 , requires additional disclosures to consumers for high cost refinance and other non - purchase loans secured by their principal residences .

the real estate settlement procedures act ( respa ) of 1974 is designed to protect mortgage borrowers from paying excessive fees related to real estate transactions .

respa requires standardized disclosures about the settlement or closing costs of residential mortgages .

this report briefly describes the role of hmda reporting for monitoring higher - priced lending activities , discusses policy issues , and summarizes recent regulatory decisions made by the federal reserve board , the agency that implements these statutes .

this report also discusses how hoepa and federally insured mortgage loans may be affected by recent regulatory changes .

hmda was enacted in 1975 to assist government regulators and the private sector with the monitoring of anti - discriminatory practices .

hmda is implemented by the federal reserve board via regulation c ( 12 cfr part 203 ) , and the public loan data set is available at the federal financial institutions examination council's website .

hmda data is used to assist with the supervision and enforcement of fair lending compliance .

the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , for example , is a federal agency that uses the hmda data to assist with its fair lending and community reinvestment act ( cra ) examinations of nationally chartered banks .

to address some concerns described above , the federal reserve has changed the benchmark rate used to calculate the rate - spread for reporting hmda loans .

the federal reserve proposes use of the average mortgage rates found in the primary mortgage market survey ( pmms ) conducted by freddie mac as the benchmark rates for rate - spread calculations .

the reporting thresholds for first mortgage loans will now be those with a spread equal to or greater than 1.5 percentage points ; for the second mortgage loans , the reporting threshold will be equal to or greater than 3.5 percentage points .

the use of an average prime mortgage rate , which the pmms reports on a weekly basis , is likely to follow the rates of prime mortgage rates more closely than treasury rates .

whenever the yield curve changes , a rate - spread computed as the difference between a mortgage rate and an average prime mortgage rate is likely to show less volatility than one computed as the difference between a mortgage rate and a treasury rate .

as a result of this regulatory change , it may become easier to attribute an observable increase in rate - spread reported loans to actual changes in lending practices , which ultimately is the objective for hmda reporting .

the 1994 home ownership equity protection act ( hoepa ) is an amendment to the truth - in - lending act ( tila ) of 1968 .

tila requires lenders to disclose the cost of credit and repayment terms of all consumer loans before borrowers enter into any transactions .

hoepa imposes additional disclosure requirements for consumers obtaining high cost refinance and other non - purchase ( closed - ended second ) loans secured by their principal residences .

a loan is considered to be a hoepa loan if either the apr exceeds the rate of a comparable treasury security by more than 8 percentage points on a first mortgage , 10 percentage points on a second mortgage , or if the consumer pays total points and fees exceeding the larger of $561 or 8% of the total loan amount .

should a loan satisfy any of these criteria , the borrower must be provided with disclosures three days before the loan is closed in addition to the three - day right of rescission generally required by tila , which means a total of six days to decide whether or not to enter into the transaction .

in 2002 , revisions to regulation c required lenders to report hoepa loans in hmda , and they must also identify such loans as being subject to hoepa requirements .

hoepa , however , is implemented via regulation z ( 12 cfr part 226 , sections 31 , 32 , and 34 ) .

hoepa has been extended to cover more loans .

since 2002 , coverage has been extended by lowering the price trigger from 10 to the current 8 percentage points above a comparable treasury security .

the federal reserve board has also amended regulation z to apply hoepa rules to all mortgage lenders ( and not just those supervised and examined by the federal reserve ) .

the amended rule added four key protections .

the first protection prohibits lenders from making loans based upon the home value without regard for the borrower's ability to repay the loan from income and assets .

second , verification of income and assets will be required for determining repayment ability .

third , higher - cost loans may not have prepayment penalties that last for more than two years , and prepayment penalties are not allowed for loans in which the monthly payment can change during the initial four years .

finally , escrow accounts for property taxes and homeowners' insurance must be established for all first lien mortgages .

additional protections covered in the rule are described in the federal reserve announcement .

hoepa loans may have been considered a subset of the larger set of hmda loans when both rate spread calculations relied upon comparable u.s. treasury securities for the benchmark rates .

now that the federal reserve has modified the benchmark rates used to compute hmda rate spreads , hmda and hoepa rate spreads will be calculated under separate methods .

the benchmark rate for computing hoepa loans is defined by federal statute , and modification of the benchmark rate for hoepa loans would be left for congress to decide .

loans meeting the existing hoepa thresholds may still simultaneously meet the newly adopted hmda thresholds .

hoepa rate spreads , however , will now be more sensitive to treasury yield curve movements than hmda rate spreads .

mortgage insurance is usually required for borrowers lacking either a downpayment or home equity of at least 20% of the property value .

prime ( or conventional ) as well as subprime homebuyers may purchase private mortgage insurance .

the federal housing administration ( fha ) is a federally operated mortgage insurance program that primarily serves first - time and less creditworthy borrowers .

should the borrower default on a fha - insured mortgage loan obligation , the lender will be reimbursed for the loss .

the fha is a self - financing program under which premiums must be sufficient to cover its costs and expected losses .

fha fees are collected via an upfront premium charge when the loan is originated and an annual premium charge thereafter .

after passage of the housing and economic act of 2008 , fha received the statutory authority to charge up to 3% in its upfront premium and 0.55% annually .

consequently , the bulk of the total mortgage insurance premium must be collected upfront , and fha has little flexibility to collect a larger portion of the insurance fees via the annual premium mechanism .

fha - insured mortgage loans , therefore , run the risk of hitting the 1.5% threshold of reportable hmda rate - spread loans .

the fha upfront premium charges would likely be calculated in the apr of the mortgage loan , which would cause the rate - spread to be higher .

the flexibility to shift how the fha insurance fees are collected or , more specifically , to make greater use of the annual premium mechanism , arguably has at least three advantages .

first , annual premium collections would reduce the risk of fha loans being incorrectly identified as higher - priced loans under hmda reporting requirements .

second , computing refunds or premium reductions via the annual premium may arguably be easier should fha borrowers become eligible for rebates .

third , under certain circumstances , an annual premium mechanism may also reduce financial burdens on fha borrowers .

for example , borrowers planning to reside in their homes for a relatively short period of time would not incur additional interest costs due to financing large insurance premiums into their mortgage loans .

