the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , the 2008 farm bill ) is the most recent omnibus farm bill , authorizing or reauthorizing a wide range of programs for a multi - year period , including commodity price and income support , farm credit , agricultural conservation , research , rural development , and foreign and domestic food programs , among others .

the 2008 farm bill became law on june 18 , 2008 , after the house and senate successfully voted to override a veto of the measure .

subtitle e of the commodity programs title ( title i ) of the enacted 2008 farm bill contains the authority for two major ongoing dairy policy tools used by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) to support the prices and incomes received by dairy farmers — the dairy price support program ( dpsp ) and the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program .

previous authority for these programs was governed by the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) through 2007 , and extended into 2008 by the enactment of various short - term farm bill extensions .

as part of more than one year of hearings and debate on the omnibus farm bill , congress considered whether to reauthorize these two programs in their current forms or with modifications .

p.l .

110-246 reauthorizes the milc program through september 30 , 2012 , and the dpsp through december 31 , 2012 , with several modifications as discussed in this report .

the dpsp provides indirect price support to dairy farmers through government purchases of surplus dairy products at statutory prices .

the milc program supports farmer income through direct payments to participating dairy farmers when the market price of farm milk in any month falls below a legislatively mandated target price .

a third federal dairy policy tool , federal milk marketing orders , requires dairy processors to pay a minimum price for farm milk depending on its end use .

federal orders are permanently authorized and hence do not require periodic reauthorization .

instead , changes are generally made administratively by usda and approved by farmer referendum .

however , issues such as the proposed authority for processors to be exempt from federal order minimum prices processors when they forward contract with dairy farmers were brought to the attention of congress in the farm bill debate .

p.l .

110-246 authorizes a forward contract program ( through september 30 , 2012 ) and contains safeguards designed to ensure that dairy farmers are not compelled by processors to participate in the program .

the 2008 farm bill also authorizes a commission to review and evaluate federal milk marketing order policies and procedures .

separately , the 2008 farm bill reauthorizes the dairy export incentive program .

it also requires alaska , hawaii , and puerto rico to contribute to an ongoing dairy promotion program that is currently supported by mandatory assessments on dairy producers in the 48 contiguous states .

this provision was included to allow usda to implement a 2002 farm bill - mandated extension of this assessment to imported dairy products .

this provision was supported by most milk producer groups , but opposed by dairy importers and processors .

see the appendix at the end of this report for a side - by - side comparison of the enacted 2008 farm bill with previous law and the house and senate farm bill dairy provisions .

the agricultural act of 1949 first established the dairy price support program ( dpsp ) by permanently requiring usda to support the farm price of milk .

since 1949 , congress has regularly amended the program , usually in the context of multi - year omnibus farm acts and budget reconciliation acts .

 ( see table 3 for a recent history of spending on the dairy price support program and related activities. ) .

section 1501 of the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 , the omnibus 2002 farm bill ) authorized a 5½ - year extension of the program through december 31 , 2007 , at the then - current support price of $9.90 per hundredweight ( cwt. ) .

of farm milk .

several measures were enacted to provide short - term extensions of many expiring usda programs , including the dpsp , so that congress could complete work on a new farm bill .

historically , the supported farm price for milk is intended to protect farmers from price declines that might force them out of business and to protect consumers from seasonal imbalances of supply and demand .

usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) supports milk prices by its standing offer to purchase surplus nonfat dry milk , cheese , and butter from dairy processors .

government purchases of these storable dairy products indirectly support the price of milk for all dairy farmers .

under the 2002 farm bill , prices paid to the processors were set administratively by usda at a level that would permit them to pay dairy farmers at least the federal support price for their milk .

prior to passage of the 2008 farm bill , in order to achieve the support price of $9.90 per cwt .

of milk specified in the 2002 farm bill , usda had a standing offer to processors to purchase surplus manufactured dairy products at the following prices , which were administratively established by usda: $1.05 per pound for butter , $0.80 for nonfat dry milk , $1.13 per pound for block cheddar , and $1.10 per pound for barrel cheese .

whenever market prices fell to the support level , processors generally made the business decision of selling surplus product to the government rather than to the marketplace .

consequently , the government purchase prices usually served as a floor for the market price , which in turn indirectly supported the farm price of milk at $9.90 per cwt .

government purchases of surplus dairy products have been relatively small since late 2003 , as market prices have remained above the support price .

in the early 1980s , the support price was $13.10 per cwt .

and government purchases peaked at $2.6 billion in 1983 .

a gradual decline in the support price to $9.90 significantly reduced the cost of the program from peak levels .

in late 2008 and early 2009 , after several years of relative inactivity , the price support program resumed purchases following a decline in milk product prices .

usda estimated that it removed 115 million pounds of nonfat dry milk in 2008 and expects to remove 320 million pounds in 2009 , along with small amounts of cheese and butter .

first authorized in 1985 , the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) provides cash bonus payments to u.s. dairy exporters .

the program was initially intended to counter foreign ( mostly european union ) dairy subsidies , but subsequent farm bill reauthorizations expanded its purpose to market development .

payments since the program's inception have totaled $1.1 billion , with the most recent expenditures made in fy2004 .

the program was active throughout the 1990s , peaking in 1993 with $162 million in bonuses ( see table 4 ) .

u.s. dairy product exports made with deip bonuses are subject to annual limitations under the wto uruguay round agreement .

the limits are 68,201 metric tons of nonfat dry milk , 21,097 tons of butterfat , and 3,030 tons of various cheeses .

total expenditures under wto commitments are capped at $117 million per year .

the dairy producer stabilization act of 1983 ( 7 u.s.c .

4501-4514 ) authorized a national dairy producer program for generic dairy product promotion , research , and nutrition education .

the program is funded through a mandatory 15-cent per hundredweight assessment on all milk produced and marketed in the 48 contiguous states .

section 1505 of the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) amended the 1983 act requiring that the 15-cent assessment be collected on all imported dairy products .

section 1505 also required usda to consult with the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) before implementing the assessment on imports to ensure that the new requirement is consistent with u.s. international trade obligations .

after consulting with the ustr , the secretary of agriculture determined that a mandatory dairy import assessment is not permissible , since alaska and hawaii are exempt from the domestic assessment .

according to usda , the exemption treats some domestic producers more favorably than importers , thereby violating u.s. trade obligations .

hence , usda has never implemented the import assessment .

section 1507 of the enacted 2008 farm bill adopts the administration's proposal to ensure that the current 15-cent assessment applies to alaska , hawaii and puerto rico .

the administration contends that the statutory change would make the definition of the united states consistent with the definition used by the ustr and u.s. trading partners , thus allowing them to implement the assessment in imported products .

the enacted 2008 farm bill also reduces the assessment on imports from 15 cents to 7.5 cents .

the import assessment is supported by most dairy producer groups .

however , milk producers in alaska and hawaii were opposed to any definition change that required them to contribute to the program .

dairy importers and processors are opposed to the import assessment , contending that it is an unfair tax on imported products which they say could be challenged as trade distorting in the world trade organization , regardless of whether alaska and hawaii are included .

