on november 7 , 2007 , at about 8:30 a.m. , the container ship cosco busan sideswiped one of the towers of the san francisco - oakland bay bridge , ripping a 100-foot by 12-foot gash into the side of the hull and releasing over 50,000 gallons of the ship's bunker fuel into the bay .

throughout the morning , and at the time of the accident , there was heavy patchy fog , and the pilot had delayed the ship's departure from the oakland pier by 90 minutes because of the fog .

about three minutes before the accident , but apparently too late to avoid the collision , the san francisco vessel traffic service ( vts ) , which monitors harbor traffic , contacted the ship's pilot .

the vts told him that he was running parallel to the bridge and inquired whether his intended course was still to pass beneath the delta and echo spans of the bridge , as he had informed vts earlier .

although several investigations are pending , the suspected cause of the accident is pilot error .

considering the number of ships transiting u.s. harbors everyday , accidents are rare .

this is largely the result of the skill and expertise of pilots and the navigation support services they receive from vtss .

when accidents occur , the public impact of the oil or fuel spilled can be large , as the cosco busan accident demonstrated .

as a result of tanker safety improvements implemented in the wake of the 1989 exxon valdez spill , the amount of oil spilled by oil tankers has been declining significantly and is now approaching the amount of oil spilled by non - tank vessels .

according to the coast guard , the cosco busan has a fuel capacity of 52,000 barrels , larger than the fuel capacity of the majority of ocean - going non - tank vessels calling at u.s. ports which have a fuel capacity between 10,000 and 20,000 barrels .

however , 360 vessels calling u.s. ports have a fuel capacity over 50,000 barrels and 100 vessels have a fuel capacity over 70,000 barrels .

while the fuel oil carried by non - tank vessels is a relatively small fraction of the oil carried as cargo in tankers , it is still of sufficient quantity to cause an environmental catastrophe and significant economic loss if spilled .

much attention has focused on the timeliness of the coast guard's response to the cosco busan spill , but the accident has also raised questions about oversight of pilot proficiency and the role of vtss in harbor navigation .

congress has thus far held three hearings on the accident and has introduced legislation in reaction to the accident .

other , preexisting legislation related to ship navigation is pending ( see the last section of this report ) .

important policy questions for congress include whether there is a need for further independent oversight of pilot performance ; whether vtss' should operate more like air traffic control centers ; and whether the pilot and ship captain should be required to agree on a passage plan before transiting a harbor ? .

ever - larger ships , difficult or challenging slow - speed handling characteristics of some of these ships , and rising port traffic that is increasingly foreign - flagged may be cause for a review of pilotage , vessel traffic services , and other safety - related navigation services in u.s. ports .

this report describes the role of pilots and vtss in the safe navigation of ships in u.s. harbors and reviews the controversy over the governance of pilot associations , the appropriate level of interaction between the vts and pilot , and other proposals for improving the safety of harbor navigation .

the report's focus is on the prevention of ship collisions and groundings in harbors and thus does not discuss oil spill response and clean - up .

this report also does not discuss the legal liabilities of carriers and mariners in ship accidents .

maritime pilots are hired by ocean carriers to take command of the navigation of their ships through harbors .

they are navigational specialists for a particular harbor .

they board ships at the entrance to a harbor ( with use of a pilot boat or in rare cases a helicopter ) and take position at the bridge alongside the master of the vessel ( or the officer in charge of the watch ) and other bridge crew .

using his / her experience and intimate knowledge of the navigation through a particular harbor , the pilot will order instructions to the helmsmen to steer the ship through the harbor and may direct tugboats , if they are assisting .

while the pilot is in command of the navigation of the ship through the harbor , the captain of the ship remains in command of the ship and retains ultimate responsibility for its safe passage .

only under emergency situations is a captain likely to countermand the pilot's orders .

often the pilot will board the ship with a computer laptop or other handheld device that contains his / her own set of charts for that harbor as well as ship tracking technology .

the laptop may also be plugged into the ship's navigation console to incorporate the ship's navigation technology into the pilot's navigation software .

when the pilot boards the ship , the captain is required to inform the pilot about the navigation particulars of the ship , such as the draft , air draft ( highest point on the vessel ) , and maneuvering characteristics .

a "pilot card" is used for this purpose .

although english is the required language of international shipping , language can be a barrier to expansive communication between the pilot and captain .

to assist the pilot and crew with safe navigation , the coast guard has established vessel traffic services ( vts ) in many ports .

from the vts , coast guard "watchstanders" can monitor and provide guidance to harbor traffic with the use of electronic communication , radio , radar , differential global positioning system ( dgps ) , surveillance cameras , and binoculars .

a vts operates 24 hours a day , seven days a week .

vtss vary depending on the geography and the nature and volume of vessel traffic in a port area , but vtss generally are staffed with both uniformed and civilian coast guard watchstanders .

currently there are vtss in eleven u.s. ports staffed by 155 civilian and 130 active - duty personnel .

the coast guard estimates that about 43 active - duty watchstanders will transfer in and out of vtss annually .

vtss may also be staffed by members of a "maritime exchange" from which they have evolved .

u.s. ports without a coast guard - led vts have a maritime exchange that provides "vts - like" services , and are more accurately called vessel traffic information services ( vtis ) .

a maritime exchange may be jointly operated or run by a pilot association and be staffed by pilots .

vtss and vtiss are funded from some combination of user fees charged to vessel operators , financing from port authorities , state governments , and the coast guard .

given the trend towards larger ships , an expected increase in port traffic , and a probable lag in the expansion of shipping channels and terminal facilities due to fiscal and environmental constraints , congress may consider several issues related to the safety of harbor navigation .

in the aftermath of the cosco busan accident , senators boxer and feinstein introduced legislation that would give authority to the vts to direct a vessel's speed and direction in an emergency and require pilots to use laptop navigational equipment under certain circumstances ( s. 2430 ) .

the coast guard authorization act of 2007 ( h.r .

2830 ) would require the coast guard to conduct a vessel safety risk assessment for cook inlet and the aleution islands of alaska .

the senate version ( s. 1892 ) , in addition to this provision , would require the coast guard to study and report on human errors that have caused oil spills and near - misses in the last ten years as well as any data deficiencies impeding such a study , and includes several provisions regarding the secure marine transport of especially hazardous cargo .

the hydrographic services improvement act amendments of 2007 ( h.r .

3352 / s. 1582 ) authorizes funding to noaa through fy2012 for its coastal surveying and nautical chart functions .

the ocean and coastal mapping integration act ( h.r .

2400 , which passed the house ) and the ocean and coastal exploration and noaa act ( s. 39 , reported by the senate commerce committee ) provides funds for updating and integrating survey information for u.s. coastal regions .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) requires the dhs inspector general to investigate the role of the san francisco vts in the cosco busan accident and the coast guard's response to the spill and issue a report by april 1 , 2008 .

