the cornerstone of an unemployed worker's income support is the joint federal - state unemployment compensation  ( uc ) program , which may provide income support through the payment of uc benefits .

the underlying framework of the uc system is contained in the social security act .

title iii of the act authorizes grants to states for the administration of state uc laws , title ix authorizes the various components of the federal unemployment trust fund ( utf ) , and title xii authorizes advances or loans to insolvent state uc programs .

uc is financed by federal taxes under the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) and by state payroll taxes under the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) .

the federal government funds federal and state uc program administration , the federal share ( 50% under permanent law ) of extended benefit ( eb ) payments , and federal loans to insolvent state uc programs .

states fund regular state uc benefits and the state share ( 50% ) of eb payments .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 , as amended ) temporarily provided for 100% federal funding of eb from february 22 , 2009 , through december 31 , 2013 .

the uc program's two main objectives are to provide temporary and partial wage replacement to involuntarily unemployed workers and to stabilize the economy during recessions .

these objectives are reflected in the current uc program's funding and benefit structure .

when the economy grows , uc program revenue rises through increased tax revenues while uc program spending falls because fewer workers are unemployed and receive benefits .

the effect of collecting more taxes while decreasing spending on benefits dampens demand in the economy .

this also creates a surplus or "cushion" of available funds for the uc program to draw upon during a recession .

in a recession , uc tax revenue falls and uc program spending rises as more workers lose their jobs and receive uc benefits .

the increased amount of uc payments to unemployed workers dampens the economic effect of lost earnings by injecting additional funds into the economy .

in response to economic recessions , the federal government sometimes has augmented the regular uc benefit with both permanent ( the extended benefit program ) and temporary extensions ( including the emergency unemployment compensation of 2008 program ) of the duration of unemployment benefits .

various measures are typically used to assess the state of the labor market .

these measures may include statistics that are absolute measures , such as employment and unemployment levels , as well as relative measures , such as the insured unemployment rate and the total unemployment rate .

a vigorous debate on how to determine when the federal government should intervene by extending unemployment benefits has been active for decades .

generally , this debate has examined the efficacy of using the iur or tur as a trigger for extending unemployment benefits .

the debate also has examined whether the intervention should be at a national or state level .

serious consideration of other measures of the labor market has become increasingly common .

in particular , the increase in the number of unemployed from the previous year has emerged in several proposals as a new trigger for a nationwide extension of unemployment benefits .

debate in congress has included substantial interest in whether the total number of weeks of unemployment insurance ( ui ) benefits available to workers is overly generous as compared with previous recessions .

table a - 7 in the appendix lists the total number of potential maximum available weeks of unemployment benefits available to the unemployed since 1935 .

at the height of the euc08 program , the potential maximum number of weeks of all unemployment benefits ( uc + eb + euc08 ) reached 99 weeks .

this maximum was available to states ( if state economic conditions and state laws met the availability requirements ) from december 2009 through august 2012 .

in comparison , the next - highest maximum potential duration of unemployment benefits was during the temporary emergency unemployment compensation ( teuc ) program in 2002 and 2003 , when up to a total of 72 weeks of unemployment insurance ( uc + eb + teuc ) was available in some states .

this maximum was available to states ( if state economic conditions and state laws met the availability requirements ) from march 2002 through december 2003 .

