wildfires have been getting more severe in recent fire seasons ; the 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2011 , and 2012 seasons were the most severe since 1960 .

an escaped prescribed fire that burned 239 houses in los alamos , nm , in may 2000 focused national attention on the growing wildfire problem .

the fire in los alamos highlighted the wildland - urban interface problem .

at that time , 2000 was the second most severe fire season since 1960 , eclipsed only by the 1988 yellowstone fires .

president clinton responded with a new national fire plan to increase funding for wildfire protection .

it has been widely proclaimed that the increasing severity of wildfires is a result of excessive biomass accumulations .

in at least some ecosystems , logging , livestock grazing , and a century of fire suppression efforts have allowed biomass fuels to accumulate to unnatural levels .

climate change , and its impacts on drought , fire , and insects and diseases , could exacerbate these problems .

many interests have proposed fuel reduction treatments as a means to lower the fuel levels and thus reduce the wildfire threat to homes and to wildlands .

the severe 2002 fire season led president bush to propose a healthy forests initiative to expedite efforts to reduce biomass fuels on federal lands , and in 2003 , congress enacted the healthy forests restoration act to expedite federal fuel reduction and other forest protection programs .

some interests are concerned that current efforts to reduce fuel levels on federal lands are inadequate , and that "environmentalist objections" to some of those efforts are unnecessarily raising costs and delaying action .

others counter that some efforts are so broad that they permit substantial timber sales without significantly reducing wildfire risks for communities .

congress continues to address these issues as it considers funding and legislative proposals .

this report focuses on options for protecting structures and for protecting wildlands and natural resources from wildfires .

it begins with a brief overview of the nature of wildfires , followed by a discussion of protecting structures .

then , it discusses wildfire damages to wildlands and natural resources , fuel treatment options and their benefits and limitations , and public involvement in federal decisions .

in temperate ecosystems , wildfires are inevitable .

the combination of biomass plus dry conditions — in the short term ( eg , the annual dry season ) or in the long term ( eg , drought or climate change ) — equals fuel to burn .

add an ignition source , such as lightning , and wildfire happens .

fire is a self - sustaining chemical reaction that perpetuates itself as long as all three elements of the fire triangle — fuel , heat , and oxygen — remain available .

fire control focuses on removing one of those elements .

there are two principal kinds of wildfire , although an individual wildfire may contain areas of both kinds .

one is a surface fire , which burns the needles or leaves , grass , and other small biomass within a foot or so of the ground and quickly moves on .

such fires are relatively easy to control by removing fuel with a fireline , essentially a dirt path wide enough to eliminate the continuous fuels needed to sustain the fire , or by cooling or smothering the flames with water or dirt .

the other principal kind of wildfire is a crown fire , also called a conflagration .

crown fires burn biomass at all levels — from the surface through the tops of the crowns of the trees — although they do not consume all the biomass ; logs and large limbs may need to burn for hours before being completely reduced to ashes .

rather , a crown fire quickly burns the needles or leaves and small twigs and limbs on the surface and throughout the crown of the trees .

because the needles and leaves in the crown are green , they require more energy to burn than dry fuels on the surface .

furthermore , because of the green fuels and the often discontinuous biomass of the canopy , wind is usually needed to sustain a crown fire .

once burning vigorously , a crown fire can create its own wind ( the strong upward convection of the heated air can draw in cooler air from surrounding areas , thus creating a wind that feeds the fire ) .

the strong upward convection can also lift burning biomass ( firebrands ) and send it soaring ahead of the fire , creating spot fires and accelerating the spread of the wildfire .

crown fires typically include areas of surface fire and unburned areas within their perimeters .

not surprisingly , crown fires are difficult , if not impossible , to control .

unless quite wide , firelines may be ineffective to control crown fires , especially if winds are causing spot fires .

water or fire retardant ( slurry ) dropped from helicopters or airplanes can sometimes knock a crown fire down ( back to a surface fire ) if the area burning and the winds are not too great .

often , however , crown fires burn until they run out of fuel or the weather changes ( the wind dies or it rains or snows ) .

nearly all fires are "patchy," with a mix of areas of varying fire severities , depending on site - specific fuel , moisture , and wind conditions .

this patchiness makes understanding and controlling wildfires difficult at best .

wildfires occasionally burn houses , in a zone commonly called the wildland - urban interface .

in recent years , it seems one or more fires annually have burned down several to a few hundred homes and outbuildings ( sheds , garages , etc. ) .

these structures generally have ignited in one of three ways: through direct contact with fire , through radiation ( heating from exposure to flames ) , and through firebrands .

the likelihood of a structure burning from one of these ignition methods is called home ignitability .

wildlands and natural resources can also be damaged by wildfires .

wildfire damages vary widely , depending on the nature of the ecosystems burned as well as site - specific conditions .

activities to modify wildland biomass fuels can reduce damages , although the cost and effectiveness also vary .

finally , for fuel reduction activities on federal lands , delays and modifications — related to endangered species concerns and public involvement in decision - making — can affect the cost of fuel treatments .

as more acres and more homes have burned in the past few years , and more people are at risk from wildfires , congress has faced increasing pressures to protect structures and resources .

congress decides what programs to authorize and fund , and many options exist .

to protect homes , congress could create new programs and expand existing ones for installing non - flammable roofing , removing burnable materials adjacent to structures , and creating a defensible space of at least 30 feet around the building .

programs could inform homeowners , or assist or require landowner action ; the programs could be federal or implemented through state or local governments .

protecting resources poses different challenges for congress , because ecological damages vary widely , depending on the ecosystem and on site - specific conditions .

fuel reduction can probably moderate crown fire damages in surface fire ecosystems , and possibly in mixed - intensity fire ecosystems .

existing programs for federal lands authorize prescribed burning ( intentional fires under prescribed conditions ) and mechanical treatments ( cutting and removing some trees ) , the principal means of reducing fuel levels .

however , prescribed fires are risky and mechanical treatments can cause other ecological damages , and both are expensive .

proponents of more fuel treatment advocate accelerated processes for environmental analysis and public review to reduce costs and expedite action .

others caution that inadequate analysis and review can allow projects with unintended damages and few fire protection benefits .

congress can alter the existing environmental and public review processes , recognizing the trade - offs between expeditious action and insufficient review .

however , the fact is that crown fires occur ; they cannot be halted and the damages they cause cannot be totally prevented .

the following materials are excerpts from the forest service handbook on nepa categorical exclusions — fsh 1909.15 — environmental policy and procedures handbook .

chapter 30 — categorical exclusion from documentation , amendment no .

1909.15-2007-1 ( february 15 , 2007 ) .

emphases ( underscoring and boldface font ) are in the original .

30.3 - policy ... 2 .

resource conditions that should be considered in determining whether extraordinary circumstances related to the proposed action warrant further analysis and documentation in an ea or eis are: a .

federally listed threatened or endangered species or designated critical habitat , species proposed for federal listing or proposed critical habitat , or forest service sensitive species .

b .

flood plains , wetlands , or municipal watersheds .

c. congressionally designated areas , such as wilderness , wilderness study areas , or national recreation areas .

d. inventoried roadless areas .

e. research natural areas .

f. american indians or alaska native religious or cultural sites .

g. archaeological sites , or historic properties or areas .

... 31.2 - categories of actions for which a project or case file and decision memo are required ... 6 .

timber stand and / or wildlife habitat improvement activities which do not include the use of herbicides or do not require more than one mile o f low standard road construction... .

examples include but are not limited to: ... b. thinning or brush control to improve growth or to reduce fire hazard including the opening of an existing road to a dense timber stand .

c. prescribed burning to control understory hardwoods in stands of southern pine .

d. prescribed burning to reduce natural fuel build - up and improve plant vigor .

... 10 .

hazardous fuels reduction activities using prescribed fire , not to exceed 4,500 acres , and mechanical methods for crushing , piling , thinning , pruning , cutting , chipping , mulching , and mowing , not to exceed 1,000 acres .

such activities: a. shall be limited to areas: ( 1 ) in the wildland - urban interface ; or ( 2 ) condition classes 2 or 3 [moderate or high risk of ecological damage] in fire regimes i , ii , or iii [surface fire , stand - replacement fire at 35 years or less , and mixed - intensity fire] , outside the wildland - urban interface ; b. shall be identified through a collaborative framework as described in "a collaborative approach for reducing wildland fire risks to communities and environment 10-year comprehensive strategy implementation plan" ; c. shall be conducted consistent with agency and departmental procedures and applicable land and resource management plans ; d. shall not be conducted in wilderness areas or impair the suitability of wilderness study areas for preservation as wilderness ; and e. shall not include the use of herbicides or pesticides or the construction of new permanent roads or other new permanent infrastructure ; and may include the sale of vegetative material if the primary purpose of the activity is hazardous fuel reduction .

... 12 .

harvest of live trees not to exceed 70 acres , requiring no more than ½ mile of temporary road construction .

do not use this category for even - aged regeneration harvest or vegetation type conversion .

the proposed action may include incidental removal of trees for landings , skid trails , and road clearing .

examples include but are not limited to: a .

removal of individual trees for sawlogs , specialty products , or fuelwood .

b .

commercial thinning of overstocked stands to achieve the desired stocking level to increase health and vigor .

13 .

salvage of dead and / or dying trees not to exceed 250 acres , requiring no more than ½ mile of temporary road construction .

the proposed action may include incidental removal of live or dead trees for landings , skid trails , and road clearing .

examples include but are not limited to: a .

harvest of a portion of a stand damaged by a wind or ice event and construction of a short temporary road to access the damaged trees .

b .

harvest of fire - damaged trees .

14 .

commercial and non - commercial sanitation harvest of trees to control insects or disease not to exceed 250 acres , requiring no more than ½ mile of temporary road construction , including removal of infested / infected trees and adjacent live uninfested / uninfected trees as determined necessary to control the spread of insects or disease .

the proposed action may include incidental removal of live or dead trees for landings , skid trails , and road clearing .

examples include but are not limited to: a. felling and harvest of trees infested with southern pine beetles and immediately adjacent uninfested trees to control expanding spot infestations .

b .

removal and / or destruction of infested trees affected by a new exotic insect or disease , such as emerald ash borer , asian long horned beetle , and sudden oak death pathogen .

