federal judges have repeatedly expressed concern about what they view as a continuing decline in their "real salary" level .

chief justice roberts has characterized the current judicial pay rate as a "constitutional crisis," particularly noting that judicial salaries remain steady or decrease as the real salaries of lawyers , law professors , and wage earners continue to increase .

the salary for district court judges is currently $169,300 ; the salary for court of appeals judges is currently $179,500 .

in 2006 dollars , the median salary for district court judges between 1955 and 2006 was $167,047 ; the median salary for court of appeals judges over the same time period was $178,139 .

while the judges' current salary is only slightly below the 1955-2006 median , the salary level has steadily decreased since 1991 , when the real salary of district judges was $185,170 and of court of appeals judges was $196,419 .

out of evident concern about the erosion of salary levels for federal judges in recent years , four bills pending in the 110 th congress would increase those levels .

while one bill ( s. 197 ) would provide for a nominal 1.7% salary adjustment , the other three — s. 2353 , h.r .

3753 , and s. 1638 — would provide for much more substantial increases , of 16.5% , 28.7% , and 28.7% respectively ( for specific values , see table 3 , below ) .

h.r .

3753 and s. 1638 would also grant federal judges annual cost - of - living adjustments ( colas ) equal to the increase in base pay for general schedule ( gs ) salaries unless congress acted to block the increase from taking effect .

in addition , h.r .

3753 and s. 1638 would , while retaining the "rule of 80" for senior status qualification , create a "rule of 84" for retirement , where years of service and age must add to 84 ( starting at 67 years old and 17 years of service ) .

h.r .

3753 and s. 1638 would reduce the amount of annuity retired federal judges receive if they have earned income that exceeds the value of their annuity ; for every $2 in annual earned income above the level of the annuity , a federal judge's annuity would be reduced by $1 , but no reduction to an annuity could be greater than 67% .

h.r .

3753 and s. 1638 require that judges in senior status perform , each year , the equivalent work of an active judge on their district or circuit performs in four months .

s. 1638 also includes a provision that restricts the reimbursable seminar - related travel for federal judges to $2,000 per trip and $20,000 per year , with exceptions for events approved by the state department and those sponsored by the federal government , state governments ( not including public educational institutions ) , bar associations , and the national judicial college .

s. 1638 also outlaws the acceptance of honorary memberships valued at more than $50 per year and applies the regulations of the judicial conference on outside earned income to justices of the u.s. supreme court .

this report reviews the most common arguments that have been advanced in recent years for and against raising federal judicial salaries ; examines a large body of data relevant to the question of whether fluctuations in judicial pay levels have affected the federal judiciary's ability to recruit and retain judges ; considers various time periods ( between 1955 and 2006 ) over which the rise and fall of judicial salaries may be examined , taking into account , as well , changes that have occurred at various points in time in non - salary compensation that federal judges receive ; identifies and analyzes options available to congress in addressing the judicial pay issue in addition to increasing judicial salaries by a specific amount or percentage on a one - time basis — including "de - linking" congressional and judicial salaries , providing judges with salaries based on their cost of living , revising retirement benefits , and altering outside income limits ; and provides a side - by - side comparison of the three bills noted above that would provide for a substantial judicial pay increase , showing how the levels provided for would compare with those of the benchmark year of 1969 ( the year of highest real salaries for federal judges since at least 1913 ) .

should congress choose to act , it can increase but not decrease judicial salaries .

the constitution prohibits congress from diminishing the salaries of article iii federal judges .

the degree to which federal judges' pay has changed depends on how it is measured .

while real judicial salary for district court judges declined 21.5% between 1969 and 2006 , such a calculation does not take into account real income growth for other classes of wage earners .

according to paul volcker , chairman of the national commission on public service , the real compensation of the average wage earner has grown 18.5% since 1991 , and the real salaries of federal workers more generally have grown 15.1% .

the real growth of salaries for individuals whom federal judges regard as their professional peers , particularly partners in law firms and law professors , may have been even greater .

using those benchmarks , the 2003 volcker commission study reported a more notable decline in real judicial salary: judicial salaries are the most egregious example of the failure of federal compensation policies .

federal judicial salaries have lost 24 percent of their purchasing power since 1969 , which is arguably inconsistent with the constitutional provision that judicial salaries may not be reduced by congress...the lag in judicial salaries has gone on too long and the potential for diminished quality in american jurisprudence is now too large .

several professional organizations have expressed concerns similar to those made by chief justice roberts and other current and former members of the federal judiciary .

the american bar association , the national bar association , several state and local bar associations , the u.s. chamber institute for legal reform , several law school deans , and the american judicature society , among other organizations , have expressed support for increasing the salaries of federal judges .

in addition , the current administration of president george w. bush has expressed support for raising federal judges' salaries .

on balance , the majority of expressed opinions on the topic of judicial salary appear to favor some form of increase in the pay of federal judges , though the specific amount of the pay and future prospects for judicial compensation may divide judges , policymakers , and professional organizations .

the consequences of such a decline in judicial salary are alleged to be the creation of problems of recruitment and retention in the federal judiciary .

abner mikva , who served in congress , as a court of appeals judge , and as white house counsel , has argued that low judicial pay has several consequences for the judiciary: it is true that more judges , faced with the alternatives of senior status or outright retirement , are choosing the more lucrative path of retirement .

but they have served their time , and a vacancy occurs whether or not the judge retires or takes senior status .

i chose retirement rather than senior status so that i could become white house counsel .

while i received no pay in that job , i have had the opportunity to earn substantial income since i left the white house and became a neutral with jams , a dispute - resolution firm .

the public obviously benefits from the ongoing service of a senior judge , but it is not a flaw in the system that allows judges to have the option to make up for some lost earning opportunities after retirement .

the real problem of inadequate judicial pay is the limits it puts on attracting judges to the bench in the first place .

i saw these limits both as white house counsel for president clinton , when i was very much involved in finding candidates to fill judicial vacancies , and as a member of various selection panels since i returned to the private sector .

lawyers most appropriate for consideration as judges are at the height of their earning power in the private sector .

at one time law schools were a good place to look , but even those salaries have advanced beyond the judicial levels now in existence .

to ask a lawyer to go on the bench from the private sector is usually to ask that person to take a drastic reduction in earnings , as well as the other problems of living in a public fishbowl .

those who argue against raising judicial salary tend to make four arguments .

first , they note that the salaries of federal judges are high relative to all workers in the united states .

the 2006 salary of federal district court judges ( $165,200 ) would put judges somewhere between the 90 th and 95 th percentile among all american households , assuming no other members of the household had income as defined by the census bureau .

court of appeals judges ( 2006 salary of $175,100 ) and supreme court justices ( 2006 salary of $203,000 for associate justices and $212,100 for the chief justice ) would be above the 95 th percentile in household income .

second , opponents argue that federal judges and the "perks" of being a federal judge ( prestige , job security , opportunity to select and work with law clerks , interesting work , retirement package that offers full salary upon qualification ) more than compensate for any shortcomings in judicial salary .

third , some have argued that raising judicial salaries may not solve some of the problems thought to be associated with low and declining judicial salary .

as judge richard posner , a judge on the seventh circuit court of appeals who has written extensively on judicial salary , argues: raising salaries would not do a great deal to attract commercial lawyers to judgeships .

the lawyer who doesn't want to exchange a $1 million income for a $175,000 income is unlikely to exchange it for a $225,000 income — [chief justice] roberts doesn't name a figure to which he thinks judicial salaries should be raised , but he can hardly expect congress to raise salaries by more than 30 percent , and that only intermittently , so that inflation will eat away at the salary until the next jump .

fourth , they contend that many of the consequences one might expect from declining salaries , including problems recruiting and retaining federal judges , have not manifested themselves in the degree to which advocates for judicial salary contend .

the difference of opinion on the necessity of a raise in judicial salary stems , in part , from disagreement on some of the consequences of what might be considered a low judicial salary .

in particular , those who advocate and oppose increasing judicial salary disagree over the extent to which declines in judicial salary: make it more difficult to recruit federal judges from private practice , depriving the federal judiciary of talented candidates ; lead more federal judges , before becoming eligible for retirement , to leave the bench to work in private practice , increasing turnover in the federal judiciary ; and lead more judges , after becoming eligible for retirement to leave the judiciary ( often for jobs in the private sector or elsewhere ) , rather than remaining in the judiciary in semi - retired "senior status," depriving the federal judiciary of important resources of manpower and expertise .

to date , little systematic evidence has been collected which would allow congress to evaluate the degree to which the current patterns of recruitment and retention on the federal judiciary deviate from historical patterns and the degree to which those deviations ( if they do exist ) can be attributed to fluctuations in judicial salary .

this report collects and analyzes evidence that can be used to evaluate how increases and decreases in judicial pay have affected the federal judiciary's ability to draw on a diverse set of professional backgrounds and deter federal judges from leaving their positions early to earn more money .

should congress choose to act to change the compensation for federal judges , its choices are not limited to increasing the salary for federal judges , although such a choice may address the immediate concerns of those who advocate for higher judicial salary .

congress may also choose to consider several changes to the structure of salary and benefits for federal judges , including "de - linking" congressional and judicial salaries , paying judges different salaries based on the location of their chambers , revising retirement benefits for federal judges , altering survivor benefits for the spouses and dependents of federal judges , reconsidering limits on the outside income judges are permitted to earn , convening the citizens' commission on public service and compensation , and creating "automatic" adjustments for judicial salaries .

four pieces of legislation pending in the 110 th congress deal with judicial salary .

s. 197 , passed by the senate on january 8 , 2007 , and pending before the house , authorizes the enactment of the 1.7% increase in judicial salary that was recommended under the procedures outlined in the ethics reform act of 1989 .

three other pending pieces of legislation — s. 1638 , s. 2353 , and h.r .

3753 would provide federal judges with much larger raises .

table 3 provides a side - by - side comparison of the three pieces of legislation .

if adopted , the new salary levels proposed by s. 1638 and h.r .

3753 would be the highest real salaries federal judges have received since at least 1913 .

in 1969 , currently the year with the highest real salaries for federal judges since at least 1913 , district court judges received real salary of $210,570 ; court of appeals judges received a real salary of $222,018 .

without endorsing any specific proposals , the bush administration has indicated its support for raising judicial salaries .

s. 2353 , which has been referred to the senate judiciary committee , provides immediate increases in salary to federal judges ; however , it makes no other changes to the compensation practices for federal judges .

h.r .

3753 , as ordered reported by the house judiciary committee , and s. 1638 , as reported by the senate judiciary committee , allow for annual salary adjustments for federal judges equal to the change in the base rate of pay for general schedule employees .

h.r .

3753 and s. 1638 would also change the workload of judges in senior status , requiring that they perform the equivalent of four months of the work of an active judge in a given year , whereas the current requirement is a work equivalent of three months a year .

h.r .

3753 and s. 1638 also include two changes to retirement ( as opposed to senior status ) .

while federal judges will still be able to take senior status under the rule of 80 , eligibility to retire will be governed by a new rule of 84 , where age and years of service , starting with 67 years old and 17 years of service , must add to 84 for a federal judge to retire and receive an annuity equal to their salary at time of retirement .

judges who retire and whose earned income after retirement exceeds the amount of their retirement annuity would find that annuity reduced by $1 for every $2 they earn above the level of their annuity .

this reduction could affect no more than 67% of their annuity , and the calculation is made annually , so the annuity could be restored to its full value if a retired judge stops earning outside income in excess of his or her annuity .

s. 1638 also includes a provision that restricts the reimbursable seminar - related travel for federal judges to $2,000 per trip and $20,000 per year ( these values would be indexed to inflation ) , with exceptions for events approved by the state department and those sponsored by the federal government , state governments ( not including public educational institutions ) , bar associations , and the national judicial college .

s. 1638 also limits the acceptance of honorary memberships to those valued at no more than $50 per year and applies the regulations of the judicial conference on outside earned income to justices of the u.s. supreme court .

appendix a .

number of judgeships , vacancies , active judges , departures from active service , and method of departure for article iii u.s. district courts , court of international trade , and u.s. courts of appeals , 1985-2007 appendix b. nominal and real salaries for u.s. district court and court of appeals judges , 1955-200 .

