detection of and protection against illicit acquisition and use of special nuclear material ( snm ) is a longstanding concern of the u.s. government .

since the development of nuclear weapons , federal agencies have been involved in securing u.s. nuclear assets against diversion , theft , and attack .

similarly , concerns that terrorists or non - state actors might acquire a nuclear weapon or the materials necessary to construct one have led to federal efforts to track , detect , and secure such materials domestically and abroad .

preventing a terrorist or non - state nuclear attack within the united states involves more than detection of the nuclear weapon .

a larger system of deterrence , counterproliferation , and response activities are established to address the nuclear threat .

intelligence information gathering regarding the intent and capability of terrorist and non - state groups and law enforcement activities that disrupt the formation and action of these groups play key roles in preventing initial acquisition of nuclear and radiological materials .

another crucial step subsequent to the detection of illicit nuclear or radiological materials is successful interdiction of these materials .

nevertheless , this report addresses only the global nuclear detection architecture , not programs focusing on events prior or subsequent to the detection opportunity .

the safe port act requires that dndo establish an "enhanced global nuclear detection architecture," but it does not define this term .

a variety of interpretations are possible .

for example , an architecture could be a collection of federal and nonfederal programs , a grouping of sensors or other technologies designed to detect nuclear and radiological material , a mechanism for collecting and distributing information about nuclear and radiological material , a framework for investment and prioritization of detection assets , or various combinations of the above and more .

the dndo describes the global nuclear detection architecture as comprising several key elements: "a multi - layered structure of radiological / nuclear ( rad / nuc ) detection systems , deployed both domestically and overseas ; a well - defined and carefully coordinated network of interrelationships among them ; and a set of systems engineering - based principles and guidelines governing the architecture's design and evolution over time. .

in implementing this definition , dndo solicited information about existing programs from agencies involved in nuclear detection .

the dndo then performed a "net assessment" of federal nuclear detection capabilities .

this assessment determined that 72 programs contributed in whole or in part to the existing global nuclear detection architecture , with total funding of more than $2.2 billion in fy2006 .

this existing global nuclear detection architecture includes programs at dhs , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , the department of state ( dos ) , and other agencies .

according to dhs , before the formation of dndo these programs were "a disparate patchwork of systems , distributed and implemented in recent years across multiple departments , jurisdictions and locations without any degree of coordination. .

the dndo has organized these programs into a global nuclear detection architecture framework , a combined system of systems , which relies heavily on its technological component .

the deployment of radiation detectors at points of entry , commercial ports , and other border crossings is key to its effectiveness .

although much focus has been given to technologies to detect nuclear or radiological material that have been developed or procured by dndo , the global nuclear detection architecture encompasses more than just these sensors .

other elements include site security of known nuclear or radiological material , use of sensor data to inform decision makers , effective reaction to a detection event , and interdiction following detection .

according to the government accountability office , "combating nuclear smuggling requires an integrated approach that includes equipment , proper training of border security personnel in the use of radiation detection equipment , and intelligence gathering on potential nuclear smuggling operations. .

other experts have concluded that the deployment of radiation detectors needs to be highly integrated with other federal efforts , prioritized on identified threats , configured for flexibility and efficiency , and organized as a global approach including international institutions .

the dndo has attempted to align existing federal programs so that their capabilities can be compared and integrated into an organizing framework that can help identify gaps and duplication .

this framework consists of three partially overlapping layers with nine sub - layers .

see figure 1 .

the layers are distinguished geographically: interior , border , and exterior .

the overlap between the exterior and border layers may make analysis of priorities between and within the layers more difficult .

the sublayers correspond mainly to conceptual steps in the transportation of a threat object to a target .

the global nuclear detection architecture has a broad , international scope , so implementing it is difficult .

multiple agency initiatives and programs must be relied on to achieve the architecture's goals , and its effectiveness is dependent on many factors outside of dndo's direct authority and control .

by categorizing existing programs in this architecture , dndo could analyze federal nuclear detection capabilities , identifying gaps and vulnerabilities through which a potential adversary might be able to avoid detection .

these gaps may be filled by redirecting existing efforts , increasing existing efforts , deploying available technology , and implementing research and development programs that develop solutions to such gaps .

multiple agencies implement the global nuclear detection architecture , even though its development is located within a single agency .

congress , in its oversight role , may be able to assess agency implementation of the global nuclear detection architecture across the federal government and thus identify weaknesses or inefficiencies that may occur .

additionally , congress may be uniquely positioned to address policy challenges .

mechanisms for policy setting , the establishment of funding levels within the global nuclear detection architecture , implementation of development plans for the architecture and the identification of solutions to gaps and vulnerabilities , and the continued maintenance of the global nuclear detection architecture all are issues that congress may choose to address .

the annual federal investment in the global nuclear detection architecture is spread across multiple agencies and across the layers and sublayers of the global nuclear detection architecture .

the appropriate balance of funds in each of the different layers and sublayers , as well as between the different programs and agencies , is likely an issue of policy interest .

when congress established the cooperative threat reduction program in 1991 , it focused on securing nuclear materials at their source and preventing these materials from being transferred into non - state hands .

these continuing programs represent significant investment in the exterior layer of the architecture .

more recently , dndo and congress have focused on the border layer of the global nuclear detection architecture .

the dndo has invested in advanced spectroscopic portal ( asp ) and cargo advanced automated radiography system ( caars ) technologies to improve the ability to detect nuclear and radiological materials at the borders , and congress has mandated the improved screening of cargo containers shipped to the united states .

investment in the interior layer of the architecture has arisen mainly through existing programs designed to protect and safeguard national nuclear facilities and laboratories .

the gao has reported the distribution of funding in the global nuclear detection architecture using a framework slightly different than that expressed by dndo .

see table 1 .

according to the gao , the dndo is not using existing information on funding in the various architecture levels to coordinate with other agencies on the overall strategic direction of detection efforts .

congress might expand or reduce agency funding levels to more closely match the levels determined by dndo to meet the needs of the global nuclear detection architecture , increase overall funding for all aspects of the global nuclear detection architecture to increase redundancy , or decrease funding if it believes other funding priorities are more important .

shifting funding between layers of the architecture has complex ramifications: it may imperil international agreements , lead to perceptions of weakness or strength in the various programs , or cause interagency disagreements .

unless the global nuclear detection architecture has a robust evaluative system with clear metrics that tie architecture performance to program funding , changes in investment in the different layers of the global nuclear detection architecture may not yield optimal risk reduction .

it is difficult to assess without careful evaluation whether shifting funds from one program to another will have a positive or negative net impact ; the relative size of the two programs is not necessarily the relevant criterion for assessing its impact on the global nuclear detection architecture .

moreover , dndo is not statutorily empowered to direct changes in the funding of other agencies .

only through higher - level budgetary policy decisions can interagency funding profiles be changed .

this situation may result in a mismatch between the optimal investment levels for the global nuclear detection architecture and the actual investments made .

congress might choose to provide the dndo director with the authority to review and assess the budgets of other departments and agencies involved in the global nuclear detection architecture and to comment or recommend alternative budget allocation to other departments and agencies or directly to the office of management and budget .

another possible approach would be for congress to require that agencies create a single global nuclear detection architecture budget , to provide congress with a more transparent correlation between agency funding and the global nuclear detection architecture .

for example , an annual budget supplement is issued for the national nanotechnology initiative , another multi - agency federal endeavor with a large budget .

such a budget supplement for nuclear detection might be coordinated by dndo through an interagency process ; the homeland security council , national security council , or national science and technology council ; or through one of the agencies participating in the global nuclear detection architecture .

alternatively , congress might vest a budgetary coordinating role within the office of science and technology policy rather than within dndo .

congress established an office of the united states coordinator for the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism within the white house .

the head of this office is to advise the president , formulate national strategy and policy , lead interagency coordination and implementation , and oversee development of a comprehensive , coordinated budget for weapon of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism prevention .

while the scope of the coordinator's responsibilities is broader than nuclear and radiological issues , the comprehensive , coordinated budget so developed might be one mechanism for clarification of priorities for nuclear detection investment .

as of the writing of this report , the position of coordinator has not been filled .

the affected agencies may not support a unified budget or additional review of agency budget decisions .

reportedly , agencies resisted similar options considered during the creation of dndo , leading to "major limits on both its scope and its power. .

agencies may perceive a bottom - up process to be more effective in meeting agency and national needs than a top - down process .

congress has mandated an annual interagency review of the global nuclear detection architecture .

this review is to be overseen by the secretaries of homeland security , state , defense , and energy , the attorney general , and the director of national intelligence .

its purpose is to ensure that each participating agency assesses and evaluates its participation in the global nuclear detection architecture .

the review is to include evaluation of detection technologies , identification of deficiencies , and assessment of agency capacity for implementation of its responsibilities within the global nuclear detection architecture .

this interagency review process may cause the agencies involved to clarify their priorities and funding requirements and thereby cause further evolution of the global nuclear detection architecture .

the gao has identified that this joint annual interagency review generally is not used in this fashion .

the joint annual interagency review is not used as a tool to analyze nuclear detection budgets across agencies to address the highest priority gaps or to strategically align global detection efforts .

instead the review is being used to provide agencies and congress with an overview of existing programs and responsibilities across the government .

the joint annual interagency review is not used to determine whether funding levels are reasonable according to agency or government needs .

the dndo aims to improve "the probability of detection by integrating and deploying current technologies , continually improving these technologies through both near - term enhancements and transformational research and development , and expanding detection capabilities at the federal , state and local levels. .

in expanding and improving the global nuclear detection architecture , dndo and other participating agencies are faced with a temporal choice .

vulnerabilities and gaps identified through the global nuclear detection architecture could be reduced by applying immediately available technologies that provide a partial solution or by investing in research and development to develop technologies that will provide a more complete solution in the long - term .

in the first case , the abilities of the global nuclear detection architecture would be incrementally improved as technologies that marginally increase the detection capabilities of the existing architecture are adopted and then serially replaced .

such a strategy might be costly , as multiple generations of equipment , each with some advantage over the previous version , are purchased and deployed .

although each generation would be an improvement , it would not provide a fully acceptable level of detection and security .

in the other case , known vulnerabilities might not immediately be addressed at all , allowing the possibility that attackers could exploit them while a research and development program attempted to develop a single system that would remove the vulnerability .

thus , an appreciable risk would remain , even though it could be partly reduced in the near term , until the results of the research and development program came to fruition .

in practice , expansion and improvement of the global nuclear detection architecture requires a balance of these two approaches , using incremental advances and transformational research in coordination to develop a robust architecture .

a key concern is how this balance is achieved and identified .

the dndo is addressing this complex problem by developing time - phased plans to address the most important gaps in the existing global nuclear detection architecture .

these plans will allow "for the integration of current and near - term technologies and approaches , as well as longer - term options that may draw upon technologies that are currently in the r&d phase and that may not be available for implementation for several years. .

additionally , dndo has taken a spiral development approach that appears to lean toward deploying available technologies , even if they serve only as partial solutions , rather than leaving a gap unaddressed .

in spiral development , technologies are refined as they are implemented based on information generated during their deployment .

thus , though the technology may serve only as a partial solution when first implemented , the goal is for it to become a more complete solution over time .

finally , dndo has adopted a multi - faceted approach to architecture development , funding multiple types of detector technology .

successes in developing and deploying these detector types may lead to significant advances in dndo's ability to detect and prevent a radiological or nuclear attack .

in addition to developing and procuring such technologies , dndo also must weigh the relative advantages to integrating these new systems into the existing architecture versus replacing existing systems with these new systems .

among key issues facing congress are determining the optimal process for creating a robust global nuclear detection architecture , understanding the capabilities of near - and long - term technology and their potential effect on the global nuclear detection architecture , and assessing the adequacy of the metrics used to measure the risk reduction benefits .

congress bestowed upon dndo the responsibility for developing and implementing a global nuclear detection architecture as part of efforts to safeguard the united states .

the success of dndo's activities in establishing this architecture will likely require ongoing evaluation and oversight into the future .

although the use of detailees , ipas , and liaisons from other agencies has helped dndo to maintain contact with other stakeholders , its reliance on these temporary personnel may make long - term efforts difficult to sustain .

as temporary personnel return to their home agency , institutional memory may be lost .

as of april 2007 , 79% of dndo's employees were either detailees , liaisons , or contractors rather than permanent staff .

efforts that rely on continued improvement and adjustment over time , as the global nuclear detection architecture does , will likely depend on dndo's ability to clearly enunciate and document the rationale and approaches that it developed and considered when they were established .

otherwise , these efforts may be delayed as new personnel have to reevaluate the ongoing process .

similarly , coordination between agencies through the interagency coordinating council may suffer if consensus decisions are not well understood by the successors of the council participants .

the dndo may be able to offset this potential loss of institutional memory in a number of ways .

one possibility is a mentoring process in which outgoing personnel actively mentor their replacements during an overlap period in order to provide continuity of information and expertise .

another would involve comprehensive documentation of decisions , both positive and negative , so that future staff have a written record to refer to when trying to understand why a particular approach was taken and why a competing approach was set aside .

finally , expanding dndo's permanent staff might provide long - term stability and more retention of core knowledge .

the dndo does appear to be increasing its permanent federal staff .

as seen in table 2 , the number of detailees has decreased and the number of permanent staff has increased since the creation of the office .

some positions within dndo may be best filled by permanent dndo staff , while others may require the expertise possessed only by detailees .

a key issue facing decision makers is balancing dndo's need for technical or subject matter experts with building a core of permanent dndo staff able to develop and evolve the nascent global nuclear detection architecture .

the dndo is aware of the need to retain institutional knowledge .

succession planning is one mechanism dndo uses to retain this knowledge .

according to dndo , before each detailee returns to their home agency , their replacement is identified and prepared to take over the departing detailee's responsibilities .

the effectiveness of this succession planning and dndo's strategic decisions regarding the use of detailees may require oversight from congress to ensure that congressional interests in program and agency continuity are met .

research and development investment plays a role in strategies for addressing the architecture's gaps and vulnerabilities .

the aim is to develop technologies to fill the gaps in the global nuclear detection architecture .

both dhs and doe fund research and development in the area of nuclear and radiological detection equipment .

the safe port act of 2006 gave dndo the statutory authority to conduct , support , coordinate , and encourage an aggressive , expedited , evolutionary , and transformational program of research and development to generate and improve technologies to detect and prevent the illicit entry , transport , assembly , or potential use within the united states of a nuclear explosive device or fissile or radiological material , and coordinate with the under secretary for science and technology on basic and advanced or transformational research and development efforts relevant to the mission of both organizations .

the research and development activities dndo undertakes under this authority address gaps and vulnerabilities in the global nuclear detection architecture .

the dndo has highlighted detecting threat materials from greater distances , in highly cluttered backgrounds , and in the presence of shielding and masking materials as particular challenges .

although homeland security presidential directive 14 required dndo to "conduct , support , coordinate , and encourage an aggressive , expedited , evolutionary , and transformational program of research and development efforts," it also directed the secretary of energy to "lead the development of nonproliferation research and development and , where appropriate , make available dual - use counter - proliferation and counter - terrorism nuclear detection research and development to dndo and other entities and officials to support the development of the domestic nuclear and radiological detection system. .

the long - term coordination of this research appears to be occurring through the subcommittee on nuclear defense research and development of the national science and technology council committee on homeland defense and national security .

additional coordination occurs between agencies participating in the global nuclear detection architecture as well .

the coordination of these research and development activities is likely to remain of interest in congress , to prevent duplication of effort and ensure that agencies meet their missions and roles .

congress may use its oversight authority to assess the balance of investments between agencies , address undue duplication of research and development activities , and increase or decrease the resources available for particular technology approaches under consideration .

