the missing and exploited children's ( mec ) program — administered by the department of justice's ( doj's ) office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) in the office of justice programs ( ojp ) — seeks to prevent cases of missing and sexually exploited children and to support communities in responding to such cases .

the program is composed of activities that are authorized under multiple laws , and includes the following components: the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) is a nonprofit organization in alexandria , va , that serves as a resource center for law enforcement agencies working on cases of missing and exploited children , the families of child victims , and the public more broadly .

ncmec personnel take reports of missing and exploited children through a hotline and online portal .

ncmec also provides technical assistance to locate abductors and recover missing children , and help with identifying child victims of sexual exploitation .

in recent years , funding for ncmec has been approximately $28 million annually .

the internet crimes against children ( icac ) task force program funds state and local law enforcement units in investigating online child sexual exploitation .

the program also includes the national icac data system ( nids ) , which is used by law enforcement agencies to coordinate information about perpetrators who sexually abuse children on the internet and to recover these children .

recent funding for the icac program has been approximately $27 million annually .

under the amber alert ( america's missing: broadcast emergency response ) program , doj supports a grantee that provides technical assistance to states in alerting the public when children are abducted and believed to be in imminent danger .

amber alert technical assistance has been funded at approximately $2 million annually in recent years .

the mec program also provides grants for training and technical assistance on child victimization and related supports .

training and technical assistance is delivered via a grantee that provides assistance through classroom instruction , web - based learning , and in - person support .

these grants can vary from year to year , and recent funding has been approximately $4 million annually .

this report covers selected aspects of research and policy concerning missing and exploited children .

it begins with background on federal involvement in missing children's issues .

the next section includes definitions and approximate numbers of children who are missing and sexually exploited .

the report then provides information about each component of the mec program .

congress has long been concerned about missing children .

in the early 1970s , congress held hearings about a subset of these children — those who had run away from home .

testimony focused on the interaction that runaway youth had with police and their increasing reliance on social service agencies for support .

these hearings and related activity led to the passage of the runaway youth act of 1974 as title iii of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( p.l .

93-415 ) .

the act , as amended , authorizes assistance to runaway and homeless youth through shelters and other services .

beginning in the late 1970s , highly publicized cases of children who were abducted , sexually abused , and sometimes murdered prompted policymakers and child advocates to declare a missing children problem .

at that time , many of the victims' families and communities perceived that kidnappings were becoming more commonplace .

prominent cases of missing children were highly publicized and a docudrama , "adam," depicted the story of abducted six - year - old adam walsh , son of john and revé walsh .

testimony at congressional hearings about missing children further reinforced the perception of a missing children problem .

witnesses testified that as many as 1.8 million children were missing .

they also highlighted the accompanying sexual exploitation that children often experienced during missing episodes .

in some parts of the country , nonprofit organizations formed by the parents of missing children were often the only entities that organized recovery efforts and provided counseling for victimized families .

congress responded by passing two bills , both of which were enacted .

the missing children act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-292 ) directed the attorney general to keep records on missing children in the national crime information center's ( ncic's ) missing persons file , maintained by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and to disseminate those records to state and local agencies .

that law neither created new federal jurisdiction over missing children's programs nor required federal law enforcement officials to coordinate missing children efforts .

two years later , the missing children's assistance act ( p.l .

98-473 ) was enacted .

it directed ojjdp to lead federal efforts to recover missing children and establish a national resource center on missing children .

ncmec has served as the resource center since 1984 .

the missing children's assistance act has been amended multiple times to further specify the responsibilities of ojjdp and ncmec in responding to missing and exploited children .

for example , ojjdp supports training and technical assistance to strengthen community responses to child victimization cases , among other activities .

current funding authorization under the missing children's assistance act is $40 million for each of fy2014 through fy2018 .

of this amount , up to $32.2 million is to be allotted to ncmec .

 ( the appendix provides a description of the original act and its amendments. ) .

the federal government has since provided additional resources in support of missing and exploited children .

selected activities have been subsumed under the mec program .

doj first funded the icac task force program in 2008 to support state and local law enforcement agencies in combatting online enticement of children and the proliferation of pornography .

the protect our children act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-401 ) formally authorized the program .

this law provided two authorizations for the icac task force program — one for $60 million for fy2009-fy2013 for icac activities generally , including grants for icac task forces , and one for $2 million for each of fy2009-fy2016 for the national icac data system , which facilitates online law enforcement investigations of child exploitation .

the child protection act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-206 ) , signed into law on december 7 , 2012 , authorized annual appropriations of $60 million for the icac task force program generally ( including the data system and the national strategy for child exploitation prevention and interdiction , discussed later in this report ) through fy2018 .

the providing resources , officers , and technology to eradicate cyber threats to our children act of 2017 ( protect our children act of 2017 , p.l .

115-82 ) extended annual authorizations of $60 million for the icac task force program generally through fy2022 .

separately , ojp first provided funding ( $10 million in discretionary appropriations ) in 2002 for states and localities to develop amber alert programs .

the prosecutorial remedies and other tools to end the exploitation of children today act of 2003 ( protect act , p.l .

108-21 ) , enacted in 2003 , directed the attorney general to create a national amber alert program , including appointing a coordinator and developing standards for issuing an alert .

p.l .

108-21 also authorized funding in fy2004 for activities to support states in developing amber alert communication plans and technologies .

as discussed in more detail later in this report , the mec program has used continuous appropriations since fy2004 to provide technical assistance to states' amber alert plans and in responding to child abductions .

the mec program was initially funded at $4 million in fy1985 and has received funding increases in most years since 1991 .

funding more than doubled from $6.0 million in fy1997 to $12.3 million in fy1998 , when the icac task force program was implemented .

another funding peak , from fy2003 to fy2004 , was the result of increased funds for the amber alert program and ncmec .

funding increased again — from $50 million in fy2008 to $70 million in fy2009 — following reauthorization of the program .

also in fy2009 , congress appropriated funding for the program under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

arra provided funding for myriad federal programs and initiatives to address the economic recession that began in december 2007 and extended through june 2009 .

specifically , the law appropriated $50 million for the icac task force program .

table 1 shows total funding and funding for each of the program's components from fy2006 through fy2017 .

ncmec has received the most funding in each of these years , followed by the icac task force program .

the next highest level of funding support went to activities including program administration , training and technical assistance on missing and exploited children , support services for missing children's organizations , and grant programs that can vary from year to year .

the fy2017 appropriation for the mec program was $72.5 million .

as with prior appropriations legislation , the fy2017 appropriations law ( p.l .

115-31 ) did not specify the level of funds for each of the program's components .

doj allocated $63.1 million for the program , with the remaining $9.3 million allocated for other expenses within the ojp and ojjdp programs ; approximately $58,000 was not obligated .

ncmec is a primary component of the mec program and employs more than 300 people at its alexandria , va , headquarters and regional offices in california , florida , new york , and texas .

these regional offices provide case management and technical support in their geographic areas .

ncmec provides multiple activities and services pertaining to missing children , including those abducted to or from the united states ; exploited children ; training and technical assistance ; families of missing children ; and partnerships with state missing children's clearinghouses and other stakeholders .

these activities and services are detailed further in this section .

note that some missing children and exploited children programs are not mutually exclusive , and this report does not provide an exhaustive discussion of all services provided by ncmec .

in addition to funding through the mec program , ncmec is also funded through private contributions , other doj grants , and the united states secret service ( usss ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

pursuant to the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) , congress has mandated that the usss provide forensic and technical assistance to ncmec and federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies in matters involving missing and exploited children .

in recent years , funding provided by the usss has been transferred to ojp to be provided directly to ncmec .

amber ( america's missing: broadcast emergency response ) alert systems are state - administered communication systems to inform the public about children who are abducted .

amber systems are voluntary partnerships — between law enforcement agencies , broadcasters , and transportation agencies — to activate messages in a targeted area when a child is abducted and believed to be in grave danger .

the first system began locally in 1996 when fourth - grader amber hagerman was abducted and murdered near her home in the dallas - fort worth area .

after the abduction , law enforcement agencies in north texas and the dallas - fort worth association of radio managers developed a plan to send out an emergency alert about a missing child to the public through the emergency alert system ( eas ) , which interrupts broadcasting .

soon after , jurisdictions in texas and other states began to create regional alert programs .

ojp first provided funding ( $10 million in discretionary appropriations ) in 2002 for states and localities to develop amber alert programs .

the protect act ( p.l .

108-21 ) , enacted in 2003 , directed the attorney general to create a national amber alert program , including appointing a coordinator and developing standards for issuing an alert .

p.l .

108-21 also authorized funding for activities to support states in developing amber alert communication plans and technologies .

the mec program provides funding to support other activities related to missing and exploited children , including training and technical assistance for public and private nonprofit organizations .

ojjdp contracts with fox valley technical college in wisconsin to provide technical assistance , which focuses on strengthening multi - disciplinary responses in child victimization cases .

assistance is provided through distance learning , webinars , onsite technical assistance , or classroom formats .

the program additionally supports program administration , printing of publications for missing children's day , and grant programs that vary from year to year .

for example , the program contributed funding to a doj mentoring grant in fy2017 that focuses on mentoring for child victims of commercial sexual exploitation and domestic trafficking .

this grant was administered as part of the doj mentoring program .

