child welfare agencies seek to ensure the well - being of children and their families , including protecting children from abuse or neglect and ensuring that they have a safe and permanent home .

as the u.s. constitution has been interpreted , states have the primary obligation to ensure child welfare .

at the state level , the child welfare "system" consists of state and local judges and other court personnel , prosecutors , law enforcement personnel , and public and private social service workers .

these representatives of various state and local entities investigate allegations of child abuse and neglect , provide services to families in their own homes , remove children from homes if necessary , and supervise and administer payments for children in out - of - home settings .

federal involvement in child welfare is tied to the financial assistance it provides to states to conduct these activities .

in fy2008 , congress appropriated just under $7.9 billion for child welfare purposes .

the bulk ( $4.6 billion ) of this money was appropriated to reimburse states for the cost of providing foster care for children who meet federal eligibility criteria ( estimated 43% of national foster care caseload in fy2006 ) .

beginning in the early 1960s , the federal government has paid for part of the cost of foster care for children who would have been entitled to federally assisted cash welfare had they continued to live in their own homes .

 ( in essence , the cash aid was expected to follow the child into foster care. ) .

states had primary responsibility to pay the full foster care costs for other children who were removed from their homes .

in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , congress ended the entitlement to cash aid for needy families with children and converted funding for this purpose to a block grant .

at the same time , it continued to require that only children removed from homes that would have met the eligibility requirements for cash aid under the state's pre - 1996 welfare - reform rules would be eligible for federal foster care assistance .

as a condition of receiving these foster care and other child welfare funds , states are required to abide by a series of federal child welfare policies .

federal child welfare policies focus , overall , on ensuring safety and well - being for all children served .

however , the most specific and extensive requirements are designed for the protection of children in foster care , especially to ensure them a safe and permanent home .

these protections must generally be provided to all children in foster care , regardless of whether they meet federal foster care eligibility criteria .

state compliance with the majority of these federal requirements is checked as part of the child and family services review ( cfsr ) .

a state that is not in "substantial conformity" with federal child welfare policy — as determined by the review — must implement a program improvement plan ( pip ) .

the state typically has two years to implement a pip .

the pip must successfully address the compliance issues identified by the cfsr or the state faces a loss of a part of their federal child welfare funding .

in fy2006 , an estimated 905,000 u.s. children , or about 12.1 children for every 1,000 in the general population , were found to be victims of abuse or neglect ; an estimated 1,530 children died due to abuse or neglect in that year .

the rate of reported child maltreatment victims has been about 12 children per 1,000 children in the national population in every year since 1999 .

this rate is well below the recorded highs in the early to mid - 1990s ( 1992-1996 ) , when the rate ranged around 15 victims for every 1,000 children in the population and the number of child victims was counted as more than 1 million annually .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

for fy2006 , states reported 64% of child victims experienced neglect , 16% were found to have experienced physical abuse , 9% sexual abuse , 7% psychological maltreatment , 2% medical neglect , and 14% "other abuse. .

these shares were fairly constant between 2000 and 2006 , although the rate of children found to have experienced neglect increased somewhat while the rate of children found to have experienced physical abuse or sexual abuse declined somewhat .

preliminary estimates show 510,000 children were in foster care on the last day of fy2006 ( or about 6.8 per every 1,000 children in the general population ) .

this represents a modest decline from the estimated 511,000 children in care on the last day of fy2005 , but is well below the recorded high of 567,000 children in care on the last day of fy1999 ( when there were about 8.0 children in foster care per 1,000 in the population ) .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

overall , the national foster care caseload declined by about 10% between fy1999 and fy2006 ; however , this decline has not been shared by all states .

between fy1999 and fy2006 ( most recent year state - level data are available ) , less than half of all the states ( 24 , including puerto rico and the district of columbia ) reported reductions in their foster care caseload , ranging from a less than 1% decline in connecticut ( 40 children ) and michigan ( 200 children ) to a nearly 47% decline in illinois ( 16,000 children ) .

along with illinois , california and new york posted the greatest numerical and percentage change declines in their caseloads between the last days of fy1999 and fy2006: california's caseload dropped by close to 40,000 children ( 34% decline ) ; new york's caseload declined by more than 21,000 children ( 41% decline ) .

over the fy1999-fy2006 time period , slightly more states ( 27 ) posted increases in their caseloads .

these ranged from an increase of about 3% ( more than 300 children ) in massachusetts to increases of 93% ( close to 900 children ) in idaho , 89% in texas ( nearly 15,000 children ) and 86% in iowa ( more than 4,000 children ) .

in addition , five states ( wy , sd , ok , az , and wv ) saw caseload increases in their foster care caseloads ranging from roughly one - third to two - thirds between the last day of fy1999 and the last day of fy2006 .

the overall number of children in care on the last day of a given year rises or falls depending upon both the number of entries to foster care , that is children who are removed from their homes in a given year , and the number of exits in that same year , that is children reunited with their families , adopted , emancipated , or placed in another permanent setting .

nationally , the number of children reported as having exited foster care has risen from an estimated 250,000 in fy1999 to an estimated 289,000 in fy2006 .

 ( however , this is understood as an undercount because some states do not report all exits from foster care. ) .

nationally , the number of children who entered foster care may be trending up .

during fy2006 ( most recent year for which data are available ) , the number of children who entered foster care in fy2006 was estimated as 303,000 compared to 293,000 children who entered in fy1999 .

table 1 indicates that this represents a rate of about 4.1 children per 1,000 in the population in both of those years .

however , during the period of greatest recorded decline in the national caseload , fy2000 through fy2004 , the rate of children entering foster care also declined , reaching a low point of 3.9 in fy2003 .

table 1 shows national estimates of the total number and the rate ( i.e .

the number of children per 1,000 in the population ) who were found to be victims of child maltreatment , who entered foster care , and who were in care on the last day of the fiscal year .

in 2007 , the house ways and means subcommittee on income security and family support , the house subcommittee that has exercised jurisdiction over the largest share of federal child welfare programs , held several hearings that were directly related to child welfare policy .

in addition to the hearings discussed below , in february 2008 that subcommittee held a hearing to receive testimony on the investment in kids instruction development and support act ( invest in kids act , h.r .

5466 ) , which was introduced by representative jim mcdermott , who chairs the subcommittee .

as of mid - june 2008 , no hearings have been held in the senate during the 110 th congress that focused primarily on child welfare .

the 109 th congress enacted numerous changes intended to improve and strengthen child welfare services , including a number of new requirements that states must meet related to children in foster care .

many proposals to further amend federal child welfare policy continue to be debated .

legislation that would respond to a number of the concerns raised in the child welfare hearings held during 2007 , including proposals to change the federal child welfare financing structure , has been introduced in the 110 th congress .

the bills introduced would expand the eligible populations served with title iv - e funds and provide some additional support for child and family services .

 ( appendix a discusses several child welfare financing proposals made outside of congress — including a proposal by the bush administration — that have influenced or continue to influence legislative proposals. ) .

other legislative proposals would authorize or require new services and protections for children in ( or about to enter ) foster care ; seek to improve services for youth who are aging out of care ( including those who have already exited due to age ) ; encourage greater access to a range of services for kinship caregivers and further encourage their involvement as decision - makers and use as caregivers for children who cannot remain safely with their parents ; aim to improve foster and adoptive parent recruitment efforts of state child welfare agencies ; permit direct access to federal title iv - e funds for tribal governments ; and make other related changes intended to enhance the safety , permanence , and well - being of children .

these legislative proposals are described in greater detail below .

most of the bills discussed would amend child welfare programs and policy that currently exist ; however , some would create new and freestanding programs or would amend other social service or education programs .

an effort was made to identify bills with proposals that highlight a wide range of child welfare policy concerns and that would be expected to affect the primary populations served by the child welfare agency ( as well as the child welfare agency itself ) .

at the same time , this discussion is not comprehensive and inclusion of a bill ( or exclusion ) is not intended to suggest the viability ( or lack of viability ) for a given proposal .

the following program funding or other authorizations are set to expire with fy2008 or have already expired .

adoption incentives ( authorized under section 473a of the social security act ) are bonus funds awarded to states that increase the number of children adopted out of foster care .

authority to appropriate funds for adoption incentives was most recently reauthorized in 2003 ( p.l .

108-145 ) and is set to expire with fy2008 .

the bush administration , as part of its fy2009 budget , discusses proposed legislation to increase the amount of certain bonuses , and h.r .

5466 would reauthorize funding for the program through fy2013 .

adoption incentives were initially created in the adoption and safe families act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-89 ) as part of a larger legislative effort to encourage and expedite appropriate placement of children from foster care into adoptive families .

the number of children adopted with public child welfare agency involvement increased significantly from 25,700 in fy1995 to 51,100 in fy2000 .

since then the number of such adoptions has stabilized at between 50,000 and 53,000 annually ( even as the number of children waiting to be adopted from foster care has declined ) .

for increases in adoptions finalized between fy1998 ( first year incentives were awarded ) through fy2006 ( most recent awards made ) , states collectively earned $221 million .

all states have won an award in at least one of these years ( although no more than 44 states , including dc , did so in any one year ) .

the largest bonus amounts , however , were paid in the program's earliest years ( when adoptions were rising ) ; in the most recent award cycle ( for adoptions finalized in fy2006 ) , 19 states earned a total of $7.4 million .

as provided in p.l .

108-145 , for a state to be eligible to earn an incentive , it must increase the overall number of adoptions out of its foster care caseload , or the number of adoptions of those children aged nine or older .

an eligible state may additionally earn a bonus for an increase in the number of children adopted from foster care who are title iv - e eligible , have special needs , and are under the age of nine .

the law establishes three "baselines" for each state: these are equal to all children adopted out of foster care in fy2002 ( or any later year when that number was higher ) , the number of children aged nine or older who were adopted in fy2002 ( or any later year when that number was higher ) , and the number of title iv - e eligible , special needs children under age nine who were adopted in fy2002 ( or any later year when that number was higher ) .

states are awarded a bonus of $4,000 for each adoption that exceeds the overall baseline ; $4,000 for each older child adoption that exceeds the relevant baseline ; and $2,000 for each title iv - e eligible special needs child under the age of nine that exceeds the relevant baseline .

h.r .

5466 and s. 3038 would reauthorize funding for the adoption incentives program for fy2009 through fy2013 at the current annual authorization level of $43 million .

both bills would double the incentive award for increases in the adoption of children aged nine and older ( from $4,000 to $8,000 ) .

h.r .

5466 would also double the incentive award for increases in the adoption of special needs children under the age of nine ( from $2,000 to $4,000 ) , while s. 3038 would increase this incentive award amount from $2,000 to $3,000 .

for purposes of the adoption incentive program , an increase in adoptions is determined on the basis of a state finalizing a higher number of adoptions ( in the given category of adoptions ) than it finalized in the base year .

both h.r .

5466 and s. 3038 would fix this base year at fy2007 .

in addition , provided additional appropriated funds were available , s. 3038 would permit states that increase their overall rates of adoptions from foster care to earn adoption incentive awards ( $1,000 multiplied by the calculated increase in adoptions ) .

finally , both h.r .

5466 and s. 3038 would permit states to earn incentive awards related to placing children from foster care into legal guardianships .

h.r .

5466 would award $4,000 for each additional such legal guardianship established by a state ( as compared to the number it established in fy2007 .

alternatively , provided additional appropriated incentive funds remained available , s. 3038 would authorize a bonus ( $1,000 ) for each title iv - e eligible relative guardianship agreement a state entered into in first year and for any increase in the number of those agreements established in subsequent years .

the president's budget requests $20 million for adoption incentives in fy2009 ( the fy2008 appropriation amount was $4 million ) .

as included in h.r .

5466 and s. 3038 , the bush administration also proposes to set fy2007 as the year in which the adoption incentive baselines are established , and also like those bills , it would not require that the baseline be adjusted in subsequent years if a state achieves a higher number of adoptions .

in justifying this proposed change , the administration notes that the "changed baselines will set goals for increasing adoptions that better reflect recent changes in the child welfare population and ensure those goals are within a state's reach so there is a true fiscal incentive to increasing adoptions. .

also like h.r .

5466 and s. 3038 , the administration proposes to double the adoption bonus for children aged nine and older ( from $4,000 to $8,000 ) .

and like , s. 3038 , it proposes to raise the award for younger special needs children by just 50% ( from $2,000 to $3,000 ) .

the administration notes that older children make up a growing share of the children waiting to be adopted , that inflation has eroded the original value of the incentives , and that the proposed increase in award amounts is "in recognition of the fact that states will have to invest additional resources and devote greater efforts in achieving adoption for the more challenging children who are waiting for adoption. .

the administration would also stipulate that adoption incentive funds received by a state could only be spent to finalize adoption or other permanency options .

currently states are permitted to spend incentive funds on any purpose authorized under title iv - b or title iv - e of the social security act , including post - adoption services .

first authorized in 1974 ( p.l .

93-247 ) , funding for capta was most recently reauthorized , through fy2008 , by the keeping children and families safe act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-36 ) .

as of mid - june 2008 , legislation primarily devoted to capta reauthorization has not been introduced ; however , several bills ( listed below ) propose amendments or would extend funding authority for capta programs .

the administration's fy2009 budget requests a "straightline reauthorization" of the program with funding authority of "such sums as may be appropriated. .

the administration notes that it has again included $10 million in its requested fy2009 funding for capta's discretionary activities component to continue the home visitation initiative ( see " home visiting ," above ) and also states that the requested funding level includes "$500,000 to conduct a feasibility study on the creation , development and maintenance of a national child abuse and neglect offender registry. .

capta authorizes funding for three grant programs: grants to states for improvement of their child protection system ; grants to all states for use by community - based groups to prevent child abuse and neglect ; and grants to eligible entities for research , pilot programs , or other activities related to the prevention and treatment of child abuse or neglect .

combined funding for these programs was authorized at $200 million for fy2004 and "such sums as may be necessary" for each of fy2005 through fy2008 ; however , total funding appropriated for capta has never exceeded $106 million , and in fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , congress provided a total of $105 million .

these funds are administered by hhs .

as noted above , as of june 2008 , no bill primarily related to reauthorization of capta has been introduced ; however a number of bills would amend capta .

these include the following .

h.r .

3409 , an omnibus youth policy bill , would make amendments that appear intended to ensure the issue of youth homelessness is given greater attention , and it would extend the current funding authority under capta , authorizing total appropriations of $200 million for fy2009 and "such sums as may be necessary" for each of fy2010 through fy2013 .

s. 2237 , an omnibus crime control and prevention bill , would authorize the appropriation of additional funds specifically for capta's state grants to improve child welfare services ( $200 million for each of fy2008-fy2012 ) and for the act's grants to support community - based activities to prevent child abuse and neglect ( $200 million in each of fy2008 through fy2012 ) ( see also "services for children and families" above ) .

s. 2237 would further amend capta to provide a new funding authorization of $545 million to be distributed via capta's community - based grants for parent education , counseling , and family strengthening services and for adoption referral and counseling ( see also " parenting education " above ) .

h.r .

5876 , the stop child abuse in residential programs for teens act of 2008 ( introduced by representative george miller in april 2008 and reported by the house education and labor committee in may 2008 ) , would amend capta to require states ( within three years of the bill's enactment ) to develop licensing standards related to certain residential programs that offer services for youth with emotional or behavioral issues as well as provisions and procedures to monitor and enforce program compliance with those standards .

in addition , the bill would also require states to develop a public database of programs covered by these licensing standards providing information on any reports of child abuse and neglect at the programs .

s. 2341 would amend capta to add a new grant program to develop individual development accounts for youth aging out of foster care ; that act would authorize the appropriation of "such sums as may be necessary" specifically for this purpose ( see also " other supports or assistance proposed " above ) ; and finally s. 2944 would amend capta to require hhs to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences for a national study of the child welfare workforce ( see also " improving the child welfare workforce " above. ) .

the adoption opportunities program was established in 1978 ( p.l .

95-266 ) and was most recently reauthorized in 2003 ( p.l .

108-36 , with capta ) .

no legislation to reauthorize this program has been introduced as of early february 2008 , although the purposes of the bill are closely aligned with proposals made by h.r .

4198 and s. 2395 ( see " foster and adoptive parent recruitment ," above ) .

further , the administration has requested a "straightline reauthorization" of the program with funding authority of "such sums as may be appropriated. .

funding for adoption opportunities was authorized at $40 million for fy2004 and "such sums as may be necessary" in each of fy2005-fy2008 .

for fy2008 , the program received an appropriation of $26.4 million ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

funding provided for adoption opportunities is administered by hhs and is distributed via competitive grants or contracts .

among other things , those competitive grants support a national adoption information clearinghouse , a national resource center on special needs adoption , and a national internet photo listing of children seeking adoption .

these entities also provide training and technical assistance related to adoption and recruitment of families who want to adopt .

finally , other competitive grants are made to conduct research or provide services related to reducing barriers to adoption ; provide services to adoptive families ; or for other related purposes .

the abandoned infants assistance program was created in 1988 ( p.l .

100-505 ) in response to concerns about "boarder babies. .

the context for this concern included increased cocaine / crack use by pregnant women , as well as the spread of hiv among infants whose parents abused drugs intravenously .

"boarder babies" were understood as infants and young children who were medically ready to be discharged from a hospital but for whom the parent ( due to drug or other reasons ) was unable to care and had thus simply abandoned in the hospital .

the program was most recently reauthorized in 2003 ( p.l .

108-36 , with capta ) , when funding was authorized at $45 million for fy2004 and "such sums as may be necessary" for each of fy2005 through fy2008 .

the program received an appropriation of $11.6 million in fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

no legislation to reauthorize this program has been introduced as of early february 2008 , but the administration has requested a "straightline reauthorization" of the program with funding authority of "such sums as may be appropriated. .

funds are administered by hhs and are distributed under this program through competitive grants or contracts to public and private communities and entities for the development , implementation , and operation of projects that aim to prevent abandonment of infants and young children who have been exposed to hiv / aids and drugs ; identify and address the needs of abandoned infants ( especially those born with aids , exposed to drugs , or those with life - threatening illnesses or special medical needs ) , including assisting them in living with their biological parents , recruiting and retaining foster families who can care for such abandoned infants , or providing residential care programs if neither the child's biological parent nor a foster family can care for the child ; and recruiting and training health and social services personnel to work with those caring for these abandoned infants .

finally , some grant funding supports the national abandoned infants assistance resource center , which provides training and technical assistance related to planning and development of projects funded under this program .

children's advocacy centers ( cacs ) are intended to coordinate a multi - disciplinary response to child abuse ( e.g .

law enforcement , social service , medical , mental health ) in a manner that ensures child abuse victims ( and any non - offending family members ) receive the support services they need and do not experience the investigation of child abuse as an added trauma .

funding authority for this program expired with fy2005 , although congress has continued to appropriate funds for this purpose .

as of early february 2008 , no legislation to reauthorize funds for this program has been introduced .

the administration has requested that funding and program authority for this and other programs authorized by the victims of child abuse act , the missing children's assistance act , the juvenile justice delinquency and prevention act , and other acts be combined into a single "child safety and juvenile justice" program .

funds would be distributed on competitive basis to "assist state and local governments in addressing multiple child safety and juvenile justice needs. .

funding to support local and regional advocacy centers ( and for related training and technical assistance ) is administered by the department of justice and was first authorized under the victims of child abuse act of 1990 ( title ii of p.l .

101-647 , as amended ) .

the bulk of cac funding is typically awarded to the national children's alliance ( a member organization for local cacs ) , which makes subgrants to support local cacs .

the remaining funds support regional cacs , as well as training and technical assistance .

the cac program was last amended in 2003 ( p.l .

108-21 ) when authority to appropriate funds was provided for the program through fy2005 .

despite the expiration of this authorization , congress has continued to provide funding for the program in each year , and in fy2008 , it provided $16.9 million ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

the victims of child abuse act of 1990 ( title ii of p.l .

101-647 , as amended ) also authorized funding to provide expanded technical assistance and training to judicial personnel and attorneys to improve the judicial system's handling of child abuse and neglect cases "with specific emphasis on the role of the courts in addressing reasonable efforts that can safely avoid unnecessary and unnecessarily prolonged foster care placement. .

funding authority for this program expired with fy2005 , although congress has continued to appropriate funds for this purpose .

as of early february 2008 , no legislation to reauthorize funds for this program has been introduced .

funds appropriated under this authority are administered by the department of justice and have been used to support the "model courts initiative" of the national council for juvenile and family court judges .

as part of the 2000 law that reauthorized the violence against women act ( p.l .

106-386 ) , funding for this purpose of the victims of child abuse act was extended through fy2005 .

despite the expiration of funding authority congress has continued to provide funds under this program authority ; for fy2008 , it appropriated $2.4 million ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

adoption awareness funds are provided to support both infant and "special needs" adoptions .

this program authority is included in the public health service act , and the program and its funding ( "such sums as may be necessary" ) was initially authorized by the children's health act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-310 ) .

funding authority expired with fy2005 , but congress has continued to appropriate funds ; for fy2008 , it provided $12.4 million for adoption awareness ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

these funds are administered by hhs , which continues to request funding for the programs authorized by adoption awareness .

infant adoption awareness funds ( expected to be $9.6 million in fy2008 ) are distributed via competitive grants or contracts to support development and implementation of programs that train staff in eligible health centers to "provide adoption information and referrals to pregnant women on an equal basis with all other courses of action included in non - directive counseling to pregnant women. .

special needs adoption awareness funds ( expected to be $2.9 million in fy2008 ) are distributed via competitive grants to nonprofit entities to plan , develop , and carry out a national campaign to provide information to the public regarding the adoption of children with special needs .

this campaign can include public service announcements on television , radio , or billboards .

appendix a .

other financing proposals both the administration , which first proposed the president's child welfare option in february 2003 , and the private pew commission on children in foster care , which first offered its financing reform recommendations in may 2004 , have offered broad proposals to change the way federal dedicated child welfare funds are distributed to states .

president's child welfare option the president's fy2009 budget proposes to offer states an alternative method for financing their foster care programs and other child welfare services .

 ( this proposal was first included in the president's fy2003 budget and has been in every successive one as well. ) .

according to fy2009 budget documents , the proposal is intended to be "budget neutral" and would give states the option to receive their foster care funding as a flexible grant over five years to support a continuum of services for families in crisis and children at risk. .

no specific legislative language to enact this plan has been introduced .

however , the administration has indicated that under this "flexible funding" plan , states could choose to receive their foster care funding as an annual pre - established grant amount ( rather than as open - ended reimbursement of eligible expenses ) for a period of five years .

the amount of a state's annual grant funding during those years would be based on the funding that the state would be assumed to receive under the title iv - e foster care program ( as it exists in current law ) over those same five years .

states could use the grant funds for the full range of child welfare services , including foster care payments , prevention activities , permanency efforts , case management , administrative activities , training for child welfare staff , and other similar child welfare activities .

further , the funds could be spent on any child without regard to whether this child met the title iv - e foster care eligibility criteria that are part of the afdc - program link .

 ( the administration's proposals would not make any changes to the current title iv - e adoption assistance program , which also includes this eligibility link. ) .

at the same time , the fy2009 budget documents note that states would be required to uphold "child safety protections outlined in the adoption and safe families act," agree to maintain existing levels of state investment in child welfare programs , and continue to participate in the hhs - administered child and family services reviews ( to ensure compliance with federal child welfare policy ) .

states experiencing a "severe foster care crisis" would , under certain circumstances , be able to tap tanf contingency funds to meet this unanticipated need .

finally , the president's proposal includes a $30 million set - aside to be available for indian tribes ( tribes are currently not eligible to directly receive federal foster care funds under title iv - e of the social security act ) and a one - third of 1% set - aside for monitoring and technical assistance of state foster care programs .

recommendations of the pew commission in may 2004 , the pew commission on children in foster care , co - chaired by former representatives gray and frenzel , released a set of recommendations to restructure the current federal child welfare system .

those recommendations have guided some aspects of introduced bills ( in this and prior congresses ) and they remain a part of the child welfare financing debate .

de - link payments the commission recommended removing the income eligibility requirements for title iv - e adoption assistance and foster care maintenance payments — now in law as part of the link between the title iv - e program and the prior law afdc eligibility requirements ( discussed above ) — and continuing mandatory and "open - ended" funding for the program .

to reduce the federal cost of this expanded eligibility , it further recommended that the share of each foster care maintenance or adoption payment reimbursed by the federal government be reduced .

those reimbursement rates now range from 50% to 83% , depending on the state's per capita income , and the pew commission proposed an even 35% reduction ( i.e .

new funding matching rates of roughly 32.5% to 54.0% ) .

to ensure that the lower reimbursement rates would not result in some states receiving less federal support for adoption subsidies and foster care maintenance payments than under current law , the commission also recommended a three - year adjustment period during which states would at a minimum receive the same level of funding that would have been available to them before the adjustment of the program eligibility criteria and the reimbursement rate .

thus , the commission believes this de - link proposal would be cost neutral to both the federal and state governments .

service , case management , and training funds the commission further recommended a single "safe children , strong families" grant program be created to provide capped , mandatory funding that states would not be able to use for foster care maintenance payments but that they could spend on virtually any other child welfare purpose , including providing services to children and their families , casework support for children , and training of child welfare , court and other relevant personnel .

the commission recommended that this grant be created by combining the capped funding now available to states under title iv - b of the social security act ( child welfare services and promoting safe and stable families ) with some of the open - ended funding now available under title iv - e for states to conduct specified administrative and child placement activities .

the initial grant funding level would be based on the total amount of current funding for each of these funding streams ( estimated at about $3.7 billion at the time of the proposal ) enhanced by $200 million in the first year ( for a total of about $3.9 billion ) .

the commission proposed that states would receive a share of this money based on the share of the total pot of money they receive under current law .

further , the commission proposed that this grant should be indexed so that each state's funding would annually grow by 2% plus the inflation rate ( consumer price index ) .

under current law , the federal government provides between 50% and 75% of the total eligible program costs for the programs that would be rolled into the safe children and strong families grant .

the commission recommended adjusting this rate to create a single federal matching rate that would ensure no state had to provide more of its own funding to receive the same level of federal support .

it estimated that this federal share ( matching rate ) would be about 68% .

finally , with regard to other funding currently provided under title iv - e , the commission recommended that states continue to be able to claim open - ended reimbursement for the development , maintenance , and operation of a state automated child welfare information system ( sacwis ) at the current federal reimbursement rate of 50% .

other pew financing recommendations among other recommendations , some of which had previously been proposed in congress , the commission recommended that assistance payments for children who exit foster care to a legal guardianship be reimbursed by the federal government on an open - ended basis ( under title iv - e ) , proposed that indian tribes be granted the ability to make direct claims for federal reimbursement under the title iv - e programs , and sought to remove current limits set on the amount of title iv - e funding that may be accessed by the territories .

it further proposed that current law adoption incentive payments be revamped to permit states that successfully found permanent homes for children ( whether via family reunification , adoption , or guardianship ) to receive these bonus funds ; sought provisions that would permit states to transfer ( "re - invest" ) certain "unspent" title iv - e foster care dollars in the safe children , strong families grant ; recommended payment of an enhanced federal matching rate for the safe children , strong families grant — if a state showed increased competence and reduced caseloads among its child welfare workforce ; proposed investment of at least some of a state's assessed penalties for noncompliance with federal child welfare policy in that state's program improvement plan ( with this spending directed by hhs ) and , finally , recommended continued reservation of funds for research , evaluation , and sharing of best practices .

the partnership recommendations in may 2007 , eight organizations representing public human services administrators and employees , as well as private child welfare service providers , researchers , and advocates , formed a partnership to propose child welfare reform .

stating that the "federal - state partnership to help children and families must be renewed and strengthened," this partnership produced a list of reform proposals — many of which are related to federal financing .

the eight organizations included in the partnership are the american federation of state , county and municipal employees ( afscme ) , american public human services association ( aphsa ) , catholic charities usa , center for law and social policy ( clasp ) , child welfare league of america ( cwla ) , children's defense fund , national child abuse coalition , and voices for america's children .

the partnership proposals are not provided in legislative form .

however some of the proposals have been addressed in legislation introduced in this congress and described in the body of the report .

a brief review of the proposals is given below .

the partnership seeks to "guarantee services , supports and safe homes for every child who is at - risk of being or has been abused or neglected. .

it proposes to do this by amending title iv - e of the social security act to permit states to use those funds on a broader range of purposes and "without converting any of the title iv - e to a block grant. .

the partnership calls for expanded federal eligibility for title iv - e foster care through elimination of the income eligibility criteria ( de - link from afdc ) .

 ( it does not propose a reduction in reimbursement rates or another mechanism that would limit increased cost from this change to the federal government. ) .

and it further proposes that any state that safely reduces its foster care caseload should be able to "reinvest" the federal title iv - e funds , which would otherwise be lost to the state , in services and supports that prevent abuse or neglect .

the partnership would further stipulate that any savings in state spending that might accrue because of these changes must be similarly reinvested .

the partnership further proposes that states should be able to use title iv - e funds to ( 1 ) provide post - permanency services to children reunited with their parents , placed permanently with a relative , or adopted , and to help older youth who age out of foster care successfully transition to adulthood and ( 2 ) provide subsidized guardianship for children placed with legal guardians ( when neither reuniting with parents nor adoption is appropriate ) .

the proposal also calls for direct tribal access to title iv - e funding and suggests that states be permitted to establish relative - specific licensing standards , provided those standards contain safety protections and criminal background checks .

for most states , the partnership would increase the federal matching rate available to states under the title iv - e program for casework activities — including assessment of child and family needs , development and refinement of permanency plans , recruitment , licensing and supervision of foster and pre - adoptive parents .

under current law , states may seek federal reimbursement of 50% of the cost of such caseworker activities ( provided they are incurred on behalf of title iv - e eligible children ) , which is the general reimbursement rate for title iv - e program "administrative" costs .

the partnership proposes to change this matching rate for caseworker activities under the title iv - e program to the state's federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) , which may range from 50% to 83% with states that have higher per capita income receiving lower rates and vice versa .

further , the partnership proposes to permit states to use child welfare funds withdrawn ( penalties ) or disallowed by the federal government to conduct evaluations of promising approaches to achieve safety , permanency , and well - being for children and implement approaches that have been demonstrated to improve these outcomes for children .

the partnership further proposes to expand both the range of topics and the kind of workers for whom states may seek federal title iv - e training support at the 75% reimbursement rate .

under current law , states may receive reimbursement of training costs at the 75% rate if the topic is related to administering the title iv - e foster care or adoption assistance program , and only on behalf of public employees .

training topics that are specifically not eligible for title iv - e reimbursement include those related to providing services , including training on how to conduct a child abuse and neglect investigation , or how to provide treatment or other services related to domestic violence , mental health issues , or substance abuse among children and families coming into contact with the child welfare agency .

the partnership proposes to permit federal title iv - e reimbursement at the 75% matching rate for any training topic related to "ensuring safety , permanency and well - being for children," and further , it would permit states to make these claims on behalf of private child welfare agency workers , court personnel , and other social service agency workers ( including those with expertise in health , mental health , substance abuse , and domestic violence related services ) .

finally , the partnership proposes to "enhance accountability" by requiring states to report annually on funds spent on particular services and categories of services ; the number of children and families served ; the duration of the services ; and the number of children and families who are unable to access a service for which they are referred .

five years after the enactment of these reforms , the partnership would call on the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) to evaluate the effectiveness of the reforms as they relate to ( 1 ) enhancing preventive , permanence , and post - permanency services ; ( 2 ) changes in foster care placements ; ( 3 ) recruitment , retention , and workloads of child welfare workers ; and ( 4 ) improved outcomes for children at - risk of entering , or who have entered , the child welfare system .

finally , to "increase the knowledge about outcomes for children," the partnership would permit states to submit additional state - level data during the child and family services review ( cfsr ) process .

appendix b .

title iv - e foster care eligibility criteri .

