recent high energy prices , concerns over energy security , and the desire to promote rural business and to reduce air pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions have sparked congressional interest in promoting greater use of alternatives to petroleum fuels .

biofuels — transportation fuels produced from plant and animal materials — have attracted particular interest .

ethanol and biodiesel , the two most widely used biofuels , receive significant federal support in the form of tax incentives , loan and grant programs , and regulatory programs .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l .

109-58 ) established a renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) .

this initial rfs required the increasing use of renewable fuel in gasoline , starting at 4.0 billion gallons in 2006 and increasing to 7.5 billion gallons in 2012 .

however , the rfs was significantly expanded on december 19 , 2007 , when president bush signed the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) .

instead of requiring 5.4 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2008 , the new law requires 9.0 billion gallons .

further , the 2007 law requires that the rfs be expanded to 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel by 2022 , as compared to an estimated 8.6 billion gallons under epact .

although this is not an explicit ethanol mandate , it is expected that much of this requirement will be met using corn - based ethanol .

the u.s. ethanol industry expanded rapidly in response to epact , outpacing the required growth in the earlier rfs and leading some proponents of corn - based ethanol to support an increase in the mandated levels of the rfs .

the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill , p.l .

110-246 ) promotes the development of cellulosic ethanol production through new tax credits , reduces slightly the blender's tax credit for corn - derived ethanol beginning in 2009 , and continues the tariff on imported ethanol .

it also expands research on agricultural renewable energy and encourages infrastructure development needed for cellulosic ethanol production .

during the final months of the farm bill debate , both food and fuel prices increased dramatically , and the role of corn - based ethanol in food price inflation became the subject of intense debate .

because of the rapid expansion of u.s. corn ethanol capacity — as of december 2008 , existing capacity was an estimated at 10.4 billion gallons per year , while an additional 1.8 billion gallons was under construction — some are concerned that the united states will soon reach the limit of ethanol that can be produced from corn .

critics of corn - based ethanol argue that the industry does not need continued government support , and that current corn demand for ethanol is putting a strain on corn and other grain markets , leading to increases in other commodity prices , such as livestock feed , which then leads to higher dairy and meat prices .

critics also argue that the environmental costs of corn - based ethanol may outweigh the benefits .

proponents of corn - based ethanol production assert that increased acreage and upward - trending yields will enable corn producers to satisfy the demand for corn for feed , fuel , and exports .

advanced biofuels based on non - food feedstocks are generating much interest .

feedstocks that could be grown on marginal land with reduced inputs compared with corn would solve the food versus fuel issue , it has been argued .

however , biofuels that rely on other sources of biomass , including agricultural wastes , municipal solid waste , and dedicated non - food energy crops such as perennial grasses , fast - growing trees , and algae are still years from commercial production .

nonetheless , this interest has led to proposals to support and / or mandate biofuels produced from feedstocks other than corn starch through explicit requirements , research , development and extension funding , and / or tax incentives .

non - corn biofuels could include fuels produced from cellulosic material ( such as perennial grasses ) , ethanol produced from sugarcane or beets , and biodiesel or renewable diesel produced from vegetable or animal oils .

under eisa , eligible corn - based ethanol production is capped at 15 billion gallons beginning in 2015 .

starting in 2009 , the rfs will require that an increasing amount of the mandate be met through the use of "advanced biofuels" — biofuels produced from feedstocks other than corn starch .

currently , cellulosic ethanol is not produced on a commercial scale .

as of july 2008 , there was one commercial - scale refinery under construction , with two demonstration - scale plants and three pilot - scale plants completed .

industry sources expect commercial production of cellulosic ethanol to begin in 2010 or 2011 .

in january 2009 , usda announced funding for a cellulosic biofuels plant under the biorefinery program with projected output of 20 million gallons annually , beginning in 2010 .

the rfs mandates cellulosic ethanol production of 100 million gallons in 2010 .

for more information on cellulosic ethanol , see crs report rl34738 , cellulosic biofuels: analysis of policy issues for congress , by tom capehart .

the following table provides a side - by - side comparison of biofuels - related provisions in eisa with the enacted farm bill — the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 .

president bush signed eisa on december 19 , 2007 , and the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 became law on june 18 , 2008 , after president bush's veto was overridden by both the senate and the house .

both bills cover a wide range of energy and agricultural topics in addition to biofuels .

the table is organized in the same order as eisa , followed by provisions that are exclusively in the enacted farm bill .

key biofuels - related provisions of eisa and the 2008 farm bill include: a major expansion of the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) established in the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) [eisa] ; expansion and / or modification of tax credits for ethanol [farm bill] ; grants and loan guarantees for biofuels ( especially cellulosic ) research , development , deployment , and production [eisa , farm bill] ; studies of the potential for ethanol pipeline transportation , expanded biofuel use , market and environmental impacts of increased biofuel use , and the effects of biodiesel on engines [eisa , farm bill] ; expansion of biofuel feedstock availability [farm bill] ; reauthorization of biofuels research and development at the u.s. department of energy [eisa] and the u.s. department of agriculture and environmental protection agency [farm bill] ; and reduction of the blender tax credit for corn - based ethanol , a new production tax credit for cellulosic ethanol , and continuation of the import duty on ethanol [farm bill] .

