section 612 of the communications act of 1934 , as amended , imposes a requirement upon cable operators to lease a certain percentage of their channel capacity to unaffiliated persons ; eliminates a cable operator's editorial control over the content provided on leased channels except in certain narrow circumstances ; grants the fcc the authority to set maximum reasonable rates , terms , and conditions for use , and procedures for dispute resolution ; and sets out procedures for challenging a cable operator's refusal or failure to make channel capacity available pursuant to section 612 .

subsection ( g ) of section 612 states that when cable systems with 36 channels or more reach 70% of u.s. households and 70% of households "passed" by these cable systems actually subscribe to that service , the fcc "may promulgate any additional rules necessary to provide a diversity of information sources. .

the fcc previously had determined that the first prong of the so - called "70 / 70" test had been met .

however , subsection ( g ) remains dormant because , though data have suggested that the second prong of the test had been met , the fcc has not made an affirmative finding .

on november 27 , 2007 , the fcc preliminarily adopted the 13 th annual assessment of the status of competition in the market for the delivery of video programming .

in this report , the fcc has found that , based on data supplied by warren communications news , the second prong of the 70 / 70 test has been met .

other data sources , according to the fcc , indicate that the second prong has not yet been met .

as a result , the fcc is requiring the cable industry to submit further information regarding the number of homes "passed" by their systems and the number of actual subscribers to those services .

the fcc asserts that this data will help the agency to accurately measure the percentage of households actually subscribing to cable services and determine if the second prong of the 70 / 70 test has indeed been met .

if the fcc determines that the test has been met , the commission will then have the authority to "promulgate any additional rules necessary to provide a diversity of information sources. .

the scope of authority section 612 ( g ) grants remains a matter of contention .

the fcc has previously solicited comment on the extent of its authority under the subsection .

the current commission , however , remains undecided as to the extent of the authority the provision grants and the continued necessity of the provision itself , in light of increased competition in the market for providing video programming .

on december 6 , 2007 , h.r .

4307 , entitled the consumer freedom of choice in cable act , was introduced in the house of representatives .

h.r .

4307 would repeal subsection 612 ( g ) .

judicial review of the scope of the fcc's power to promulgate rules under 612 ( g ) would likely begin with a determination of whether or not the court is required to defer to the agency's interpretation of its authority .

the court must first ask "whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue .

if congress has done so , the inquiry is at an end ; the court 'must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress.' .

a federal court determining whether congress has spoken directly to the scope of an agency's authority under a statutory provision likely would begin its analysis with the language of the statute itself .

statutes must be read as a harmonious whole , and in determining whether congress has spoken directly to an issue , "a reviewing court should not confine itself to examining a particular statutory provision in isolation. .

ambiguity of meaning may be clarified when placed in context .

justice scalia has stated that "[s]tatutory construction ... is a holistic endeavor .

a provision that may seem ambiguous in isolation is often clarified by the remainder of the statutory scheme — because the same terminology is used elsewhere in a context that makes its meaning clear , or because only one of the permissible meanings produces a substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law. .

it seems , therefore , that when an agency's interpretation of the scope of its authority is at issue , a reviewing court will look first to the statutory context in which the provision granting the authority appears ( i.e. , the intent of the statute as a whole , the structure of the statute , and inferences that can be drawn from the placement of the provision under review ) to determine the precise scope of the power congress has delegated .

with these principles in mind , it seems likely that a court would begin its analysis of the authority congress granted under subsection 612 ( g ) by noting the subsection's broad language .

on its face the subsection appears to grant broad authority to promulgate any rule that would ensure a diversity of information sources once the statutory test has been satisfied .

however , because statutory construction "is a holistic endeavor," the court likely would analyze the broad language of subsection 612 ( g ) within the context of the entire statute in which the subsection resides .

subsection ( g ) appears within section 612 , which applies solely to leased access to cable systems .

congress has provided other avenues of access to cable systems in the statute , beyond leased access , such as the provision requiring carriage of local television channels ( "must - carry" ) , the provision requiring carriage of non - commercial educational channels , and the provision requiring carriage of public education and government ( peg ) channels .

the court would then weigh a narrow interpretation against legal arguments for a broader one .

it should also be noted that congress in the 1984 cable act stated its intent to ease regulatory burdens on the cable industry .

if 612 ( g ) grants broad authority , as some commenters argued , it would allow the fcc to regulate many different areas related to the provision of video programming .

this result would arguably run contrary to the deregulatory intent of the statute .

although not beyond question , it appears that a court likely would adopt the narrow interpretation of subsection 612 ( g ) , because the narrow reading appears to "produce a substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law. .

a narrow reading appears to comport with the entire statute's overarching theme of avoiding unnecessary regulation , and seems consistent with the placement of the subsection within the section dealing exclusively with leased access .

