the united states may have to build many new power plants to meet growing demand for electric power .

for example , the energy information administration ( eia ) estimates that the nation will have to construct 226,000 megawatts of new electric power generating capacity by 2030 .

this is the equivalent of about 450 large power plants .

whatever the number of plants actually built , different combinations of fossil , nuclear , or renewable plants could be built to meet the demand for new generating capacity .

congress can largely determine which kinds of plants are actually built through energy , environmental , and economic policies that influence power plant costs .

this report analyzes the factors that determine the cost of electricity from new power plants .

these factors — including construction costs , fuel expense , environmental regulations , and financing costs — can all be affected by government energy and economic policies .

government decisions to influence , or not influence , these factors can largely determine the kind of power plants that are built in the future .

for example , government policies aimed at reducing the cost of constructing power plants could especially benefit nuclear plants , which are costly to build .

policies that reduce the cost of fossil fuels could benefit natural gas plants , which are inexpensive to build but rely on an expensive fuel .

the report provides projections of the possible cost of power for new fossil , nuclear , and renewable plants built in 2015 .

the projections illustrate how different assumptions , such as for the availability of federal incentives , change the cost rankings of the technologies .

key observations include the following: government incentives can change the relative costs of the generating technologies .

for example , federal loan guarantees can turn nuclear power from a high cost technology to a relatively low cost option .

the natural gas - fired combined cycle power plant , the most commonly built type of large natural gas plant , is a competitive generating technology under a wide variety of assumptions for fuel price , construction cost , government incentives , and carbon controls .

this raises the possibility that power plant developers will continue to follow the pattern of the 1990s and rely heavily on natural gas plants to meet the need for new power generation .

with current technology , coal - fired power plants using carbon capture equipment are an expensive source of electricity in a carbon control case .

other power sources , such as wind , nuclear , geothermal , and the natural gas combined cycle plant without capture technology , currently appear to be more economical .

none of the projections is intended to be a "most likely" case .

future uncertainties preclude firm forecasts .

the value of this discussion is not as a source of point estimates of future power costs , but as a source of insight into the factors that can determine future outcomes , including factors that can be influenced by the congress .

the main body of report is divided into the following sections: types of generating technologies ; factors that drive power plant costs ; financial analysis methodology ; analysis of power project costs .

the report also includes the following appendixes: appendix a presents power generation technology process diagrams and images .

appendix b and appendix c provide the data supporting the capital cost estimates used in the economic analysis .

appendix c also shows how operating costs and plant efficiencies were estimated for certain carbon control technologies .

appendix d presents the financial and operating assumptions used in the power cost estimates .

appendix e is a list of acronyms used in the report .

the first part of this section describes how the characteristics of electricity demand influence power plant choice and operation .

the next part describes the generating technologies analyzed in the report .

this section of the report discusses the major factors that determine the costs of building and operating power plants .

these factors include: government incentives .

capital ( investment ) cost , including construction costs and financing .

fuel costs .

air emissions controls for coal and natural gas plants .

this financial analysis of new power plants provides estimates of the operating costs and required capital recovery of each generating technology through 2050 .

plant operating costs will vary from year to year depending , for example , on changes in fuel prices and the start or end of government incentive programs .

to simplify the comparison of alternatives , these varying yearly expenses are converted to a uniform annualized cost expressed as 2008 present value dollars .

converting a series of cash flows to a financially equivalent uniform annual payment is a two - step process .

first , the cash flows for the project are converted to a 2008 "present value. .

the present value is the total cost for the analysis period , adjusted ( "discounted" using a "discount factor" ) to account for the time value of money and the risk that projected costs will not occur as expected .

this lump - sum 2008 present value is then converted to an equivalent annual payment using a uniform payments factor .

the capital costs for the generating technologies are also converted to annualized payments .

an investor - owned utility or independent power producer must recover the cost of its investment and a return on the investment , accounting for income taxes , depreciation rates , and the cost of money .

these variables are encapsulated within an annualized capital cost for a project computed using a "capital charge rate. .

the financial model used for this study computes a project - specific capital charge rate that reflects the assumed cost of money , depreciation schedule , book project life , financing structure ( percent debt and percent equity ) , and composite federal and state income tax rate .

for a pou project , which is 100% debt financed , a "capital recovery factor" reflecting each project's cost of money is computed and used to calculate a mortgage - type annual payment .

combining the annualized capital cost with the annualized operating costs yields the total estimated annualized cost of a project .

this annualized cost is divided by the projected yearly output of electricity to produce a cost per mwh for each technology .

by annualizing the costs in this manner , it is possible to compare alternatives with different year - to - year cost patterns on an apples - to - apples basis .

inputs to the financial model include financing costs , forecasted fuel prices , non - fuel operations and maintenance expense , the efficiency with which fossil - fueled plants convert fuel to electricity , and typical utilization rates ( see appendix d , table d - 1 through table d - 4 , below ) .

most of these inputs are taken from published sources , such as the assumptions eia used to produce its 2007 and 2008 long - term energy forecasts .

the power plant capital costs are estimated by crs based on a review of public information on recent projects .

appendixes b and c of the report displays the data used for the capital costs estimates .

this section of the report analyzes the cost of power from the generating technologies discussed above .

results are first presented for a base case analysis .

results are then presented for four additional cases , each of which explores a key variable that influences power plant costs .

these cases are: influence of federal and state incentives .

higher natural gas price .

uncertainty in capital costs .

carbon controls and costs .

in each case the cost of power from a natural gas - fired combined cycle plant is used as a benchmark for evaluating the cost of power from the other generating technologies .

the gas - fired combined cycle plant is used as a benchmark because of the dominant role it has played , and may continue to play , as the source of new generating capacity capable of meeting baseload and intermediate demand .

the closer a generating technology comes to meeting or beating the power cost of the combined cycle , the better its chances of competing in the market for new power plants .

the base case is a starting point for comparing how different assumptions , such as for fuel and construction costs , change estimated power costs .

none of the cases is a "most likely" estimate of future costs .

future power costs are subject to so many variables with high degrees of uncertainty that projecting a most likely case is impractical .

the object of the analysis is provide insight into how key factors influence the costs of power plants , including factors under congressional control such as incentive programs .

these estimates are approximations subject to a high degree of uncertainty .

the rankings of the technologies by cost are therefore also an approximation and should not be viewed as definitive estimates of the relative cost - competitiveness of each option .

also note that project - specific factors would weigh into an actual developer's decisions , including how close a fossil plant would be to fuel sources , local climate ( for wind and solar ) , the need for and cost of transmission upgrades , the developer's appetite for risk , and the developer's financial resources .

the lowest cost generating technologies in the base case are pulverized coal , geothermal , and natural gas combined cycle plants .

all have costs around $60 per mwh ( 2008 dollars ) .

based on the assumptions in this report , other technologies are at least a third more expensive .

of the three lowest cost technologies , geothermal plants are limited to available sites in the west that typically support only small plants , and coal plants have become harder to build due to cost and environmental issues .

the gas - fired combined cycle plant is currently a technology that can be built at a large scale , for cycling or baseload service , throughout the united states .

the above projections are based on private ( iou or ipp ) funding of power projects .

the cost per mwh drops precipitously if the developer is assumed to be a pou with low - cost financing .

however , most pous are small and do not have the financial or managerial resources to build large power projects .

as noted earlier in the report , power plants can be built by investor - owned utilities ( ious ) , publicly owned utilities ( pous ) , or independent power producers ( ipps ) .

the base case assumes that coal and nuclear plants are constructed by ious because they are most likely to have the financial resources and regulatory support to undertake these very large and expensive projects .

the natural gas combined cycle plant is assumed to be built by an ipp .

ipps often prefer to build and operate gas - fired projects because of their relatively low capital costs .

the wind , solar , and geothermal plants are also assumed to be ipp projects .

the most common current practice is for ipps to develop renewable projects and sell the power to regulated utilities .

the base case has the following characteristics: the analysis is for new projects beginning operation in 2015 .

estimates of fuel prices , allowance prices , and most operational characteristics are from eia's reference case assumptions for the 2008 annual energy outlook .

the 2008 overnight capital costs for each technology are estimated by crs from public information on recent projects ( see appendix b ) .

the base case excludes "discretionary" incentives: the federal loan guarantee program and clean coal tax credit programs , state utility commission decisions to allow cwip in rates , and the federal renewable energy production tax credit , which is scheduled to expire at the end of 2010 .

these incentives are excluded because they are granted by government entities based on a case - by - case analysis of individual projects , and / or are dependent on congressional action to fund or extend the incentives .

accordingly , there is no certainty that most projects will receive these incentives .

for example , as of november 2008 , doe had received requests from nuclear plant developers for $122 billion in loan guarantees , compared to congressional approval of only $18.5 billion for nuclear projects .

the only incentives included in the base case are ( 1 ) the 30% investment tax credit for solar and geothermal energy systems , which has been extended to 2017 and is automatically available to any qualifying facility ; and ( 2 ) the nuclear production tax credit , which is available to any qualifying facility .

as discussed above , the assumed value of the nuclear credit is 1.35 cents per kwh .

the base case includes no carbon emission controls or costs .

given these assumptions , table 4 presents the resulting annualized cost of power per mwh for each technology .

under the base case assumptions , the lowest - cost options are pulverized coal , natural gas combined cycle , and geothermal generation , all in the $60 per mwh ( 2008 dollars ) range ( column 10 ) .

these results are attributable to the following factors: pulverized coal is a mature technology that relies on a relatively low cost fuel .

natural gas is an expensive fuel , but combined cycle technology is highly efficient and has a low construction cost .

geothermal energy has no fuel cost and unlike variable renewable technologies , such as wind and solar , can operate at very high utilization rates ( high utilization allows the plant to spread fixed operating costs and capital recovery charges over many megawatt - hours of sales ) .

although all three technologies have similar power costs , the coal and geothermal technologies have limitations and risks that the natural gas combined cycle does not face .

geothermal plants are limited to relatively small facilities ( about 50 mw ) at western sites .

as discussed above , many coal projects have been canceled due to environmental opposition and escalating construction costs .

in contrast , the gas - fired combined cycle plant has limited environmental impacts , can be located wherever a gas pipeline with sufficient capacity is available , and plants can be built with generating capacities in the hundreds of megawatts .

probably the main risk factor for a combined cycle plant is uncertainty over the long term price and supply of natural gas .

in the base case , wind power , igcc coal , and nuclear energy have costs in the $80 per mwh range .

igcc and nuclear plants are very expensive to build , with estimated overnight capital costs of , respectively , $3,359 and $3,682 per kw of capacity ( 2008 dollars ; see table d - 2 ) .

because the plants are expensive and take years to construct ( an estimated four years for an igcc plant and six years for a nuclear plant ) these technologies also incur large charges for interest during construction that must be recovered in power costs .

wind has a relatively high cost per mwh because wind projects have high capital costs ( $2,100 per kw of capacity ) and are assumed to operate with a capacity factor of only 34% .

the low capacity factor means that the plant is the equivalent of idle two - thirds of the year .

consequently , the capital costs for the plant must be recovered over a relatively small number of units of electricity production , driving up the cost per mwh .

high capital costs and low rates of utilization also drive up the costs of the solar thermal and solar pv plants to , respectively , $100 per mwh and $255 per mwh .

another way of viewing the results is to compare each technology's costs to a benchmark cost of electricity .

as discussed above , the benchmark used is the cost of power from a natural gas combined cycle plant .

column 3 of table 5 shows the difference between the base case power cost for each technology and the base case cost of power from the gas - fired combined cycle .

geothermal energy and pulverized coal are the only technologies that have power costs similar to the natural gas combined cycle plant .

nuclear , wind , and coal igcc power are projected to have costs 31% to 35% higher , and solar thermal has a projected power cost 62% higher .

solar photovoltaic is over 300% higher .

the cost of money can have a significant impact on the cost of power .

as discussed earlier , pous have access to lower cost financing than ious or ipps .

the significance of lower cost financing is illustrated in table 6 , which compares the cost of power assuming iou and ipp financing ( column 3 ) with the cost of power assuming pou financing ( column 4 ) .

excluding for the moment the solar technologies , the reduction in the cost of power ranges from 14% for the combined cycle plant ( the least capital - intensive option , which makes it least sensitive to financing costs ) to 37% for the capital - intensive igcc and nuclear plants ( column 5 ) .

the low cost of public financing helps explain why many capital intensive coal and nuclear projects have pou co - owners .

the reduction in cost by using public financing is only 11% for the solar thermal plant and 14% for the solar photovoltaic plant .

the reductions are small because when the plants are publicly financed they lose the 30% renewable energy investment tax credit ( pous do not pay taxes and so cannot take advantage of any tax - based incentives ) .

the loss of the tax credit largely negates the benefit of lower cost pou financing for solar projects .

government financial incentives can make high - cost technologies into low - cost options .

the incentive with the greatest impact is the federal loan guarantee , which reduces the cost of financing capital - intensive technologies .

with a loan guarantee the cost of nuclear power flips from a high - cost option ( $83.22 per mwh ) to one of the low cost ( $63.73 per mwh ) .

even when competing technologies have the advantage of the discretionary government incentives , no technology currently has a significant cost advantage over the natural gas combined cycle .

the base case includes only non - discretionary incentives: the renewable energy investment tax credit and the nuclear production tax credit .

this analysis includes the following discretionary incentives: federal loan guarantees for nuclear power .

a clean coal tax credit for the igcc plant .

a production tax credit for wind ( assumes continuation of the terms and conditions of the current production tax credit ) .

return on construction work in progress ( cwip ) in rates for ious .

table 7 shows the effect of the discretionary incentives compared to the base case .

the additional incentives have the greatest effect on nuclear power .

the annualized cost of nuclear generation drops by 23% ( column 7 ) , from one of the highest to one of the lowest costs .

the most important driver for the nuclear plant is the federal loan guarantee , which allows a developer to fund a project with 80% debt at a much reduced interest rate .

the loan guarantee alone cuts the cost of nuclear power by 20% ( $15.44 per mwh ) .

the renewable production tax credit reduces the cost of wind power by 10% .

geothermal and combined cycle plants ( with no additional incentives ) and coal ( with a 5% reduction in cost due to cwip in rates ) remain low - cost options .

table 8 compares the combined cycle benchmark cost of power ( column 3 ) to the cost of power with discretionary incentives ( column 4 ) .

the table is limited to the technologies that receive the additional incentives: pulverized coal ( cwip in rates ) , igcc coal ( cwip and an investment tax credit ) , wind ( production tax credit ) , and nuclear ( loan guarantee and cwip ) .

with discretionary incentives , nuclear power swings from a 35% higher cost than the combined cycle to only a 3% difference ( comparing columns 3 and 4 ) .

the cost advantage of the combined cycle over wind and igcc coal drops from more than 30% to just under 20% .

the cost of power from pulverized coal remains similar to that of the combined cycle .

if the price of natural gas is assumed to be 50% higher than in the base case , geothermal and pulverized coal power are clearly less costly than the combined cycle .

however , the use of the geothermal power is limited to available sites in the western united states , and pulverized coal by construction cost and environmental issues .

in the higher gas price case , the cost of power from the natural gas combined cycle plant converges with wind , nuclear , and igcc coal .

the combined cycle plant no longer has a clear economic advantage over these technologies , but neither is it at a great disadvantage .

the economics of natural gas - fired generation pivot on fuel prices .

for the base assumptions used in this study , fuel constitutes half of the total cost of power from a new combined cycle power plant , compared to 18% for a coal plant and 6% for a nuclear plant .

in addition to being critical to the cost of gas - fired power , natural gas prices are also one of the most uncertain elements in this analysis .

as discussed earlier in this report , natural gas prices have been exceptionally difficult to forecast .

if the united states becomes more dependent in the future on imports of liquefied natural gas , the domestic and international natural gas markets will be increasingly linked , adding an additional element of uncertainty to the natural gas price outlook .

underestimates of natural gas prices were pervasive among government and private forecasters in the 1990s and contributed to over - investment in gas - fired generating capacity .

if future gas prices are higher than assumed in this report's base case , the economics of gas - fired generation could change substantially .

the gas market has historically been volatile .

gas prices increased more than 200% from the early 1990s through 2007 , and annual increases sometimes exceeded 50% ( figure 7 ) .

figure 8 illustrates the base case gas price projection and an alternative that ramps up to a level 50% higher than in the base case .

in the base case the annualized cost of power from a natural gas combined cycle plant is $61.77 per mwh .

with a 50% higher gas price , the combined cycle power cost is $77.05 per mwh .

at this power cost the combined cycle is substantially more costly than pulverized coal or geothermal power , and has a clear economic advantage only over the solar technologies ( table 9 , column 4 ) .

on the other hand , even with this much higher fuel price projection , the cost of power from the combined cycle is still comparable to that of wind , nuclear , and igcc coal generation ; and while pulverized coal and geothermal power have lower costs , as discussed above the former is increasingly hard to build for cost and environmental reasons , and the latter is limited to small plants at western sites .

therefore , even with a 50% increase in fuel prices , the gas - fired combined cycle is still a competitive option for new generating capacity .

another perspective is to determine the increase in the base case natural gas price projection required for the cost of power from the natural gas combined cycle plant to equal the cost of power from an alternative technology .

this is illustrated in table 10 .

the table shows that the price of gas would have to be between 62% to 69% higher than in the base case for the cost of power from a combined cycle to equal the projected cost of electricity from nuclear , wind , or coal igcc technologies ( column 3 ) .

natural gas prices would have to increase by about 125% to 635% for the cost of combined cycle power to match solar thermal or solar photovoltaic electricity costs .

because of its low capital costs and assumed high utilization rate , the power cost of the gas - fired combined cycle plant is about half as sensitive to changes in capital costs as the other technologies .

the implication is that if power plant capital costs continue to increase rapidly , the competitive position of the combined cycle will improve compared to all other technologies .

if capital costs decline , the competitive position of the other technologies will substantially improve versus the combined cycle .

however , even assuming a 25% drop in capital costs compared to the base case , the combined cycle is still competitive with all other technologies .

as noted above , the cost of building power plants has recently increased dramatically .

whether costs will continue to increase , remain steady in real dollar terms , or decline is unknown .

table 11 illustrates the effect on the cost of power of assuming a uniform 25% increase or decrease in capital costs for all technologies compared to the base case .

power costs change by about + / - 20% for each technology except for the gas - fired combined cycle plant ( + / - 12% ; see column 3 ) .

this is because the combined cycle has a relatively low capital cost and a high capacity factor .

table 11 shows that the power cost of the combined cycle is about half as sensitive to changes in capital costs as the other generating technologies .

the implication is that continued rapid escalation in the cost of building power plants will favor the economics of combined cycles .

this is illustrated by table 12 .

in the base case ( column 3 ) , the power costs of wind , nuclear , and igcc coal are about a third higher than the combined cycle .

in the high capital cost case ( column 4 ) the difference widens to almost 50% .

on the other hand , decreases in capital costs , whether the result of market forces or government incentives , would reduce the cost of power from the other technologies about twice as much as for the combined cycle .

this is illustrated by the low capital cost case ( column 5 ) , in which all the non - solar technologies are within 21% or less of the generating cost of the combined cycle .

the estimates of carbon - related allowance costs and control technology costs used in this analysis are subject to an exceptional degree of uncertainty , including whether congress will actually pass carbon control legislation .

the results of this analysis are therefore equally uncertain .

with the carbon control assumptions used in this analysis , coal - fired generation is expensive , ranging from about $100 to almost $120 per mwh .

the least expensive options include zero - carbon emission technologies: geothermal ( $59.23 per mwh ) , nuclear ( $83.22 ) and wind ( $80.74 ) .

the natural gas combined cycle plant without carbon capture is competitive with the other options , even with allowance costs , at $77.21 per mwh .

if the cost and efficiency penalties of carbon capture technologies are assumed to drop by 50% , the gas - fired combined cycle plant with capture has an electricity cost comparable to wind and nuclear power .

however , a coal plant with capture is still more expensive than wind or nuclear power .

carbon control legislation is under consideration by the congress , but there has been no agreement on the structure of a control regime or a timetable for implementation .

no power plants have been built with full scale carbon capture equipment .

the costs of co 2 allowances and control systems are therefore very uncertain .

actual costs will depend on the content of final legislation ( if any ) , the development of allowance markets in the united states and abroad , and the evolution of control technologies .

the carbon capture power cost analysis for this study is based on the following assumptions: power plant cost and performance with carbon controls assume current ( petrochemical industry based ) technology capable of removing 90% of the co 2 .

as discussed above , the cost of carbon capture for power plants using petrochemical industry derived technology will be very high .

table 13 provides estimates of how the capital costs and heat rates of coal and gas plants increase with the addition of carbon controls based on current technology .

capital costs increase by 42% to 97% ( column 4 ) , and heat rates increase by 21% to 27% ( column 7 ) resulting in a decline in efficiency .

newer technologies may be less costly and more efficient , but these are still in development .

the co 2 allowance price projection is adapted from the eia "core" case forecast from its analysis of s. 2191 .

allowance costs begin in 2012 at $17.70 per metric ton of co 2 ( 2008 dollars ) ; increase by 2020 and 2030 to , respectively , $31.34 and $63.99 ; and reach $266.80 by 2050 ( see table d - 4 ) .

all allowances must be purchased ( i.e. , there is no free distribution of allowances to power plants ) .

fuel prices are the same prices used in the base case ( see table d - 4 ) .

as in the base case , the only financial incentives included are the nuclear production tax credit and the investment tax credit for solar and geothermal plants .

from a financing standpoint , units with carbon controls are assumed to be high risk projects that incur financing costs equivalent to below investment grade interest rates .

this assumption is made because units coming on - line in 2015 , as assumed for this study , would be part of the first wave of power plants with carbon controls .

table 14 , below , shows estimates of the levelized cost of power for a carbon capture case .

the results indicate: the power costs for coal plants using control technologies are high compared to the base case .

the costs in the carbon case range from $100.69 per mwh to almost $120 per mwh ( column 10 ) , compared to $63.19 per mwh for a pulverized coal unit in the base case ( table 14 , column 10 ) .

this illustrates the impact of the high capital costs and efficiency penalties of current carbon capture technologies .

with the imposition of carbon costs on fossil plants , three of the least expensive options are zero - carbon technologies: geothermal ( $59.23 per mwh ) , nuclear ( $83.22 ) and wind ( $80.74 ) .

because geothermal plants are limited to specific sites in the western states , nuclear power ( a baseload technology ) and wind power ( a variable renewable resource ) are the zero carbon options with relatively low costs and wide latitude for plant sites .

a fourth relatively low - cost technology is the natural gas combined cycle plant without carbon capture ( $77.21 per mwh including allowance costs ) .

the relatively low cost is due to the technology's low capital cost , high capacity factor , and relatively low emissions of co 2 per megawatt - hour of power generated .

as shown in table 14 , the natural gas combined cycle plant without carbon capture incurs allowance costs of $13.06 per mwh , which is 61% less than the pulverized coal plant cost of $33.80 per mwh ( column 6 ) .

in other words , for every dollar of allowance costs incurred by a coal plant without capture technology , the combined cycle incurs only about 40 cents in costs .

solar thermal power ( $100.32 per mwh ) has a lower cost than fossil plants with carbon capture technology , but is still estimated to be about 20% more expensive than nuclear and wind power .

the relatively low cost of power from the natural gas combined cycle plant is in part a function of the fuel price .

as noted above , the carbon capture analysis uses the same fuel price projections as in the base case .

it is possible that in a carbon - constrained world demand for gas will increase , driving up prices .

as shown below in table 15 : a 12% increase in the price of gas would equalize the cost of electricity from the combined cycle plant without carbon capture with wind power ( column 3 ) ; a 20% increase would equalize the power cost of the combined cycle plant and the nuclear plant ; the price of natural gas would have to more than double for the power cost of the gas - fired combined cycle plant to equal the cost of coal power with carbon controls , or increase by 75% to match the cost of solar thermal power .

this scale of natural gas price increases has precedent .

as shown in figure 7 , between the early 1990s and 2007 the market price of natural gas increased by about 200% .

as discussed above , the cost and efficiency impacts of current carbon capture technologies are high , and improved technologies are under development .

table 16 shows the estimated cost of power for plants with carbon capture assuming that capital cost and heat rate ( efficiency ) penalties are both reduced by 50% .

in this case the combined cycle plant with capture has an electricity cost slightly less than wind and nuclear power , and the pulverized coal plant with capture closes to within 20% of wind power and 16% of nuclear ( columns 8 and 9 ) .

the igcc plant with capture is more expensive , with a power cost 28% higher than wind and 24% higher than nuclear ; this result reflects the high cost of igcc technology even before carbon capture is added .

appendix a .

power generation technology process diagrams and images pulverized coal integrated gasification combined cycle coal ( igcc ) natural gas combined cycle nuclear power wind geothermal solar thermal power solar photovoltaic power appendix b .

estimates of power plant overnight costs the financial analysis model used in this study calculates the capital component of power prices based on the "overnight" cost of a power plant .

the overnight cost is the cost that would be incurred if a power plant could be built instantly .

the overnight cost therefore excludes escalation in equipment , labor , and commodity prices that could occur during the time a plant is under construction .

it also excludes the financing charges , often referred to as interest during construction ( idc ) , incurred while the plant is being built .

with the exception of plants using carbon control technology ( see appendix c ) the overnight costs were estimated for this study from public information on actual power projects .

the costs were estimated as follows: crs developed a database of information on 161 power projects and cost estimates covering the fossil , nuclear , and renewable energy technologies included in this report .

a subset of the projects in the database were used to estimate overnight costs .

projects were excluded for many reasons , including because the projects were too old to reflect current construction costs , did not use standard technology , were extreme high or low outliers and no information was available to explain the costs , or had other unusual characteristics ( eg , some plants reduced costs by purchasing used or surplus equipment ) .

the remaining projects were sorted by technology ( eg , nuclear , wind , etc. ) .

the reported cost per kilowatt of capacity for the projects in each group were then averaged to estimate the overnight cost for each technology .

to the extent possible the information for the database was taken from information filed by utilities with state public service commissions .

the advantage of using this source is that utilities seeking permission to construct new plants are often required to disgorge cost details .

with these details the project cost estimate can be adjusted to exclude idc and other expenses not directly associated with the cost of the plant , such as major transmission system upgrades distant from the plant site .

when utility commission filings for a project were not available , as was almost always true for ipp and pou projects , other public sources were used , including press releases and trade journal articles .

in most cases it was possible to determine whether or not a cost estimate included idc .

however , it was rarely possible , with or without utility commission filings , to determine how much cost escalation was built into a project estimate .

because it was not possible to extract the escalation costs from the project estimates , as a rough correction the financial model assumed no cost escalation to avoid a double count .

the model does compute the idc charges .

the 161 projects in the database includes information on 119 united states power plant projects .

some are still in the planning stage , and a few never progressed beyond paper studies and were canceled .

the database also includes information on 31 generic and 11 foreign cost estimates for nuclear power plants .

 ( a generic estimate is a cost estimate not associated with any real project or specific site .

generic estimates are usually made by vendors or found in government and academic studies. ) .

the generic and foreign estimates are useful for illustrating cost trends because no nuclear plants have been built in the united states in many years , but none were used in the final estimate of the overnight nuclear plant cost .

although the capital costs used in this study are based on these actual project estimates , the capital costs are still subject to significant uncertainty due to such as factors as cost escalation and evolution in power plant and construction technology .

the uncertainty is greatest for the technologies which have the least commercial experience , such as advanced nuclear plants and igcc coal plants .

immediately following is information on the projects used to estimate overnight costs for this report .

there is a table for each technology ( eg , pulverized coal ) listing each project used to estimate the overnight cost for that technology .

accompanying each table is a graph showing the time trend for that technology's capital costs .

the data points on the graph are marked to indicate whether a point represents a project used in estimating the overnight cost , or another project that was excluded from the estimate for one of the reasons discussed above .

the time axis for these graphs is the actual or planned first year of commercial service .

the following acronyms are used in the tables: pulverized coal integrated gasification combined cycle ( igcc ) coal nuclear natural gas combined cycle wind geothermal solar thermal solar photovoltaic appendix c. estimates of technology costs and efficiency with carbon capture pulverized coal with carbon capture the costs and heat rate for a supercritical pulverized coal plant with carbon capture is primarily based on information from mit's 2007 study , the future of coal .

mit estimated that a new supercritical plant built with amine scrubbing for co 2 removal would have the following characteristics: co 2 capture rate: 90% change in efficiency compared to a new plant without carbon capture: - 23.9% ( from 38.5% to 29.3% ) .

this equates to an increase in the heat rate of 31.3% .

increase in capital cost: 61% .

for a new plant with amine scrubbing to have the same 600 mw net capacity as a new plant without carbon controls , the size of the plant has to be scaled up to account for the electricity and steam demands of the capture system .

the increase is proportional to the change in efficiency .

therefore , a developer would have to build the equivalent of a 788 mw plant with carbon capture to get 600 mw of net capacity , with the difference ( 188 mw ) consumed by the amine scrubbing system , either in the form of steam diverted from power generation or electricity used to compress the co 2 .

mit does not break out the variable and fixed o&m costs for carbon capture , as required by the financial model used in this study .

these costs were calculated from a doe study of the costs of retrofitting carbon capture to the conesville unit 5 coal - fired plant in ohio .

based on this study , the incremental o&m costs for carbon capture are $8.24 per kw for fixed o&m and $7.79 per mwh for variable o&m ( 2006 dollars ) .

these costs for operating the carbon capture system are added to the base o&m costs for a coal - fired plant , as estimated by eia , to calculate the total o&m costs for the plant .

the estimated characteristics of a new supercritical pulverized coal plant with amine scrubbing are: capacity: 600 mw .

heat rate: the base heat rate of 9,200 btus per kwh in 2008 increases by 31.3% to 12,080 btus per kwh .

overnight capital cost: $4,025 per kw ( base 2008 cost of $2,500 per kw increased by 61% ) .

variable o&m costs ( 2006 dollars ) : a base value of $5.86 per mwh plus the carbon control incremental cost of $7.79 per mwh for a total of $13.65 per mwh .

fixed o&m costs ( 2006 dollars ) : a base of $35.20 per kw plus the carbon control incremental cost of $8.24 per kw for a total of $43.44 per kw .

capacity factor: 85% , same as for a new supercritical plant without carbon capture .

construction time: assumed to be four years , same as for a new supercritical plant without carbon capture .

igcc coal and natural gas combined cycle with carbon capture the operating and cost characteristics of a coal igcc plant built with carbon capture are taken from eia assumptions for its 2008 long - term forecast , except for the capital cost .

as shown in appendix b , the cost estimate for an igcc plant without carbon capture , based on public information on current projects , is $3,400 per kw in 2008 .

this is much higher than eia's estimate for an igcc plant without ( $1,773 per kw ) or with ( $2,537 ) carbon controls .

to estimate the capital cost of an igcc plant with carbon capture , the percentage difference in the eia estimates of plants with and without capture ( 43% ) was applied to the crs estimate of $3,400 per kw without capture .

this produces an estimated cost for an igcc plant with carbon controls of $4,862 .

eia's other assumptions , such as for o&m costs and heat rates , are used without adjustment in this study .

the capital cost for a natural gas - fired combined cycle with carbon capture was estimated in the same way .

based on public data for current projects , the overnight cost estimate for a new combined cycle used in this study is $1,200 per kw in 2008 ( see appendix b ) .

this compares to eia's estimates of $706 per kw for a combined cycle without carbon capture and $1,409 with carbon capture , a premium of 100% .

the capital cost for a new combined cycle with carbon capture used in this study is therefore double the crs base cost of $1,200 per kw , or $2,400 per kw .

as with the coal igcc , eia's other assumptions for a combined cycle plant with carbon capture are used without adjustment .

appendix d. financial and operating assumptions appendix e. list of acronyms and abbreviation .

