since 1966 , the federal government has provided guarantees and subsidies to approved private lenders or state government entities that make student loans .

the aim: making higher education more affordable .

because college graduates' enhanced human capital is generally not viewed as collateral , without federal subsidies and guarantees , lenders would probably charge interest rates more in line with other unsecured loans , such as credit card debt , that could push the financial costs of higher education beyond the reach of many students .

recent changes in the federally guaranteed loan programs , outlined below , have raised concerns that the supply of student loans could be disrupted for the 2008-2009 academic year , prompting congress and the administration to take steps to forestall possible disruptions that might affect students' education plans .

overview of the student loan market two major student loan programs exist federally: the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program and the william d. ford federal direct loan ( fdlp ) program .

these programs provide loans to undergraduate , graduate and professional students , and the parents of undergraduate dependent students , to help finance the costs of postsecondary education .

the ffel program is the largest student loan program .

subsidized and "unsubsidized" ffel stafford loans are made to students .

ffel plus loans are made to parents of students , as well as to graduate and professional students .

loan volumes for the plus program are much smaller than ffel loan volumes .

the federal government absorbs interest costs of students in school or in deferment for subsidized loans , which are available to students meeting certain financial need tests .

for "unsubsidized" loans , which are not need - based , interest costs that accrue while a student attends school or is in deferment are either paid by the borrower or folded into the loan itself .

the william d. ford federal direct loan program , created in 1993 , allows students enrolled in participating institutions of higher education to obtain stafford and plus loans directly from the federal government .

loan volumes federal student loans ( ffel , fdlp , and perkins ) are projected to provide $74 billion of the estimated $258 billion cost of higher education in the 2007-2008 academic year .

in recent years , ffel loan volume has been about four times greater than fdlp loan volume .

private student loans are projected to provide another $18 billion of that total .

contributions from students and their parents are projected to cover $71 billion , with scholarships and grants covering the remaining $95 billion .

figure 1 shows stafford loan volumes for undergraduate students attending four - year or two - year public institutions , and figure 2 shows the same data for students attending four - year or two - year private institutions .

total stafford loan volumes for both the fdlp and ffel programs are much higher for four - year colleges and universities than for two - year institutions , and are substantially higher than loan volumes for proprietary institutions .

in particular , student loan volumes for two - year private institutions are very low compared to volumes for four - year private institutions .

direct loans schools , or their subunits , choose to participate in the ffel program or the fdlp program .

thus , the fdlp program could provide loans in the event that private ffel lending was insufficient to satisfy student loan demand , if school financial aid officials made participation decisions that would allow that to occur .

some have expressed concern that a rapid increase in fdlp loans , which might occur were a significant proportion of ffel lenders to exit the market , would present significant administrative challenges to the department of education .

on may 21 , 2008 , the education secretary , margaret spellings , sent a letter to student lenders stating that the department had the ability , if need be , to double the volume of fdlp loans .

figure 1 .

stafford loans for students in public colleges & universities , 1987-2006 ( in billions of dollars ) source: data provided by department of education.note: totals for 50 states and d.c. foreign loans excluded .

figure 2 .

stafford loans for students in private colleges & universities , 1987-2006 ( in billions of dollars ) source: data provided by department of education.note: totals for 50 states and d.c. foreign loans excluded .

the college cost reduction and access act the college cost reduction and access act ( p.l .

110-84 ) , enacted in september 2007 , cut interest rate subsidies to lenders and increased the proportion of default costs borne by lenders .

some have argued that reductions in federal family education loan ( ffel ) subsidies , as well other changes in the ffel program , would lead some student loan providers to exit the market .

lender withdrawal announcements in early 2008 , some student lenders announced plans to restrict loans in response to tightening credit conditions and cuts in federal subsidies put in place by the college cost reduction and access act .

in february 2008 , the pennsylvania higher education assistance program ( pheaa ) announced they would suspend making federally guaranteed loans .

since then , many other lenders announced plans to suspend participation in federally guaranteed student loan programs .

according to finaid.org , as of july 14 , 2008 , 96 lenders had indicated that they would suspend originating ffel loans and an additional 24 indicated that they would only suspend originating consolidation loans .

in addition , 27 lenders announced that they would suspend new private loans .

in total , as of july 14 , 2008 , 125 lenders had indicated that they would suspend participation in private loans and some part of the ffel program .

the secretary of education , in a march 4 , 2008 , letter to financial aid professionals , requested that financial aid offices relay information on lenders' intentions to curtail student loans to the u.s. department of education .

some analysts maintain that difficulties in the market for student loans stem from wider problems in credit markets or from student loan industry attempts to create pressure to reverse subsidy cuts .

further , some student loan providers have encountered financial problems not directly related to the student loan market .

for example , sallie mae ( slm corp. ) took a $1.5 billion write - down stemming from financial positions it took that would have increased in value had its stock price risen .

some observers contend that student lenders have overstated their recent troubles and that loans remain available through the federal direct lending program ( fdlp ) .

the following sections describe key provisions of the ffel loan program and outline changes made by the college cost reduction and access act .

although reductions in interest rate subsidies for ffel lenders have attracted the most attention , other legislative changes may also have important effects on the student loan market .

lender subsidy formulae the formulae determining interest rates that student borrowers pay and the yields ( including certain subsidies ) received by ffel lenders for various types of federally guaranteed loans are set by legislation .

these formulae have been changed many times since 1981 .

other changes in program details , such as higher origination fees paid to the federal government , have reduced lenders' profit rates .

on the other hand , new information and communication technologies have sharply increased productivity in the banking industry , reducing servicing costs for student loans , and other things equal , increasing lender profits .

lenders participating in federal guaranteed loan programs receive subsidy payments that , according to language of the higher education act , ensure holders of ffel loans receive at least "equitable" returns , compared to other financial opportunities available to those lenders .

under current law , these lenders receive a yield equal to a short - term commercial paper ( cp ) rate plus a legislatively determined add - on , which can vary by type of loan and by type of lender .

when borrower interest rates fall below the sum of the cp rate and the add - on , the government makes special allowance payments ( sap ) to lenders .

special allowance payments are determined quarterly .

during some periods in the past , when the fixed borrower rate exceeded the sum of the sap add - on and the base interest rate , lenders would collect the difference , known as "floor income" or "excess interest. .

the higher education reconciliation act of 2005 ( hera ; p.l .

109-171 ; sec .

8006 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) changed stafford student loan rules so that floor income on loans disbursed on or after april 1 , 2006 , is now returned ( i.e. , rebated ) to the federal government .

the college cost reduction and access act ( p.l .

110-84 ) reduced lender subsidies in several ways .

for new loans originated after october 1 , 2007 , lender origination fees increased from 0.5% to 1% of loan value .

sap add - on rates for stafford loans and consolidation loans were cut by 0.55% ( 55 basis points ) for for - profit lenders and by 0.40% ( 40 basis points ) for not - for - profit lenders .

sap add - on rates for plus loans were reduced by 85 basis points for for - profit lenders and by 70 basis points for not - for - profit lenders .

default costs the act also increased the proportion of default costs borne by lenders .

for loans originated after october 1 , 2012 , lender insurance rates will be cut from 97% to 95% .

as of october 1 , 2007 , the "exceptional performer" status enjoyed by lenders that met certain federal regulatory requirements , which gave those lenders access to faster processing of default paperwork and a 99% insurance rate , was eliminated .

on the other hand , average default rates have decreased sharply since the early 1990s , thus generally reducing the financial risks to lenders of defaults .

the total default rate for ffel and fdlp loans for the fy2005 cohort ( calculated in july 2007 ) was 4.6% , well below the peak default rate of 22.4% reached by the fy1990 cohort .

fy2005 cohort default rates for four - year institutions were even lower , averaging 3.0% for public four - year institutions and 2.3% for their private counterparts .

borrower rates the college cost reduction and access act also specified a gradual reduction in borrower interest rates for subsidized stafford loans to undergraduates .

borrower interest rates for new subsidized stafford student loans , which had been fixed at 6.8% since july 1 , 2006 , are scheduled to decline gradually to 3.4% in july 2011 .

from july 1 , 1988 , through june 30 , 2006 , borrower rates were based on interest rates for 91-day treasury bills plus an interest margin , subject to a cap .

conditions and rules for borrower interest rates have changed many times , and the rate a given student has paid depends on when a student's first loan originated , how many years the loan has been in repayment , and how promptly the student has made payments , among other factors .

lenders of last resort eligible borrowers can also receive ffel program loans from a lender of last resort if they cannot obtain a loan from another lender .

each state has a designated federal student loan guarantor , which is responsible for administering a lender - of - last - resort program .

the lender of last resort may be the guarantor itself or an eligible private ffel lender .

the federal government guarantees 100% of loans issued by lenders of last resort .

the ensuring continued access to student loans act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-227 ) made several changes to the lender - of - last - resort program .

the department of education , in spring 2008 , has been requiring guarantee agencies to update their lender - of - last - resort programs .

were many lenders to leave the student loan market due to lower profits , more students might use lenders of last resort .

in past years , lender - of - last - resort loans have comprised a tiny share of the student loan market .

according to the department of education , lender - of - last - resort loans have never accounted for more than 1% of total federal student loan volume in a fiscal year .

in recent years , such loans have accounted for about one - fourth to one - half of 1% of stafford loan volume .

to understand how recent legislative changes might affect the market for student loans , a basic supply and demand model is presented below .

the standard economic model of supply and demand provides a starting point for analysis of the student loan market , although federal intervention and the particular characteristics of the student loan market also play important roles .

interest rates paid by borrowers and those received by lenders for federally guaranteed loans are set legislatively .

because interest rates , which act as the price of a loan , are not set by a market mechanism , the student loan market will not clear: either lenders will be willing to supply more loans at the legislatively set lender interest rate than borrowers are willing to accept at the borrower interest rate , or more borrowers will want loans ( at their interest rate ) than lenders are willing to supply ( at their interest rate ) .

figure 3 illustrates two cases .

in the first diagram , demand for student loans ( q d ) , given the borrower interest rate , falls short of loan supply ( q s ) at the lender rate .

lenders' profits are then represented by a trapezoid below the lender interest rate and above the supply curve , comprising regions a , c , and e. the triangle below the supply curve and above the demand curve represents deadweight loss ( dwl ) .

when loans are originated above the socially efficient level , indicated by the intersection of demand and supply curves , so that the social costs of some loans exceed the benefits gained by society , the resulting reduction in economic well being is called deadweight loss .

an inefficiently low volume of student loans would also generate deadweight loss .

lenders earn economic rents ( rectangle e ) because they receive a price that exceeds their costs .

an economic rent is a payment above the minimum needed to induce a given amount of supply .

a small reduction in the lender interest rate shrinks rectangle e , hence squeezing lenders' rents , without reducing loan supply .

in the second case , demand for student loans ( q d ) , given the borrower interest rate , exceeds loan supply ( q s ) at the lender rate .

lenders earn no economic rents and some would - be borrowers are unable to obtain ffel loans .

these borrowers might obtain loans from the direct loan program , if their school participated in that program , or from a lender of last resort .

otherwise , students may obtain non guaranteed private loans or might go without student loans altogether .

developments in financial markets , especially those associated with mortgage securities , have led many investors to become more cautious and less willing to accept risk .

investors , therefore , have been demanding greater compensation for taking risks in the form of higher interest rate spreads .

figure 4 shows the spread ( difference ) between 3-month aa - rated financial commercial paper securities and the 3-month constant maturity treasury rate .

this spread reflects financial markets' assessment of the riskiness of one key class of securities issued by financial institutions relative to treasury securities of the same maturity .

higher interest spreads , in turn , raise the cost of capital for lenders .

although financial liquidity has fallen mostly due to developments in the real estate market in the united states and in other countries , wider concerns about economic and financial conditions have affected all credit markets .

because the lender interest rates for federally guaranteed stafford loans disbursed since the start of 2000 are based on a commercial paper rate , student lenders are cushioned from risks associated with the spread between treasury bill and commercial paper rates .

issuers of private student loans , which are not guaranteed , are not protected from those risks .

moreover , the design of federal guaranteed loan subsidies does not protect student lenders from other financial risks .

for example , figure 5 shows the spread between 3-month u.s. dollar libor ( london interbank offer rate ) and an index of 3-month rates for financial commercial paper .

because many financial instruments are based on libor interest rates , increased volatility in the difference between libor and the commercial paper rates used in student lender subsidy formulae could expose those lenders to higher levels of financial risk .

finally , some student lenders have structured their finances in ways that have exposed them to financial risks generated by a wider credit crunch .

in particular , many student lenders have raised funds through the auction - rate securities market , which has been strongly affected by the credit crunch .

as signs that student lenders might contract the supply of loans emerged in early 2008 , members of congress have taken several actions intended to ensure that college students would be able to obtain loans necessary to financing their educations .

on february 28 , 2008 , shortly after the pennsylvania higher education assistance agency announced that it planned to halt issuing federal loans , the chairs of the house and senate education and labor committees ( representative george miller and senator edward kennedy ) wrote to secretary of education margaret spellings , urging her to take steps to avoid any possible disruptions of the federal student loan programs .

the ranking member of the house education and labor committee ( representative howard "buck" mckeon ) wrote to secretary spellings on february 15 , 2008 , asking her to monitor trends in the student loan market .

since the inception of the federal guaranteed student loan program , congress has sought to allow lenders an "equitable" return on capital to ensure an adequate supply of student loans and to avoid disruptions that would interfere with the educational plans of students .

as financial markets have evolved and banking practices have become more efficient , however , lender yields that were once perceived to be "adequate" may have , over time , allowed student lenders to earn rents ( that is , receive a price above their costs ) .

from time to time , congress has adjusted lender subsidy formulae with the aim of bringing lender yields more in line with lender costs , thus reducing costs to taxpayers or making funds available for other priorities while avoiding supply disruptions .

because the true economic costs of lenders are not easily observed , and because costs in different segments of the student loan market differ , achieving a precise alignment of lender yields and lender costs is difficult .

moreover , lenders have different cost structures , so that a cut in lender interest rate subsidies that would allow a highly efficient , low - cost lender to earn a profit might put considerable pressure on another lender with higher costs .

the latest legislation to adjust lender yields for guaranteed student loan programs , the college cost reduction and access act of 2007 , according to its sponsors , was intended to reduce "excess" subsidies to student lenders .

student lenders and industry associates have claimed that those subsidy reductions would force many student lenders from the market , potentially disrupting loan supply and complicating financial arrangements of many students and their families .

since early 2008 , several dozen lenders have announced plans to leave the student loan market in part or in full , raising concerns that inadequate supply of student loans could disrupt financial aid arrangements in the 2008-2009 academic year .

evaluating the effects of subsidy reductions and changes in lender insurance provisions , however , is difficult to separate from the effects of episodes of turmoil in global financial markets that emerged about the same time as the last stages of congressional consideration of the college cost reduction and access act of 2007 .

congress , by passing the ensuring continued access to student loans act of 2008 and through other initiatives , has sought to put in place mechanisms that would avoid or at least mitigate any such disruption in the near term .

the need for other measures or for more thorough going changes in federal student loan policy in the longer term may depend on how the current economic slowdown develops , and how financial markets react and evolve in the face of challenging economic conditions .

this appendix explains how economic , demographic , and other factors can affect the demand for student loans and the supply of student loans using basic microeconomics .

a demand curve shows a relationship between price and the quantity of a good or service that consumers want to buy at that price , holding other factors constant .

in a market for loans , the interest rate is the price and the volume of loan originations is a typical measure of quantity .

demand shifts demand for student loans is a derived demand , meaning that students and their families presumably value the benefits of higher education , which loans help finance , rather than the loans themselves .

that is , the willingness of students and their families to take student loans depends on the attractiveness of higher education .

when some factor that helps determine the demand curve changes , the demand curve shifts .

for example , when the number of graduating high school students increases , the demand curve ( dd in figure a - 1 ) shifts to the right ( d ' d ' ) , so that at any given price , a higher quantity of loans is demanded .

conversely , a decrease in the number of new high school graduates would shift the demand curve to the left .

changes that most economists believe would cause the demand for student loans to shift to the right include the following: increases in the college premium ( the average difference between wages earned by college graduates and those earned by those who have not attended college ) , increases in the size of traditional college - age cohorts ( 18-21 ) , increases in the number of non - traditional students .

some factors could arguably increase or decrease demand for student loans .

for example , an increase in the unemployment rate may reduce income , which could reduce demand for higher education and student loans .

alternatively , higher unemployment could reduce the amount of income a student would lose by attending school , which could increase demand for higher education .

thus , the effect of rising unemployment on demand for student loans is ambiguous .

the cost of higher education also may have an ambiguous effect on demand for student loans .

higher tuition costs could increase the demand for loans , or could discourage some students from attending .

similarly , family income could also have an ambiguous effect on the demand for student loans .

at some income levels , an increase in income could increase the probability of attending college , while at higher income levels , additional income might reduce the need for loans .

the effect of unemployment , higher tuition , and family income on demand for higher education , therefore , can only be resolved by empirical research .

supply shifts similarly , a supply curve shows the relationship between price and the quantity of a good or service that firms are willing to supply , holding other factors constant .

the lender interest rate or the yield lenders receive acts as the price in loan markets .

a competitive firm's supply curve is its marginal , or incremental , cost schedule .

the supply curve shifts when something changes lenders' costs .

for example , if lenders' cost of funds , then profit - maximizing lenders will be willing to offer fewer loans at a given price , so that the supply curve shifts to the left ( from ss in figure a - 1 to s ' s ' ) .

for ffel lenders , who receive a yield based on increases relative to an index of commercial paper rates , the cost of funds rises if market interest rates used to finance loans rise relative to commercial paper rates , which may occur in periods of high financial volatility .

on the other hand , if lenders find more efficient ways to service loans , thus lowering their costs , then the supply curve shifts to the right .

other factors that economists believe would shift the supply of student loans to the left include the following: increased default rates , higher loan servicing costs ( especially in comparison to loan size ) , higher marketing costs .

student loan markets differ from other markets as noted in the introduction , student loan markets differ from other markets in important ways .

in many types of loan markets , lenders and borrowers have imperfect information about each other , which may lead to problems of adverse selection and moral hazard .

adverse selection occurs when lenders cannot distinguish between more and less risky borrowers , which can prevent less risky borrowers from obtaining loans on terms that reflect their low risk of default .

moral hazard occurs when lenders cannot monitor borrowers , so that some borrowers may take actions that increase risk to the lender .

for example , moral hazard would occur if students were less careful with borrowed funds than with their own earnings .

both adverse selection and moral hazard can cause loan markets to function inefficiently or to shut down completely .

while some loan markets mitigate such problems via collateral requirements or the use of credit score information , those approaches are not easily applied to student loan markets .

the aim of federal student loan guarantee programs , according to many economists , is to support a competitive loan market by mitigating potential adverse selection and moral hazard problems .

by guaranteeing loans , the federal government greatly reduces lenders' risk exposure , lessening adverse selection problems .

enforcing standards and procedures on lenders and institutions of higher education , and requiring lenders to retain a small portion of default risk , many analysts would argue , reduces moral hazard problems .

