when the mississippi river rose to near record levels in 2011 , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) intentionally broke several levees along the river , thereby flooding normally protected areas in order to prevent greater damage elsewhere .

the decision to detonate levees has been controversial , with opponents arguing that levee detonation combined with the resulting flooding may render extensive amounts of farmland unproductive for a generation .

the 2011 mississippi river floods brought renewed attention to federal liability for floods , which has been the subject of ongoing litigation since hurricane katrina .

hurricane katrina struck the gulf coast in august 2005 , bringing with it rain , high - velocity winds , and a large storm surge , and leaving behind a massive path of destruction .

much of the extensive damage that occurred resulted when the storm surge breached levees and floodwalls protecting new orleans .

some of these structures were part of the federally authorized lake pontchartrain and vicinity project ( lpv ) , constructed by the corps and maintained by local levee districts .

by august 31 , 2005 , 80% of new orleans was under water .

while some flooding was expected in new orleans , primarily because the city sits below sea level and lacks natural drainage , the extent of inundation was unprecedented .

in many instances , like that of katrina , floods occur when natural conditions prove too extreme for flood control structures or those structures fail .

in other instances , like that of the 2011 mississippi river flooding , the corps may flood certain lands in order to reduce damage to other areas .

this report examines the legal issues resulting from flood damage in both instances .

it analyzes the general framework of liability claims for flood damage and federal government immunity under the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) and the flood control act of 1928 ( fca ) .

the report specifically analyzes claims for federal liability for damage caused by katrina .

finally , it examines the legal issues surrounding the corps' decision to activate floodways along the mississippi river in 2011 .

as a threshold issue , any suit against the federal government ( including the corps ) must overcome the doctrine of sovereign immunity .

sovereign immunity means that the government cannot be sued .

congress , however , may waive sovereign immunity and allow the federal government to be sued in specific circumstances .

the plaintiff bears the burden of proving that it has the right to sue the government .

the ftca and the fca govern when lawsuits may be filed against the federal government for flood damages .

the ftca and the fca frequently appear as defenses to the same claim .

one federal circuit court has held that the ftca does not overrule or invalidate the immunity provision of the fca .

courts generally consider the underlying liability claim only after determining that the immunity provisions do not apply .

in the aftermath of katrina , numerous legal claims were filed against the government for flood damage .

a fundamental question has been whether the breaches occurred because the storm surge was greater than the hurricane protection system was designed to contain , or whether faulty design , construction , or maintenance of the system caused the breaches .

studies indicate that both problems may have played a part .

according to a national hurricane center ( nhc ) report , most of the breaches resulted from overtopping , where the water exceeded the protective structures , but some new orleans floodwall breaches occurred before the surge exceeded the structures' design , meaning the floodwalls failed .

litigation against the federal government and some contractors is ongoing and has been consolidated under the heading in re katrina canal breaches consolidated litigation , in the federal district court for the eastern district of louisiana .

the legal defenses available to the federal government depend on the facts underlying the specific flooding incident .

therefore , some background regarding hurricane katrina's flooding of new orleans is necessary to analyze the legal issues .

beginning in april 2011 , a series of severe storm systems combined with increased water levels due to snowmelt caused some of the largest floods in the mississippi river basin area in the last century .

simultaneous flooding of the mississippi and ohio rivers in late april threatened the safety of cairo , il , a town located at the confluence of the two rivers .

as river levels continued to rise , the corps prepared to activate the floodway system of the mississippi river and tributaries project ( mrtp ) .

the floodway system allows the corps to artificially crevasse or open certain levees along the mississippi river to flood areas normally protected by the levees in order to alleviate flood damage to other areas .

after activating the birds point - new madrid floodway near cairo , the corps subsequently activated floodways downstream as the river's crest travelled south , raising questions of the corps' liability and potential remedies for affected landowners .

congress authorized the mrtp pursuant to the fca in response to a flood that devastated the mississippi river basin in 1927 .

in order to prevent such damage in the future , the mrtp was designed as a system of civil works to protect against flooding and to maintain navigation of the river channel .

the mrtp included a series of floodways that were designed to divert floodwaters in order to provide relief to other segments of the levee system when the river's waters reached certain levels .

the mrtp includes four floodways: the birds point - new madrid floodway ( missouri ) ; the morganza floodway ( louisiana ) ; the west atchafalaya floodway ( louisiana ) ; and the bonnet carre floodway ( louisiana ) .

in may 2011 , the corps intentionally breached the levee protecting the bird's point - new madrid floodway by detonating a hole in the levee to divert floodwaters to protect cairo , il , a town located at the confluence of the flooding mississippi and ohio rivers .

the corps also opened floodgates on the morganza floodway to alleviate pressure on the levees protecting baton rouge and new orleans and opened the bonnet - carre floodway to prevent floodwaters from reaching new orleans .

the corps' activation of the bird's point - new madrid and morganza floodways was only the second use of each since their respective completion in 1933 and 1953 , and the activation of the bonnet - carre floodway was the ninth use since its completion in 1932 .

the corps' initial decision to activate the floodway system at bird's point - new madrid raised questions about the agency's authority to purposely flood some lands to save others .

in the case of bird's point - new madrid , detonation of the levee according to the floodway operation plan was expected to flood 130,000 acres in missouri , an area about 35 miles long and between 3 and 10 miles wide .

the decision was particularly controversial because the corps' decision would protect either an illinois town or missouri farmland and residences .

accordingly , missouri filed a lawsuit challenging the corps' authority to operate the floodway at the expense of missouri residents' homes and farms .

a federal district court rejected missouri's challenge to the corps' authority to operate the floodway system at bird's - point - new madrid .

the court relied on precedent from a 1984 case from the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit to find that the corps' decision to operate the floodway could not be reviewed by courts .

in that case , the eighth circuit reviewed the legislative history of the floodway system and noted that congress authorized both the construction of the levees and the artificial breaching of those levees when water exceeded certain levels set by the operations plan .

the eighth circuit explained that because congress broadly delegated authority to operate the levee , providing "no additional standards for determining whether and where to crevasse the levee," courts must afford the corps' decision a "high degree of deference" since it required highly technical expertise .

accordingly , the district court refused to bar the corps from artificially crevassing the levee in response to the 2011 floods .

the corps' decisions to divert floodwaters through the mrtp floodway system meant that property owners that typically were protected by the levee and floodway structures instead suffered flooding to their land , homes , farms , or other property .

the government generally cannot deprive a property owner of the possession or use of his property without compensating the owner for the loss caused by the government's action .

in the case of the mrtp's floodway system , congress had provided for the acquisition of "flowage rights for additional destructive flood waters that will pass by reason of diversions from the main channel of the mississippi river. .

the acquisition of these rights could occur through a variety of legal methods , including acquiring title to the property itself or acquiring a right - of - way .

for the purposes of this report , such a right will be referred to generally as a flowage easement .

acquisition of flowage easements from property owners of potentially affected land allows the government to operate levees without risk of liability for the resulting damages from operating the floodways .

as the district court explained in missouri v. u.s. army corps of engineers , "under those easements , the landowners released and held harmless the united states for any and all damages that occur as the result of flooding. .

by selling flowage easements to the government , property owners were compensated for damage resulting from the operation of the floodway at any future time .

flowage easements are a property right and as such are transferred in the same manner as the title to property is transferred .

if the original owner of property assumed the risk of future flooding and agreed to not hold the government liable for damages resulting from operation of the floodway , subsequent owners would be bound by that promise as well .

although the subsequent owner would not consent to such risk directly , the attachment of the easement to the property means that the subsequent owner had notice of the risk as part of his or her purchase of the property .

some questions of liability regarding the sufficiency of the flowage easements have been raised since the corps initiated floodway operations .

the corps has not acquired such easements to all lands affected by operation of the various floodways .

for example , with respect to the bird's point - new madrid floodway , the corps has asserted that it "obtained all flowage easements necessary to legally operate the floodway. .

although there has been public debate regarding the corps' failure to obtain easements for all affected property , the eighth circuit has held that such a failure does not justify barring the operation of the floodway .

rather , the court noted that landowners had other adequate legal remedies , including seeking compensation from the government in courts for the resulting damage .

in addition to challenging whether the corps had acquired the necessary easements , some of the landowners affected by the operation of the mrtp have claimed that "to the extent any easements existed , they were insufficient to allow the flowage of water and debris over the plaintiffs' land and property in the force and magnitudes that existed during the flood. .

the landowners argue that the scope of the easements was exceeded by the damage caused by the corps' operations .

specifically , concerns have been raised about the amount of sediment that would cover the floodway after the waters recede and whether the corps would owe additional compensation for excess sand and gravel that might be deposited on the land by floodwaters .

the focus of legal challenges related to the 2011 mississippi floods has focused on the corps' authority with respect to the mrtp and the sufficiency of floodway easements .

no claims related to the ftca appear to have been filed alleging negligence in the operation of the floodways .

in legal challenges to previous decisions to operate the floodways , however , courts have emphasized the degree to which congress deferred to the corps' discretion in mrtp operations .

therefore , if an ftca claim is filed , parties may find it difficult to challenge the corps' actions under the gaubert test .

given the recognition of the role of the corps' judgment in how to operate the system and the policy considerations involving the impacts of flooding on the natural and human environment , it appears that the corps would be able to defend such challenges under the discretionary function exception of the ftca .

in addition to authorizing the mrtp , as discussed above , the fca also granted immunity to the government , including the corps , for damages caused by floods or floodwaters .

under the central green analysis , the corps could avoid liability for damage caused by its operation of the floodways depending on the character of the waters causing damage and the purpose of their release .

in the case of the 2011 floods , the waters causing damage are clearly floodwaters that were diverted through the floodway as a primary facet of the mrtp , one of the nation's largest flood control projects .

therefore , it appears likely that section 702c immunity would apply .

