a "dear colleague" letter is official correspondence that is sent by a member , committee , or officer of the house of representatives or senate and that is widely distributed to other congressional offices .

a "dear colleague" letter may be circulated in paper through internal mail , distributed on a chamber floor , or sent electronically .

"dear colleague" letters are often used to encourage others to cosponsor , support , or oppose a bill .

"dear colleague" letters concerning a bill or resolution generally include a description of the legislation or other subject matter along with a reason or reasons for support or opposition .

additionally , "dear colleague" letters are used to inform members and their offices about events connected to congressional business or modifications to house or senate operations .

the committee on house administration and the senate committee on rules and administration , for example , routinely circulate "dear colleague" letters to members concerning matters that affect house or senate operations , such as house changes to computer password policies or a reminder about senate restrictions on mass mailings prior to elections .

these letters frequently begin with the salutation "dear colleague. .

the length of such correspondence varies , with a typical "dear colleague" running one to two pages .

member - to - member correspondence has long been used in congress .

for example , since early house rules required measures to be introduced only in a manner involving the "explicit approval of the full chamber," representatives needed permission from other members to introduce legislation .

a common communication medium for soliciting support for this action was a letter to colleagues .

for example , representative abraham lincoln , in 1849 , formally notified his colleagues in writing that he intended to seek their authorization to introduce a bill to abolish slavery in the district of columbia .

the use of the phrase "dear colleague" has been used to refer to a widely distributed letter among members at least since early in the 20 th century .

in 1913 , the new york times included the text of a "dear colleague" letter written by representative finley h. gray to representative robert n. page in which gray outlined his "conceptions of a fit and proper manner" in which members of the house should "show their respect for the president" and "express their well wishes" to the first family .

in 1916 , the washington post included the text of a "dear colleague" letter written by representative william p. borland and distributed to colleagues on the house floor .

the letter provided an explanation of an amendment he had offered to a house bill .

congress has since expanded its use of the internet and electronic devices to facilitate distribution of legislative documents .

electronic "dear colleague" letters can be disseminated via internal networks in the house and senate , supplementing or supplanting paper forms of the letters .

such electronic communication has increased the speed and facilitated the process of distributing "dear colleague" letters .

in the contemporary congress , members use both printed copy distribution and electronic delivery for sending "dear colleague" letters .

in the house , members may choose to send "dear colleague" letters through internal mail , through the electronic e - "dear colleague" system , or both .

regardless of distribution method , house "dear colleague" letters are required to address official business and must be signed by a member or officer of congress .

members of the house often send out "dear colleague" letters to recruit cosponsors for their measures .

the practice of recruiting cosponsors has become more important since the passage of h.res .

42 in the 90 th congress ( 1967-1968 ) .

h.res .

42 amended house rules to permit bill cosponsors , but limited the number to 25 .

in 1978 , the house agreed to h.res .

86 , which further amended house rules to permit unlimited numbers of cosponsors .

"dear colleague" letters sent through internal mail must be written on official letterhead , address official business , and be signed by a member or officer of congress .

a cover letter must accompany the "dear colleague" letter , addressed to the director of the house customer solution center , with specific distribution instructions and authorization as to the number to be distributed .

these materials must be submitted by 9:45 a.m. for morning distribution and 1:45 p.m. for afternoon mail delivery .

the current number of paper copies needed for distribution of a "dear colleague" letter in the house is 475 for all members only ( including leadership ) ; 525 for all members ( including leadership and full committees ) ; 625 for members , full committees , and subcommittees ; 300 for republican members , leadership , and full republican committees ; 275 for all republican members and leadership only ; 250 for democratic members , leadership , and full democratic committees ; 200 for all democratic members and leadership only ; and 700 for all house mail stops .

for distribution to the senate , house "dear colleague" letters must have a separate cover letter addressed to the deputy chief administrative officer of the house for customer solutions , adhere to the same standards as house "dear colleague" letters , and follow the current distribution numbers of 110 for senators only , and 135 for senators and committees .

when using the paper system , congressional offices create and photocopy their "dear colleague" letters and deliver them to either the first call customer service center or to the house postal operations office .

when the house postal operations office is closed , letters may be deposited in a drop box located in the vending area of the longworth cafeteria .

a copy of the "dear colleague" letter is delivered to offices as requested .

on august 12 , 2008 , the house introduced a web - based e - "dear colleague" distribution system .

the e - "dear colleague" system replaced the email - based system .

under the e - "dear colleague" system , then - chair of the committee on house administration , representative robert brady , wrote that members and staff "will be able to compose e - dear colleagues online , and associate them with up to three issue areas .

members and staff will be able to independently manage their subscription to various issue areas and receive e - dear colleagues according to individual interest. .

pursuant to the house members' congressional handbook , the rules regulating a paper "dear colleague" letter sent via internal mail are also applicable to a letter sent electronically .

house members and staff who want to use the e - dear colleague system can subscribe and send letters at http: / / e - dearcolleague.house.gov .

during the registration process , they may choose up to 32 issue areas for which they wish to receive "dear colleague" letters .

the website also allows them to sign up for either the republican or democratic "dear colleague" distribution lists .

additionally , the website enables individuals "to search all e - dear colleagues by session , date , issue area , and keyword or bill number. .

the e - dear colleague system did not alter the process for the delivery of paper "dear colleague" letters .

to send an e - "d ear colleague" letter , an individual staff member views http: / / e - dearcolleague.house.gov and clicks on send .

this action brings up the send screen , where the staff member takes the following actions: enters his or her email address , the type of office the staff member works in ( i.e. , member , leadership , committee , or other ) , and the member's , committee's , or office's name ; types in a letter title , selects whether it is a letter to be sent to either the republican or democratic distribution lists , and chooses up to three issues to associate with the letter ; types , or cuts and pastes , the letter into the text editor on the webpage , including uploading any graphics or attachments ; associates the letter with a particular bill or resolution number ( optional ) ; and reviews the letter before sending .

following the completion of this process , staff members receive an email asking them to confirm that they are sending the "dear colleague" letter .

a final opportunity to edit the letter is also provided .

once the letter is completed , it is sent to all individuals who have selected to receive "dear colleague" letters in issue areas associated with the letter .

electronic versions of "dear colleague" letters sent prior to august 12 , 2008 , are stored in a microsoft exchange public folder that is accessible to all house members and staff .

electronic versions of "dear colleague" letters sent on or after august 12 , 2008 , are archived on the house e - "dear colleague" website .

similar to the house paper system , "dear colleague" letters in the senate are written on official letterhead and address official business , but there is not a central distribution policy .

in general , when using the paper system , senators and chamber officers create their own "dear colleague" letters and have them reproduced at the senate printing graphics and direct mail division .

once reproduced , paper copies of the "dear colleague" letters are delivered to the senate mailroom by the sending office , accompanied by a distribution form or cover letter with specific distribution instructions .

as prescribed by the senate , current distribution numbers for "dear colleague" letters in the senate are 100 for all senators ; 20 for standing , select , and special committees ; 5 for the joint leadership ; and 1 each for the officers of the senate ( total of 7 ) .

the choice to send "dear colleague" letters electronically is at the discretion of the individual senate office .

there is no central distribution system for electronic senate "dear colleague" letters .

