the animal drug user fee act of 2003 ( adufa i , p.l .

108-130 ) was signed by the president in november 2003 .

it established a new requirement , effective in fy2004 , for fda to collect fees from sponsors of brand - name animal drugs in order to reduce the backlog of reviews for those products , decrease the time required for future reviews , and improve the predictability of the review process .

representatives of animal drug research and development companies say that an animal drug can take 7 to 10 years to develop , at a cost of $100 million or more .

predictable and timely review is important to these companies .

companies that make generic animal drugs , which are not currently covered by a user fee program , want review of their products to be timely and predictable as well .

moreover , veterinarians , animal producers , pet owners , and consumers have an interest in the safety , availability , and affordability of animal drugs , including their safety when used in livestock production .

animal drug user fee authority sunsets october 1 , 2008 .

if the program were not reauthorized by then , fda would have been prohibited at that time from collecting user fees , and would have to lay off animal drug review staff .

fda began discussions with animal drug sponsors regarding adufa reauthorization ( adufa ii ) in the spring of 2007 .

in 2008 , fda published its reauthorization proposal in the federal register in february , held a public meeting in march , and accepted public comments through mid - april .

on april 24 , 2008 , fda published draft legislation to reauthorize adufa , along with a proposal for a new user fee authority for generic animal drug reviews .

on july 8 , 2008 , bills were introduced in the house to reauthorize adufa ( h.r .

6432 ) and to establish a user fee program for generic animal drugs ( h.r .

6433 ) .

both bills were forwarded without amendment to the full committee by the house energy and commerce subcommittee on health the following day , and were marked up by the full committee on july 16 , 2008 .

on july 30 , 2008 , the house passed h.r .

6432 , as amended , under suspension .

the engrossed bill incorporated an amended version of h.r .

6432 , as it was reported by the full committee , and h.r .

6433 , the proposal for generic animal drugs , as it was reported .

on august 1 , 2008 , the senate took up the house - passed measure and passed it by unanimous consent .

the measure has been sent to the president , who is expected to sign it .

reauthorization of the existing user fee program was supported by animal drug research and development companies , livestock producers , and the american veterinary medical association .

because a sunset of program authority would have been highly disruptive to the animal drug review process , many supporters felt that adufa reauthorization was "must pass" legislation in the 110 th congress .

a coalition of consumer groups opposed the user fee program and its reauthorization , however , citing concerns about the safety of animal drugs approved for livestock production .

this report discusses aspects of adufa i , including funding and program performance ; fda's proposed changes for adufa ii ; fda's proposal for a new generic animal drug user fee program ; congressional activity ; and relevant issues .

appendix a provides a summary of adufa i .

appendix b describes the fda process for approval of animal drugs .

this report will be updated to incorporate legislative actions and other events as they unfold .

references in this report to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

though adufa i required fda to take steps to ensure that the user fee program did not compromise the timeliness of generic animal drug reviews , fda has had difficulty keeping up with these reviews , and has not generally met the statutory requirement to act on anadas within 180 days .

 ( see the earlier section on " program performance ". ) .

it is not clear whether this is a result of the user fee program , a result of a failure of non - fee funding to keep pace with demand in the generics program ( which may have occurred regardless of the user fee program ) , or other factors .

in its fy2009 budget request , fda proposed , for the first time , a user fee program to support reviews of generic animal drugs .

at an adufa public meeting in 2007 , a representative of the generic animal drug alliance ( gada ) announced the alliance's support for a generic animal drug user fee program .

on april 24 , 2008 , fda published a draft legislative proposal for the animal generic drug user fee act ( agdufa ) , accompanied by performance goals for generic animal drug review that were agreed to in consultation with the industry .

the agency noted the increasing review times for generic animal drugs , saying that the workload was likely to grow , because patent protection on approximately 49 animal drugs will expire between fy2009 and fy2011 .

the agdufa proposal is similar in design to adufa i , including , for example , comparable fee triggers ( one of them requiring maintenance of non - user fee funding for generic animal drug reviews ) , fee - setting requirements , workload adjustments , and reporting requirements .

like fda's adufa ii proposal , the agdufa proposal has fixed annual increases instead of the adufa i inflation adjuster .

notable differences between adufa i and the agdufa proposal include the following: agdufa authority to collect application , product , and sponsor fees , but not establishment fees .

agdufa sponsor fees ( for which a given sponsor would pay only one fee per year ) that are tiered according to the number of a sponsor's currently approved anadas .

agdufa authority to waive or reduce fees only if the drug is intended for a minor use or minor species indication .

table 5 presents fda's proposed authorization levels for agdufa fee revenues for fy2009 through fy2013 .

fda's proposed performance goals for agdufa are similar to those for adufa i .

the agency proposes to review and act on 90% of five "sentinel" types of generic animal drug submissions within specific time frames , which decrease steadily from fy2009 through fy2013 .

 ( as noted earlier , ffdca §512 ( c ) ( 1 ) requires the fda to act on all such submissions within 180 days. ) .

in fy2009 , the proposed target to act on certain submissions is as long as 700 days ( almost two years ) .

by fy2013 , the longest proposed target is 270 days .

the agency did not propose any agdufa performance goals regarding the backlog of reviews , or other matters .

in congressional testimony in june 2008 , a witness representing gada testified that according to its agreement with fda regarding an animal generic drug user fee program ( as reflected in fda's agdufa proposal ) , "the performance goals for agdufa do not return generic application review times to [the statutory requirement of 180 days] .

rather , 270 days is the highest level of performance that the generic animal drug industry could afford. .

this section discusses issues germane to congressional consideration of adufa reauthorization and the establishment of a user fee program for generic animal drugs .

actual consideration of these issues in moving legislation is tracked in the previous section of this crs report , " congressional action " .

generally , companies that research and develop animal drugs have been satisfied that adufa i has eliminated the review backlog for brand - name animal drugs , improved the timeliness and predictability of reviews , and improved communication with fda throughout the process .

the industry's focus for adufa ii was to continue the enhancement of fda review capacity , including more support for increasingly complex reviews .

also , at the public meeting in march 2008 , both fda and industry speakers discussed a growing backlog of premarket inspections of foreign animal drug producing facilities , which has not been remedied by the current user fee program .

the centerpiece of fda's reauthorization proposal , as negotiated with industry , was an increase in user fee revenues to reflect cost growth in excess of authorized inflationary adjustments .

the proposal would authorize fda to collect almost twice as much in animal drug user fees during the five - year adufa ii program period ( fy2009 through fy2013 ) as it could during adufa i ( fy2004 through fy2008 ) .

much of the growth in program costs that fda cited is driven by factors outside of the agency's control , such as growth in the costs of employee salaries and benefits , and rents .

although a backlog of premarket foreign facility inspections was discussed at the march 2008 public meeting , the fda proposal did not explicitly address the cost of these inspections .

given recent concerns about the safety of imported drugs and foods , fda has been under pressure to expand its oversight of foreign facilities that manufacture products it regulates .

fda has not , however , signaled any particular safety concern about foreign plants that manufacture animal drugs , or any changes to the premarket inspections of these plants that are conducted for purpose of application review .

at present , establishment fees may be assessed for these plants , when applicable , but the fees are not directly linked to inspection costs , and do not distinguish between domestic and foreign facilities .

the aim of drug user fees programs is to speed the evaluation of drugs for safety and effectiveness , without shortchanging the rigor of the evaluation or compromising the actual safety and effectiveness of approved drugs .

critics have charged that the user fee program for human drugs ( pdufa ) places too much influence in the hands of industry , and speeds drugs to market with inadequate safety review .

they note that the industry is actively involved in establishing performance benchmarks , for example .

also , some feel that consumer confidence in fda's review process is important , and that a perception of conflicts in the user fee programs may undermine this confidence .

it has been difficult to measure the effect of pdufa , if any , on the safety of human drugs , and unequivocal evidence of such an effect is lacking .

the law has , since its second reauthorization , allowed fda to carry out certain postmarket safety activities with user fee funds .

adufa i does not have a comparable authority .

no postmarket activities are listed in the definition of activities for which fees may be used .

for animal drugs , postmarket safety concerns arise on occasion , resulting in withdrawals or label warnings , but noteworthy recent examples preceded adufa .

fda's proposal for adufa ii , as negotiated with industry , did not seek authority to use animal drug user fees for any postmarket activities .

it is reported that during adufa reauthorization negotiations , fda sought to have authority to spend user fees on some postmarket antimicrobial resistance activities ( discussed further below ) , but drug companies objected .

concerns about the effects of adufa on animal drug safety often play out in a different context than that for the safety of human drugs .

some critics of the law are concerned about the safety of drugs approved for animal agriculture with respect to public health and the environment , rather than safety for the treated animal .

in particular , they are concerned about antimicrobials ( eg , antibiotics ) used in food - producing animals , and the risk of transmitting antimicrobial resistant infections to people through food .

in general , animal drug companies and livestock producers are concerned that overly stringent regulation of this class of animal drugs could compromise their availability and have harmful effects on animal health without an attendant public health benefit .

fda has asserted that there is a preponderance of evidence that the use of antimicrobials in food - producing animals has adverse public health consequences , and that there is little evidence to the contrary .

in 2003 , fda published guidance for industry , laying out the agency's information requirements and processes for evaluating animal antimicrobial drugs that may pose this risk .

review of this class of animal drugs may be more complex than is typical .

fda has not , however , published information about submissions , review times , outcomes , costs , or other metrics specific to this class .

a coalition of consumer groups opposed reauthorization of adufa , but in the event of its reauthorization , called for it to authorize the use of adufa funds for the following postmarket activities related to antimicrobial resistance: safety reviews of currently approved antimicrobial drugs , the collection of veterinary drug use data to support antimicrobial risk assessments , and enhanced surveillance for antimicrobial resistance related to animal drug use .

appendix a .

summary of provisions in adufa i appendix b .

the animal drug approval process like human drugs , animal drugs must be shown to be safe and effective before they can be marketed .

the fda center for veterinary medicine ( cvm ) , office of new animal drug evaluation ( onade ) , is responsible for the premarket review of new animal drugs , and it grants approvals when requirements have been met .

 ( cvm also regulates veterinary devices but does not require their premarket approval .

veterinary biologics are regulated by the u.s. department of agriculture. ) .

specific statutory requirements for the approval of "new animal drugs" are found in the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , section 512 [21 u.s.c .

§ 360b] .

specific regulations are primarily at 21 c.f.r .

510 , et seq .

in each case , general provisions also apply , such as labeling requirements and enforcement provisions .

according to cvm , virtually all animal drugs meet the ffdca definition of "new animal drug. .

the term does not , as it may sound , distinguish between pioneer ( i.e. , brand - name ) and generic animal drugs .

several application names and acronyms used in the animal drug approval process derive from the term "new animal drug. .

these names and acronyms are described in table b - 1 and discussed below .

in this report , the terms "animal drug" and "new animal drug" are used interchangeably .

requirements for the approval of pioneer animal drugs begin at ffdca section 512 ( b ) ( 1 ) , and those for the approval of generic animal drugs begin at ffdca section 512 ( b ) ( 2 ) .

the respective products are often referred to as " ( b ) ( 1 ) " or " ( b ) ( 2 ) " animal drugs .

the animal drug approval process is generally similar to that for human drugs , devices , and many biologics .

animal drug sponsors conduct discovery research on drug candidates , including pilot studies of dose and potential toxicity .

sponsors seeking to develop a promising drug candidate ( an investigational new animal drug , or inad ) submit relevant information to cvm .

usually , the process begins with a sponsor's request for an exemption , pursuant to ffdca section 512 ( j ) , to allow for the interstate shipment of the unapproved product in order that clinical trials of the drug's safety and effectiveness may be conducted .

sponsors wishing to begin the fda approval process for an inad submit a new animal drug application ( nada ) to cvm .

cvm generally conducts phased review of animal drugs , encouraging sponsors to submit information about a product as it becomes available , rather than all at once , and to maintain ongoing consultations with cvm about technical and other requirements .

technical requirements include ( 1 ) the demonstration of safety in the target species , as well as in the environment and in humans ( including those handling and administering the drug , and those consuming the products of food - producing animals , if applicable ) ; ( 2 ) the demonstration of effectiveness in the target species ; and ( 3 ) matters regarding manufacturing methods , controls , and product stability .

when all required information is available , sponsors submit a final "administrative nada," containing agency sign - off letters for all phases of review , a labeling proposal , and other information .

an approved nada means the product is safe and effective for its intended use , and that the methods , facilities , and controls used for the manufacturing , processing , and packaging of the drug are adequate to preserve its identity , strength , quality , and purity .

as with approved human drugs , sponsors of approved nadas are required to notify fda regarding an approved drug's postmarket performance , including any adverse events .

the animal drug approval process differs from the process for human products in two important ways .

first , to support the requirement for demonstration of safety in humans , if an animal drug is intended for use in a food - producing animal , the sponsor must develop methods to test for drug residues in the human food product ( eg , meat , milk , eggs , honey ) .

fda determines whether the drug can be used safely in food - producing animals , with respect to public health .

if approved , the drug's label must address a "withdrawal time" if necessary ( i.e. , a period of time that the drug must be withheld before an animal's products can be marketed for human consumption ) , allowing drug residues to fall below levels of concern .

second , although cvm requires clinical trials to demonstrate an animal drug's safety and effectiveness , these trials are , necessarily and as a matter of regulation , somewhat different from clinical trials required for the approval of human drugs .

an approved animal drug may be labeled for use only in the species for which trials were conducted .

however , veterinarians are permitted , under certain conditions , to use approved drugs for unapproved uses — so - called "extra - label" uses — such as use in species other than those on the label , or for indications other than those on the label .

also , clinical trials for animal drug approval need not be as extensive as trials for human drugs .

among other things , initial testing of the animal drug may begin in the target species , whereas candidate human drugs are studied to determine their safety in animals first , before human trials are begun .

cvm also has authority to approve generic animal drugs .

sponsors seeking approval of a generic investigational new animal drug ( jinad ) must submit an abbreviated new animal drug application ( anada ) .

the generic product and its uses must be the same as those of an approved animal drug , with certain exceptions , and it must be demonstrated that the generic product is bioequivalent to the approved product .

holders of approved or pending nadas must submit certain patent information to cvm .

cvm publishes patent information on approved nadas , and requires anada applicants to certify that their product would not infringe upon a current patent , or that any such current patent is invalid .

sponsors seeking to market a generic version of an approved animal drug for a substantially different use than that currently approved ( such as a label indication for a new species ) often must conduct clinical trials , and typically need an investigational exemption pursuant to ffdca section 512 ( j ) in order to ship the drug interstate .

finally , cvm has authority for the conditional approval of drugs to treat minor animal species ( eg , fish ) and uncommon diseases in major animal species .

this allows sponsors to market a drug before collecting all necessary effectiveness data , but after proving that the drug is safe .

