b oth the house and the senate have on occasion in the past introduced and adopted resolutions in which the body has expressed its "censure," "condemnation," "no confidence" in , or other term of disapprobation regarding the conduct of an executive branch official .

this report examines the legal , constitutional , and legislative framework of such resolutions of censure or no confidence ; discusses precedents and known instances where such resolutions have been introduced and / or adopted ; and places such actions in the context of other congressional authority , as well as the meaning of such actions in the context of systems of parliamentary governments which do not reflect this country's system of separated powers .

the issue of the propriety and the authority of congress or of either house of congress to officially express an opinion concerning an executive branch officer — such as an opinion that the president should remove an official , or that a cabinet official should resign , or to otherwise formally reprimand , "censure," or express disapprobation or loss of confidence concerning an executive official — has been debated and questioned from time to time in the house and the senate .

in early congressional considerations some members of congress , in their opposition to resolutions which declared either an opinion of praise or disapproval of the executive , cited the lack of an express constitutional grant of authority for the house or the senate to state an opinion on the conduct or propriety of an executive officer in the form of a formal resolution of censure or disapproval .

others have argued , including during the consideration of the impeachment of president william jefferson clinton , that impeachment was the proper , and exclusive , constitutional response for congress to entertain when the conduct of federal civil officers is called into question , rather than a resolution of censure .

resolutions expressing disapproval of executive officials considered in the house in 1867 , and in the senate in 1924 , were objected to by some members as interfering with the president's prerogatives in appointments and removals of executive officials , and as labeling with a "brand of shame" an individual in the government without proper proceedings or due process .

concerning judicial officers , precedents indicate that the house has on occasion either rejected or not dealt with attempts to consider a "censure" motion of federal judges offered by the judiciary committee as an alternative to articles of impeachment .

parliamentarians have noted an apparent disinclination of the house to consider censure as part of the impeachment procedure .

it has , however , become accepted congressional practice to employ a simple resolution of one house of congress , or a concurrent resolution by both houses , for certain nonlegislative matters , such as to express the opinion or the sense of the congress or of one house of congress on a public matter , and a resolution expressing an opinion of "no confidence" in , or other expression of censure or disapproval of an executive branch official within a concurrent or simple resolution would appear to be in the nature of such a "sense of congress" or "sense of the senate" ( or house ) resolution .

the absence of express constitutional language that the congress , or the house or the senate individually , may state its opinion on matters of public import in a resolution of praise or censure is not necessarily indicative of a lack of capacity to do so , or that such practice is per se unconstitutional .

it is recognized in both constitutional law and governmental theory that there are , of course , a number of functions and activities of congress which are not expressly stated or provided in the constitution , but which are nonetheless valid as either inherent or implied components of the legislative process or of other express provisions in the constitution , or are considered to be within the internal authority of democratic legislative institutions and elective deliberative bodies generally .

the practice of the house , senate , or congress to express facts or opinion in simple or concurrent resolutions has been recognized since its earliest days as an inherent authority of the congress and of democratic legislative institutions generally , and the adoption of "sense of" the house or senate resolutions on various subjects and in reference to various people , is practiced with some frequency in every congress .

as noted , precedent exists for the house or senate on infrequent occasions to adopt such a "sense of" or similar resolution criticizing , censuring , or condemning a particular public official in the executive branch of government , or that official's conduct .

the resolutions or statements both the house and the senate have adopted in the past concerning a government official , other than a member of congress , have expressed disapproval , censure , or opinion that an officer should be removed .

such an expression of opinion , censure , disapproval or lack of confidence in or of a federal officer by the house , the senate , or the congress is not an "impeachment" of that civil officer under article i , section 2 , clause 5 and section 3 , clause 6 of the constitution ; nor is it a "punishment" of one of the house's or senate's own members under article i , section 5 , clause 2 .

furthermore , a censure or vote of no confidence would also not , in most cases , be within those inherent or implicit authorities , in the nature of contempt , typically imputed to democratic legislative assemblies to protect the dignity and integrity of the institution , its members and proceedings .

finally , because there is no legal consequence to a resolution expressing an opinion of the senate or the house , and because such expression in a simple resolution does not appear to technically be a "bill" referred to in the constitutional prohibition on "bills of attainder," it is unlikely that such an expression would violate that constitutional restriction on congress .

in addition to using words of disapproval such as "condemn" or "censure," the house or the senate have considered resolutions which have used language expressing a loss of confidence in an official , and which have been described as proposing a vote of "no confidence" in an executive branch official .

the use of the term "vote of no confidence" to reflect a senate , house or joint congressional action on a resolution concerning an official of the executive branch might be somewhat misleading because of the particular nature and impact of "no confidence" votes in parliamentary democracies .

a vote of no confidence has a technical meaning and concrete consequences only in a parliamentary form of government , in which the continuance of the executive in office is dependent on its maintaining majority support in the parliament ( or one house thereof ) .

the american system of separated powers , on the other hand , makes no provision for votes of no confidence in the parliamentary sense .

except through the process of impeachment , accordingly , no action by the congress ( or of either house ) can have any practical effect similar to that of a parliamentary vote of no confidence .

for example , votes of "no confidence" or "votes of censure" in the british parliament , are votes instituted in parliament by the opposition party which , if they succeed , indicate that the government no longer has the support of the majority of parliament ( including the government's own party members ) , and thus lead to a dissolution of the government and new elections .

under the u.s. system of government , with the constitutional scheme of separated powers , the legislature — congress — does not impact directly the removal of officials in the executive branch of the federal government ( other than through impeachments ) .

adoption of a resolution expressing a lack of confidence could have symbolic effects as an expression of the sense of congress ( or of either house ) .

a vote expressing "no confidence" of the senate or the house in a particular official of the government , while it may certainly have political implications , would have no specific legal import .

these resolutions , expressing the disapproval of congress ( or of either house ) with an official of the executive branch , have in the past sometimes been submitted , and occasionally adopted .

for recent years , it has been possible to identify resolutions of this kind systematically through a search of the legislative information system of the congress ( lis ) , which includes a database of introduced measures extending back to the 93 rd congress ( 1973-1974 ) .

an initial search identified simple and concurrent resolutions described with any form of the terms "confidence," "censure," or "condemnation. .

on the basis of information independently acquired about resolutions offered in the early 1950s against secretary of state dean acheson , the search was also extended to include simple and concurrent resolutions described with any form of the term "resignation. .

from among the measures identified by these searches , those relating to federal officials other than members of congress were selected .

these searches together yielded 59 resolutions submitted from the 93 rd through 114 th congresses ( 1973-2016 ) and directed against federal officials .

information about the subject and form of these measures is presented in appendix .

no feasible means appeared of comprehensively identifying similar measures for the period preceding the availability of electronically searchable data .

in the historical period before that covered by the lis database , nevertheless , several instances are known in which the house or the senate expressed a specific opinion disapproving of conduct of an executive official , or suggesting that a particular executive officer resign or be removed by the president .

the instances discussed in this section constitute only examples of congressional actions .

they are known not to compose a comprehensive list of all resolutions to censure executive ( and judicial ) officials that may have been adopted or considered by either house .

accordingly , available information can permit no definite assertion whether a vote of no confidence fully similar to that proposed , for example , by s.j.res .

14 has ever previously occurred in american history .

it might be considered unlikely , however , that resolutions critical of officials during earlier periods of history would have been couched solely in terms of "no confidence," because proponents would likely have understood that these terms have a technical meaning only in a parliamentary system of government .

although there has been discussion in both houses of congress of the appropriateness of such actions , resolutions have been introduced and considered in each house of congress in the past , and on occasion have been adopted , wherein the house or the senate has expressed the "sense" of the institution that an official in the executive branch has engaged in conduct worthy of censure , condemnation , or other expression of disapprobation ; should resign or be removed by the president ; and , in a few circumstances , expressly stating in the preamble or the operative portion of the resolution that the public or the particular house of congress has lost "confidence" in the official .

such actions and proposals would appear to be in the nature of "sense of congress" or "sense of the senate" ( or house ) resolutions in which it has been the practice for the senate or the house to address certain nonlegislative matters , such as to express the opinion or the sense of congress or of one house of congress on a public matter .

aside from obvious symbolic , political , or publicity implications , there are no specific legal consequences in the passage of such a resolution , nor is there any legal significance or consequence for the senate or the house to choose one phrase of disapprobation or condemnation over another , or to include or not to include the concept or expression of a loss of "confidence" in an official .

to the extent that a resolution containing a "vote of no confidence" purports to present a proposition functionally similar to a vote of no confidence in a parliamentary system , present knowledge does not permit identifying any similar proposition as having been offered in the past .

on the other hand , to the extent that such resolution purports to present such a proposition , it cannot , under the american constitutional system , succeed in doing so .

instead , the proposition actually presented by a resolution of this nature can only be that of expressing congressional disapproval of a federal official , and in that general respect the resolution is not dissimilar from a number of others that have been offered , from time to time , throughout american history .

