oil exploration and production in iraq began in the 1920s under the terms of a wide - ranging concession granted to a consortium of international oil companies known as the turkish petroleum company and later as the iraq petroleum company .

the nationalization of iraq's oil resources and production was complete by 1975 .

from 1975 to 2003 , iraq's oil production and export facilities were entirely state operated .

however , from the early 1980s until the toppling of saddam hussein's government in 2003 , the country's hydrocarbon infrastructure suffered from the negative effects of war , international sanctions , a lack of investment and technology , and , in some cases , mismanagement and corruption .

iraq's highest - ever production level of 3.5 million barrels per day ( mbd ) was reached in 1990 immediately prior to the iraqi invasion of kuwait .

damage during the 1991 gulf war and subsequent international sanctions limited overall production and exports until 2003 and beyond .

according to the oil and gas journal , iraq has 115 billion barrels of proven oil reserves , the world's third - largest after saudi arabia and iran .

other estimates of iraq's potential oil reserves vary , and the u.s. department of energy's energy information administration ( eia ) notes that current estimates "have not been revised since 2001 and are largely based on 2-d [two - dimensional] seismic data from nearly three decades ago. .

given the relative abundance of oil resources in iraq and the relative ease with which iraqi oil is extracted , many observers expect that new exploration using advanced technology will reveal further reserves , although estimates of potential additional reserves vary considerably .

many oil industry professionals consider iraq to have the world's largest , potentially most productive reserves that are not yet fully developed .

iraq's current proven reserves are concentrated ( 65% or more ) in southern iraq , particularly in the southernmost governorate of al basrah .

large proven oil resources also are located in the northern governorate of al tamim near the disputed city of kirkuk .

 ( see figure 1 , below. ) .

iraq's current average oil production rate fluctuates around the march 2003 level of 2.5 mbd .

however , the current export level of 1.97 mbd remains below the march 2003 level and the 2010 budget target of 2.10 mbd ( see table 1 , below ) .

at present , crude oil is the source of over 90% of iraq's domestic energy consumption , and , according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , oil exports generate approximately 85% of iraq's government revenue .

declines in global oil prices from their 2008 high and reduced oil production led iraqi leaders to amend their 2009 and 2010 revenue and budget assumptions from projected surpluses to projected consecutive $15 billion deficits .

the imf expects iraq's budget "to record significant , albeit declining deficits" in 2010 and 2011 , "before returning to a surplus position in 2012. .

official u.s. assessments stress that continued fluctuations in oil prices and production may jeopardize iraq's fiscal stability and the sustainability of its reconstruction and development plans , with uncertain follow - on effects on the economy and security .

compared to other top oil producers , iraq's current total output makes a significant contribution to global oil supplies .

according to the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , as of october 2009 , iraq's total production of 2.4 mbd accounted for nearly 3% of global supply and made iraq the world's 11 th - largest oil producer ( see table 2 , below ) .

current iraqi plans call for the expansion of oil production to 4 mbd by 2013 and then upward to 6 mbd by 2017 .

in december 2009 , iraq's minister of oil hussein shahristani stated that "any increase will not be seen before 2011. .

international firms are not expected to begin to make investments and carry out substantial infrastructure work under the terms of recently agreed technical service contracts until after the iraqi elections scheduled for march 2010 .

u.s. officials and many observers greeted iraq's 2009 technical service contract bidding rounds ( see below ) as a signal that the iraqi political leadership is committed to capitalizing on iraq's resource potential and generating revenue to meet the country's significant development needs .

the international monetary fund , world bank , and others have argued that the fiscal shortfalls iraq is facing as a result of stable oil production levels and moderate global oil prices will jeopardize the government's ability to provide needed services and could undermine security gains .

nevertheless , the political , security , and technical challenges described above leave most experts skeptical that iraq will be able to meet its ambitious goals within the time frame currently outlined by the maliki government .

the main points of contention among iraqi politicians and citizen groups with regard to energy policy include the proper roles and authorities of federal and regional bodies , the terms and extent of potential foreign participation in oil and gas production and development , and potential formulas and mechanisms for equitably sharing oil and gas revenue .

in addition , some iraqi labor groups and elected officials have challenged the transparency and inclusiveness of legislative drafting and contract negotiation processes thus far .

concurrent negotiations regarding constitutional amendments have had direct implications for the hydrocarbon legislation debate , particularly efforts to clarify the specific authorities granted to federal and regional governments to regulate oil and gas development and export activities under articles 111 and 112 of the iraqi constitution .

overall , iraqi , u.s. , and other international observers have expressed concern that the violence and political tension that have prevailed in iraq in recent years have not been conducive to careful consideration of detailed hydrocarbon sector legislation or new national oil and natural gas contracts .

the november 4 , 2009 , u.s. defense department report on security and stability in iraq stated that "fundamental differences remain over federal and regional authorities in contracting and management of the oil and gas sector. .

in the run - up to iraq's march 2010 national elections , candidates' positions on oil - and natural gas - related policy questions received scrutiny from voters , although most candidates did not appear overly inclined to defend uncompromising positions on energy policy as a means of garnering popular support .

u.s. officials and many observers greeted iraq's 2009 technical service contract bidding rounds as a signal that the iraqi political leadership is committed to capitalizing on iraq's resource potential and generating revenue to meet the country's significant development needs .

the international monetary fund , world bank , and others have argued that the fiscal shortfalls iraq is facing as a result of constant oil production levels and moderate global oil prices will jeopardize the government's ability to provide needed services and could undermine security gains .

nevertheless , the political , security , and technical challenges described above leave most experts skeptical that iraq will be able to meet its ambitious goals within the time frame currently outlined by the maliki government .

in december 2009 , the international energy agency ( iea ) revised its medium - term oil production outlook for iraq upward to 3.1 mbd by 2014 .

the iea warned that this revised outlook is "extremely vulnerable to future revision" in light of "the many political and security risks that continue to challenge the government and industry. .

according to the iea report , iraq's "production targets are arguably very ambitious and are near impossible to reach in the announced time frame given political , logistical , and technical hurdles. .

in the near term , experts and industry professionals are closely focused on the outcome of the march 2010 national elections , the makeup of the new council of representatives , and the formation of a new cabinet .

while many expect that the new cabinet will continue along the oil sector management path outlined by the current government , some stakeholders harbor concerns that the terms for international investment in iraq's oil and gas sector could be significantly revised under a new administration or under pressure from members of the new parliament .

the new government also will need to address long - standing political and constitutional questions that have remained unresolved in light of the pending election .

the obama administration and many members of the 111 th congress identify the promotion of political reconciliation and long - term economic development as key u.s. policy goals in iraq .

the current military strategy employed by u.s. forces in iraq seeks to support iraqi forces as they maintain a secure environment in which elected leaders can resolve core political differences .

in iraq , the ongoing debate over energy policy and legislation reflects iraqis' unresolved political differences over the powers reserved for federal and regional authorities , proper means for ensuring equitable distribution of hydrocarbon revenues , and long - standing , shared concerns about preserving iraq's unity and sovereignty .

in light of the u.s. military commitment and persistent iraqi political differences , members of congress and u.s. policymakers face a number of challenging questions: as the u.s. role in providing security in iraq diminishes , how will the united states influence the pace and content of iraqi energy policy debates ? .

how should u.s. diplomats engage with iraqis regarding the management of iraq's sovereign economic resources ? .

should the united states encourage iraqis to complete constitutional reforms that will resolve core political differences before promoting the adoption and implementation of hydrocarbon sector legislation ? .

how can the united states effectively encourage iraqis to adopt equitable revenue - sharing mechanisms ? .

should the u.s. government promote or facilitate u.s. and international investment in iraq's oil and gas sector and , if so , in what form , on which terms , and on what scale ? .

if constitutional disputes over federal and regional authority remain unresolved , the durability of compromises reached with regard to hydrocarbon legislation , revenue sharing , and new oil and gas contracts may be undermined .

international investment and technology appear necessary in light of the current iraqi government's ambitious plans for the expansion of iraq's oil and gas production .

however , the terms and conditions of international participation are likely to remain highly controversial , with powerful iraqi interest groups taking opposing positions .

the public positions that members of congress and administration officials take on each of these questions may influence iraqi attitudes toward the remaining u.s. presence in iraq , toward iraq's proposed legislation and investment arrangements , and toward each other .

in recent years , congress has sought to ensure that appropriated funds are not used to control iraq's oil resources and has sought to influence the development and course of u.s. policy in iraq by requiring the administration to report on key oil and oil revenue related benchmarks .

section 1221 of p.l .

111-84 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , states that , "no funds appropriated pursuant to an authorization of appropriations in this act may be obligated or expended ... to exercise united states control of the oil resources of iraq. .

section 9008 of the fy2010 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

111-118 ) contain similar prohibitions .

section 314 of p.l .

111-32 , the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( june 24 , 2009 ) states that "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other act shall be obligated or expended by the united states government ... to exercise united states control over any oil resource of iraq. .

senator john ensign continues to advocate for the creation of an "iraq oil trust" to ensure that all iraqis share the proceeds of iraq's oil exports equitably .

s. 351 , the support for iraq oil trust act of 2009 , would require the u.s. department of state to provide the government of iraq with a plan outlining options for the creation and implementation of different types of oil trusts .

the bill would withhold 10% of u.s. economic support fund assistance to iraq until the administration certified the delivery of such a plan .

the bill mirrors the version introduced in the 110 th congress , s. 3470 , the support for iraq oil trust act of 2008 , of which then - senator and now secretary of state hillary clinton was a co - sponsor .

section 1314 of the fy2007 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-28 ) specifically identified the enactment and implementation of legislation "to ensure the equitable distribution of hydrocarbon resources of the people of iraq without regard to the sect or ethnicity of recipients" and "to ensure that the energy resources of iraq benefit sunni arabs , shia arabs , kurds , and other iraqi citizens in an equitable manner" as benchmarks on which the president was required to report to congress in july and september 2007 .

section 3301 of the act states that no funds appropriated by the act or any other act may be used "to exercise united states control over any oil resource of iraq. .

on july 12 , 2007 , the administration released an interim report on the iraq benchmarks stating that progress toward meeting the revenue - sharing benchmark "is unsatisfactory," and noting that the administration remains "actively engaged" in encouraging iraqi leaders "to expeditiously approve the draft [revenue sharing] law in the council of ministers and move it to the council of representatives. .

according to the report , "the effect of limited progress toward this benchmark has been to reduce the perceived confidence in , and effectiveness of , the iraqi government. .

the september 2007 report stated that iraq's government "has not made satisfactory progress toward enacting and implementing legislation to ensure the equitable distribution of hydrocarbon revenue. .

the report also stressed that "it is difficult to predict what further progress might occur" when iraq's parliament reconvenes and considers proposed legislation .

section 8113 of p.l .

110-116 , the department of defense appropriations act , 2008 ( november 13 , 2007 ) states that "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other act shall be obligated or expended by the united states government ... to exercise united states control over any oil resource of iraq. .

section 1222 of p.l .

110-181 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( january 28 , 2008 ) states that "no funds appropriated pursuant to an authorization of appropriations in this act may be obligated or expended ... to exercise united states control of the oil resources of iraq. .

section 1211 of s. 3001 , the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( september 27 , 2008 ) and section 8106 of p.l .

110-329 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , contained similar prohibitive language .

president bush issued signing statements stating that the executive branch would "construe such provisions in a manner consistent with the constitutional authority of the president" because , in his view , the provisions "could inhibit the president's ability to carry out his constitutional obligations. .

hydrocarbon framework law beginning in mid - 2006 , a three - member oil and energy committee working under the auspices of the iraqi cabinet prepared draft hydrocarbon framework legislation to regulate iraq's oil and gas sector .

a political negotiating committee subsequently edited their draft .

following approval by the negotiating committee , iraq's council of ministers ( cabinet ) approved a draft version of the hydrocarbon framework law in february 2007 .

subsequent negotiations among iraqi leaders sought to clarify the responsibilities of federal and regional authorities as well as contracting procedures for oil fields .

on july 3 , 2007 , iraqi prime minister nouri al maliki announced that the council of ministers had approved a final version of the framework law and had forwarded the bill to the council of representatives for consideration .

the council of ministers' shoura council reportedly amended provisions of the bill to ensure their consistency with provisions of the iraqi constitution .

however , kurdish officials protested the changes , arguing that they are substantive , rather than semantic , and have tentatively withdrawn their support for the legislation .

the boycott of cabinet and parliamentary proceedings by various iraqi entities at the time of the cabinet's approval of the law added to the controversy surrounding the proposed legislation .

as of november 2009 , statements from iraqi government officials and members of the council of representatives suggest that parliamentary consideration of the legislation continues to be delayed by disagreements between key political figures and likely will be delayed until the election of a new parliament in national elections scheduled for early 2010 .

the council of ministers reportedly is considering new draft legislation , but no timetable has been announced for its consideration .

skepticism about the performance of oil minister shahristani appears to be significant within the council of representatives , as is opposition to the conduct of the investment bidding round conducted in july 2009 and to contracts signed by the kurdistan regional government .

as such the applicability of the compromises reached prior to the announcement of draft legislation may be in doubt .

note: the following analysis applies to draft legislation released in 2007 and may require substantial revision if new draft legislation emerges from the council of ministers in the coming weeks and months or under a new government elected in 2010 .

federal oil and gas council the central element of the draft hydrocarbon framework legislation is the creation of a federal oil and gas council ( fogc ) to determine all national oil and gas sector policies and plans , including those governing exploration , development , and transportation .

the fogc would become the most powerful body in iraq's oil sector , with the power to review all contracts , and would operate according to a two - thirds majority decision - making system .

the seats on the fogc are reserved for specific cabinet members , representatives of constitutionally recognized regional governments , hydrocarbon experts , and "producing governorates. .

a "panel of independent experts," open to iraqi and foreign membership , would work with the fogc in a non - binding , advisory capacity .

the possibility that foreign energy experts or industry representatives could be chosen to participate on this panel has alarmed some iraqis and foreign observers .

although the draft law stipulates that the formation of the fogc "shall take into consideration a fair representation of the basic components of the iraqi society," some observers have warned that the makeup of the fogc specified in the draft law could potentially contribute to sectarian or regional tensions .

given the potential for the majority shiite arab community to directly or indirectly control the makeup of iraq's cabinet in iraq's democratic system and the ineligibility of sunni arab governorates to qualify for fogc seats based on the other specified terms , some sunni arabs fear their interests may not be adequately represented in the powerful council .

other iraqis may be encouraged to seek constitutionally recognized regional status in order to ensure their representation in the council .

contract type ( s ) the draft hydrocarbon framework law establishes several criteria that future "exploration and production contracts" must meet .

the criteria are designed to preserve iraqi control and maximize the country's economic return .

the draft law does not mandate the use of so - called "production - sharing agreements" as the sole model contract for future oil development in iraq .

the law states that contract holders may be given exclusive rights to exploration , development , production , and marketing of iraqi oil for specified periods , subject to approval of the contract and a field development plan by iraqi authorities .

the law also outlines general terms and conditions for evaluating contracts and development plans designed to preserve the iraqi government's sovereign control of oil production , economic returns to iraq , and "appropriate returns" to potential investors .

the fogc's panel of independent experts would use these criteria to evaluate contracts signed by the kurdistan regional government since 2003 , and the ministry of oil , and the fogc would use the criteria to evaluate contracts signed by the former regime with international oil companies ( article 40 ) .

the contract provisions of the law have attracted significant attention because they would allow foreign participation and therefore represent , in principle , a reversal of the nationalization of iraq's oil sector .

the specific details of model contracts developed by iraqis and the terms of specific individual contracts negotiated between iraq and potential foreign partners would determine the type of foreign participation and the specific long - term revenue benefits to iraq or foreign companies .

the draft hydrocarbon framework law does not mandate a specific form of contract or predetermine specific contract terms or details .

the fogc would develop model contracts for use in iraqi oil and gas fields and evaluate agreements with foreign participants according to the stated criteria and the model contracts .

according to revenue watch middle east director yahia said , "the aim of this law from beginning was to promote foreign investment in iraq's oil sector .

yet while the law opens the door for foreign companies , there are careful , deliberate mechanisms in place to maintain control in the hands of national government. .

petroleum revenues and sharing arrangements the draft hydrocarbon framework law states that iraq's oil wealth belongs to all of its citizens , as reflected in the iraqi constitution .

however , the draft legislation does not contain specific guidelines or mechanisms for revenue sharing .

the draft would create two funds for oil revenues: the first , an "oil revenue fund," and the second , a "future fund" to hold an unspecified percentage of oil revenue for long - term development goals .

both funds would be regulated and administered according to terms specified in separate federal revenue legislation .

regional authority and oil field management annexes constitutionally recognized regional authorities would automatically qualify for seats on the fogc under the terms of the draft oil sector legislation .

the draft law originally was structured to grant regional authorities licensing powers with regard to oil fields specified in four annexes , subject to the terms of the draft law and in conjunction with the plans and procedures of the fogc .

official versions of the draft annexes were not published .

however , kurdish representatives made several public statements following an april 2007 conference in dubai expressing their opposition to the draft annexes and threatening to withdraw support for the legislative package in the council of representatives .

the annexes reportedly were dropped from the draft legislation prior to its approval by the cabinet .

under the new arrangement — allegedly designed to meet demands of kurdish negotiators — the management of specific oil fields would be decided by the members of the fogc .

draft revenue - sharing law article 112 of the iraqi constitution sets qualitative criteria for the distribution of oil and gas revenues and requires the iraqi parliament to pass a law regulating revenue distribution .

in february 2007 , some officials in baghdad and washington indicated that a broad agreement to share oil revenues among regions based on population had been reached .

however , iraqi leaders continued to negotiate the terms of the draft revenue - sharing law through june 2007 .

in line with the constitutional requirement , a separate draft revenue - sharing law has been prepared as a component of the hydrocarbon legislative package currently under consideration .

according to a draft of the revenue - sharing law published by the kurdistan regional government on june 20 , 2007 , the federal government would be empowered to collect all oil and gas revenue , with the stipulation that all funds be deposited into external and internal accounts based on their source .

the federal government would have priority to allocate the funds in the accounts to support national priorities such as defense and foreign affairs , "provided that this does not impact the balance and needs of the governments of the regions and the governorates which are not organized in a region. .

the remainder of the accounts would be distributed to regions and governorates automatically , on a monthly basis , based on agreed population - density - based percentages until a census can be completed .

the kurdistan regional government would receive a 17% share of the remaining funds deposited in two accounts at the central bank of iraq branch in irbil .

no specific provision is made in the draft for addressing requirements to meet the needs of "damaged regions" as required by article 112 of the constitution .

the draft revenue law also would create a "commission of monitoring the federal financial resources" composed of central government officials , experts , and representatives of each region and governorate .

the commission would monitor deposits and allocations from the central revenue fund , in addition to facilitating international audits and producing monthly , quarterly , and annual transparency reports .

article 7 of the draft revenue law reiterates the call for the establishment of a "future fund" for surplus revenue , but states that the operation of such a fund should be defined in a separate piece of legislation following further negotiation among federal , regional , and governorate representatives .

ministry of oil and iraq national oil company laws the final two components of the hydrocarbon legislative package are proposed laws that will reorganize iraq's ministry of oil and establish an iraqi national oil company ( inoc ) .

under the hydrocarbon framework law , the responsibilities and authorities of the ministry of oil and the inoc would be altered significantly , and the draft ministry and inoc laws are necessary to ensure proper oversight , accountability , and separation of powers between the two entities .

as of november 2009 , a draft inoc law had been approved by the council of ministers , but was not considered by the council of representatives before the 2010 national election .

