the kaesong industrial complex ( kic ) is an industrial park located in the democratic people's republic of korea ( dprk or north korea ) just across the demilitarized zone from south korea .

as of the end of december 2010 , approximately 120 medium - sized south korean companies were using north korean labor to manufacture products there , employing over 47,000 workers .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

currently , the park has much of the infrastructure ( eg , south korean - built water , sewage treatment , and electrical facilities ) to enable the completion of the complex's first phase , an 800-acre site that would contain roughly 300 foreign manufacturers employing around 100,000 north korean workers .

if the master plan of hyundai asan , the co - developer of the project , is followed the kic eventually will be over 6,000 acres ( nearly half the size of manhattan island ) and include high - technology zones , shopping districts , residential areas , and facilities for tourism and recreation .

at present , over 100 companies that have signed lease agreements to open factories have not done so .

the complex was planned , developed , and financed largely by south korea , and it has become a symbol of engagement between the north and the south .

in 2010 , about $1.4 billion , or 76% , of the $1.9 billion in total trade between the two koreas was attributable to the kic .

the purpose of this report is to provide an overview of the role , purposes , and results of the kic and examine u.s. interests , policy issues , options , and legislation .

the kic resulted from an initiative led by the hyundai group beginning in 1998 that coincided with the republic of korea's ( rok ) "sunshine policy" that attempted to improve relations between south korea and the dprk .

the kic is located about 106 miles southeast of pyongyang and 43 miles north of seoul just across the demilitarized zone ( dmz ) in the dprk .

the purposes of the kic as stated by south korea have been to develop an industrial park in which south korean businesses could manufacture products using north korean labor , provide an opening for north korea to liberalize and reform its economy , and ease tensions across the dmz .

although begun primarily as a private sector venture , both governments are heavily involved in the project .

groundbreaking occurred in june 2003 and again in april 2004 .

hyundai asan and the korea land corporation ( both from south korea ) have been developing and managing the complex .

south korean companies operating in kaesong receive certain incentives from the rok government and have certain rights as determined by negotiated agreements with the dprk .

the kic is a duty - free zone , with no restrictions on the use of foreign currency or credit cards and no visa required for entry or exit .

property and inheritance rights are ensured .

south korean law breakers in kaesong are not to go on trial in the north .

the corporate tax rate is 10% to 14% with an exemption for the first five years after generating profits and a 50% reduction for the ensuing three years .

the south korean government ( through its inter - korea cooperation fund ) offered companies that established their operations in the kic ( in the pilot project and first phase ) loans with low interest rates equal to those applied to public works projects .

these loans totaled about $40 million as of the end of 2005 .

out of the first 26 firms to either begin operations or contemplate beginning operations in the near term , 25 of them applied for loans from the inter - korea cooperation fund .

south korea also provides political risk insurance that will cover financial losses up to 90% of a company's investment in the kic up to 5 billion south korean won ( $5.4 million ) .

under a south korean law passed in april 2007 , south korean small and medium - sized firms operating in the kic are eligible for state subsidies and other benefits equal to their counterparts at home .

table 2 shows the first three phases of the master plan for the project .

the first phase encompasses 800 acres with as many as 300 south korean firms operating in the complex .

at the end of phase 3 , the plan calls for as much as 4,800 acres in the industrial zone with as many as 1,500 firms employing 350,000 north korean workers and producing $16 billion worth of products per year .

it also includes 2,200 acres in a supporting zone with residential facilities ( dorms ) , commercial establishments ( hotels , restaurants , offices , conference rooms ) , and tourist facilities ( golf course , peace park , theme park ) .

the master plan also includes an expansion zone of 1,600 acres for industrial use and 4,000 acres for support .

this would be used after phase 3 and would accommodate an additional 500 companies , 150,000 employees , and estimated production of $4 billion per year .

counting the expansion zone , the grand totals for the master plan would be 6,400 acres for the industrial zone ( 10 square miles ) , 6,200 acres for the supporting zone , 2,000 companies , 500,000 workers , and $20 billion per year in products .

the industrial and supporting zones together cover an area roughly one - fifth the size of washington , dc .

the kic aims to attract south korean companies , particularly small and medium - sized enterprises , seeking lower labor and other costs for their manufactured products as an alternative to establishing subsidiaries in china or other low - wage markets .

as indicated in table 1 , by the end of 2010 , about 120 companies had begun operations in kaesong and were employing over 47,000 north korean workers .

of the $374 million initial cost for the first stage , $223 million was to be provided by the south korean government .

much of the supporting infrastructure has been built , including a job training center , a water supply plant ( which sends about one - quarter of its 60,000 tons / day capacity to kaesong city ) , a wastewater treatment plant , and an electricity substation .

in december 2006 , the korea electric power corporation connected north korea and south korea by a 100,000 kilowatt power - transmission line and in june 2007 began transmission of high - voltage electricity for use by the companies in the kic .

in december 2007 , the two koreas announced what was to be daily train service across the demilitarized zone along a recently reconnected rail line between the two koreas .

regular train service , however , has not begun .

the plan is for the trains to connect the kic to south korea in the south and to china in the north .

currently , the trains terminate south of kaesong , in bongdong , which does not have loading facilities .

meanwhile , kaesong is connected to south korea by a road that has thousands of vehicles per day passing through the checkpoints .

the 15 companies operating in the pilot industrial complex in kaesong in 2006 and their products included sonoko cuisine ware ( kitchenware ) , sj tech ( semiconductor component containers ) , shinwon ( apparel ) , samduk trading ( footwear ) , bucheon industrial ( wire harness ) , taesung industrial ( cosmetics containers ) , daewha fuel pump ( automobile parts ) , munchang co. ( apparel ) , romanson ( watches , jewelry ) , hosan ace ( fan coils ) , magic micro ( lamp assemblies for lcd monitors ) , jy solutec ( automobile components and molds ) , ts precision machinery ( semiconductor mold components ) , yongin electronics ( transformers , coils ) , and jccom ( communication components ) .

as shown in table 3 , in 2010 , the kic - produced goods totaled $323.3 million , about a 25% increase from 2009 .

as of the end of december 2010 , a little over half of the cumulative production total had been in textiles and clothing , around 20% had been in electronics products as well as in metals / machinery , and about 10% had been in chemical products .

the share of textile and clothing production has increased over time , from 46% in 2007 to 53% in 2009 .

examples of the variety of products made in kaesong include socks , pajamas , shoes , auto parts ( four firms ) , semiconductor parts ( two firms ) , toner cartridges ( one firm ) , fish nets , and motorcycle helmets .

currently , all products made in the kic are shipped to south korea for sale there or for export after clearing customs in the rok .

the primary export destinations in 2010 were australia , the european union , russia , and china .

other than labor , land , and site construction materials , there now is no local procurement of inputs into the manufacturing processes in the kic nor are products manufactured in the kic sold in north korean markets .

most companies there use labor - intensive manufacturing processes with raw materials and intermediate goods from south korea shipped to kaesong for final assembly .

as the kic is expanded , however , companies could procure some of their manufacturing inputs locally .

it is not yet clear whether south korean companies operating in the kic are doing so primarily for political purposes or whether their operations in the complex are economically viable .

also , it is not clear whether companies in the complex would be economically viable without south korean government support in providing infrastructure and loans with below - market interest rates .

the kic does provide small and medium - sized businesses access to labor costs lower than those in china or vietnam , a workforce that speaks the same language , and proximity to large markets in south korea .

some companies appear to be using production in kaesong to replace that in china , south korea , or elsewhere , but others may be using government - subsidized loans and political risk insurance to invest in politically popular projects .

the long list of companies that have applied to enter the kic , however , indicates that investments there likely are seen as profitable for most businesses .

it also should be noted that an estimated 40% of the small and medium - sized south korean companies that established operations in china have not been successful there .

many have withdrawn from that market .

the kic is viewed as essential for survival by some of these companies .

the experience of some of the early investors in kaesong may be indicative of the economic viability of the project .

shinwon ( clothing ) established operations in the kic to take advantage of the dexterity and lower cost of north korean workers , favorable logistics , and to avoid nontariff barriers in china and southeast asia .

by manufacturing about 16% of five of its clothing lines there , it expects to accrue considerable savings in production costs .

it considers its kaesong factory to be optimal when compared with those it has in china , indonesia , vietnam , and guatemala .

samduk trading company produces high - quality shoes in the kic .

start - up costs were high because of the need to train workers .

it took eight months for some production lines to reach 60% of the productivity level of south korean companies .

the romanson company ( watches ) finds the kic superior to production in china because of the common language and low labor costs .

it reportedly plans to move 75% of its watch production to the kic .

the moonchang company ( uniforms , seat covers , leisure clothes ) faced a rough start in dealing with its north korean workers but feels it is now on the right track .

the woori bank is in a difficult situation because of the limited customer base and low demand for personal or business loans .

its main business is currency exchange .

it provides zero interest rates on deposits because there are no means to make profits by investing deposits elsewhere in north korea .

the kic has raised several issues with u.s. policy makers .

these include labor conditions , financial benefits for pyongyang , the kic in the korus fta , and the control of u.s. exports to kaesong .

the kaesong industrial complex sits at the hub of spreading concentric sets of economic and geopolitical interests and concerns .

at its narrowest sense , the kic is a business venture in which participants are seeking profits and business advantages .

on the south korean side , the kic provides small and medium - sized companies with a manufacturing platform and opportunity to access low - cost labor without having to go overseas to establish subsidiaries or to outsource the assembly of their products to china or other markets .

on the dprk side , the kic provides jobs for workers who can earn relatively higher wages without crossing their borders illegally or working under contract in labor - scarce countries such as those in the russian far east or in middle eastern countries .

at a somewhat wider set of interests , the kic provides a channel for rapprochement between the dprk and south korea .

kaesong developed partly from south korea's sunshine policy of economic engagement with the north .

it can be viewed as a confidence - building measure between two countries whose hostility toward each other has lingered since the 1950-52 korean war .

as has been the case with the extensive economic interchange between china and taiwan , the kic may provide a bridge for communication and a catalyst for cultural interaction , and it can create stakeholders in each other's economies with a shared interest in stability , liberalization , and increased communication across the dmz .

at a still wider set of interests , the kic may be the proverbial camel's nose under the tent in attempts to reform , liberalize , and modernize the north korean economy .

in neighboring china in 1978 , foreign businesses were first allowed to operate in special economic zones .

now foreign invested businesses generate more than half of china's exports and imports .

the chinese speak of practicing socialism with chinese characteristics and , indeed , many state - owned enterprises still encumber the chinese economic system .

the state - owned enterprises that are successful , however , operate much like privately owned enterprises , and one is hard pressed to find other significant differences between the chinese brand of socialism and market capitalism .

in may 2010 , kim jong - il paid his fifth visit to china to visit special economic zones and to discuss issues .

he also visited an industrial site .

likewise , the kic exposes average north koreans to modern business methods and to the accouterments of western industrial society .

according to the economist intelligence unit , the decrepit north korean economy has "three crying needs: deeper market reforms , greater openness , and above all , massive investment to modernize decrepit plant and infrastructure. .

the kic potentially addresses all three of these needs to a limited extent .

however , reports from north korea indicate that the economic reforms there currently are stalled — even being reversed .

unlike china's reforms , moreover , the initiative for the kic came from abroad , is viewed with suspicion by many , and is an isolated case .

pyongyang , however , has renamed the rajin - sonbong region bordering china as rason and is attempting to attract more chinese investment there .

in sum , it is still too early to tell if kaesong will succeed , much less have a large effect on the rest of the north korean economy .

at a geopolitical level , kaesong is one part of the standoff between the dprk and the united states , china , south korea , japan , and russia , over north korea's nuclear weapons program .

under the rubric of the six - party talks lie a bundle of strategic issues , such as the ability of north korea to finance its nuclear program , the need for humanitarian and energy aid , the stability of the kim jong - il regime , and the enforcement of various economic sanctions being applied to north korea .

a major goal of the united states in the six - party talks is to halt and verifiably dismantle north korea's capability to produce nuclear fuel and nuclear bombs or to proliferate nuclear material or technology to potentially hostile countries or groups .

the u.s. strategy to accomplish this is a combination of sticks ( sanctions , diplomatic isolation , name calling ) and carrots ( promises of aid , diplomatic recognition , security guarantees ) conveyed to north korea through the six - party talks , bilateral meetings , and occasional media blasts .

under this strategy , there is little reason to provide the dprk with any financial reward , even if it is to the benefit of south korea , unless it shows significant progress in its commitments under the six - party talks .

this is particularly the case if north korea carries out attacks against south korea .

the south korean goals with respect to north korea , however , not only include the denuclearization of the korean peninsula but eventual reunification and reconstruction of the dprk's economy .

a major south korean concern is the potential cost of reunification either in the form of a flood of economic emigrants to the south or in actual budgetary outlays to help rebuild the north's civilian economy .

the high cost to west germany of the integration of east germany after the fall of the berlin wall has provided little comfort to the policy makers in seoul .

the south korean strategy , therefore , has tended to be longer on carrots ( promises of food , fuel , and fertilizer ) and shorter on sticks ( sanctions ) with a heavy reliance on engagement across the interactive spectrum and on diplomacy to resolve the issue .

even after the north korean nuclear test in 2006 , south korea continued the kic operations .

it only halted its plans to call for new applicants to enter the kic .

likewise , north korea's provocations in 2010 did not result in the closing of the complex .

existing production facilities continued to manufacture and expand .

although rok president lee myung - bak has said he will seek more reciprocity in seoul's dealings with pyongyang , and he has been somewhat vague about how he will treat the kic , his statements and actions to date have been widely interpreted to mean that phase 1 of the complex , at a minimum , will continue operating .

undoubtedly , the kic would be a centerpiece if lee enacts his "grand bargain," under which south korea would provide massive development assistance if north korea dismantles its nuclear program .

for south korea , not only does kaesong provide entry into the decrepit dprk economy , but it is a key factor in building up and reforming the economy in the north with an eye toward eventual reunification .

beijing's strategy before the return of hong kong in 1997 has been instructive to seoul .

a major reason that many of the first economic reforms in china occurred in nearby guangdong province , particularly just across the border from hong kong in shenzhen city , was that beijing tried to stem pressures to immigrate to hong kong by raising the standard of living and industrial development in the region abutting the returning territory .

this strategy has been so successful that some immigration , particularly of hong kong retirees , has been going from hong kong to guangdong province and not the other way around .

likewise , beijing has broadened ties with taiwan through allowing cross - strait investments , travel , business visas , communication , and other business - based activities .

in some sectors , particularly in the manufacture of computers and other electronic products , taiwan and the east coast of china have become one integrated economy .

kaesong arguably could begin a similar process with north korea .

south korea also aims to become a hub of east asia .

in order to accomplish this , it would like to be connected to china , russia , and to europe via railways that pass through north korea .

as part of the kic project , north and south korea have reconnected a railroad line connecting the north and south and have conducted a test run on it .

 ( a second line on the opposite side of the peninsula also was connected. ) .

in terms of logistics , a shipment by rail from south korea via kaesong to hamburg , germany would take about 27 days by ship , 10 days via the trans - siberian railway , and 7 days via the trans - china railway .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

the three national interests of the united states that form the basis of all policy discussion are security , economic well - being , and value projection .

these three national interests all play into consideration of the kaesong industrial complex .

the main security concern for the united states is the location of the kic in the dprk .

u.s. security concerns with respect to north korea center on two major considerations: ( 1 ) the dprk's nuclear program and ( 2 ) potential conflict across the dmz separating north korea and south korea .

the kic has opposing effects upon these security considerations .

on one hand , since income in any country is fungible , anything that increases revenue to the pyongyang regime has the potential to contribute to the dprk's military ( including its missile and nuclear program ) .

it is likely , however , that the dprk's nuclear program has assured funding from the government .

also , given kim jong - il's "military first" policy , the north korean military has top priority in the allocation of scarce economic resources .

it also has call on certain economic activities and government subsidies for them .

it is not clear how much , if any , income ( over that used to pay for expenses related to kaesong ) for pyongyang from the kic currently is directed toward the dprk military or nuclear program .

since the kic land formerly was a military base that had to be vacated , some arrangement may have been made to compensate the military for relinquishing a strategically important piece of ground .

even if the income from the kic does not go directly into military purposes , it may bolster funds for civilian purposes that had been cut because of the budgetary demands of the military .

the kim regime , moreover , uses scarce foreign exchange to bolster the loyalty of its inner circle of elites who use it to buy imported luxury goods .

u.n. security council resolutions 1718 ( adopted october 2006 ) and 1874 ( adopted june 2009 ) explicitly prohibit any member state from providing funds that go to support north korea's nuclear weapons program .

resolution 1718 states in section 8 ( d ) that all member states shall , in accordance with their respective legal processes , ensure that any funds , financial assets or economic resources are prevented from being made available by their nationals or by any persons or entities within their territories , to or for the benefit of persons or entities engaged in or providing support for the dprk's programs related to nuclear weapons , other weapons of mass destruction , and ballistic missile related programs .

as for tensions across the dmz , the kic already has played an important role in increasing the level of engagement between the dprk and south korea and in raising the priority of economic activity relative to security concerns .

even though the border between north korea and south korea is heavily guarded and crossings had been rare , the military on both sides have acquiesced to the daily traffic on the north - south highway to kaesong and the re - connection of two railways across the dmz ( along with limited tourist visits and family reunions ) .

in terms of the second u.s. national interest of economic well - being , the kic currently has little relevance , although it has some effect through u.s. trade and investment relations with south korea .

u.s. companies have no investments in kaesong and u.s. trade with north korea in 2009 was virtually non - existent .

south korea , however , is the seventh - largest trading partner of the united states , and the united states is south korea's third - largest trading partner .

if the six - party talks on the denuclearization of the korean peninsula were to re - start and progress far enough , the united states could re - establish diplomatic relations with the dprk , lift economic sanctions , and eventually grant that country normal trade relations ( most - favored nation ) status .

if so , trade with north korea could be done on the same basis as trade with most other countries of the world .

absent that development , south korea's request to treat products made in the kic as south korean in origin would seem to be the only way to bring the kic into the set of industrial locations open to normal or preferential trade with the united states .

meanwhile , south korean companies exporting kic products likely will continue to avoid the u.s. market rather than face economic sanctions and high u.s. tariffs .

this may give countries that include the kic in their ftas with south korea ( such as asean and efta ) a possible small diplomatic advantage over the united states in dealing with seoul .

moreover , south korea is likely to press the united states to change its kic policy .

this could be a source of future u.s. - rok tension even if the korus fta is passed .

the third u.s. national interest is projecting u.s. values such as a market - based economy , representative government , and nations adhering to world standards for working conditions , environmental regulation , and other humanitarian considerations .

in this respect , the kic potentially could play a significant role as a demonstration project to educate north koreans on the workings of a market - based economy .

the kic provides an opportunity for businesses to operate in north korea according to what may be higher labor and environmental standards than exist in the rest of the country and to educate north korean middle managers on how such standards work .

currently , the 40,000 north koreans employed in the kic are too few and the project too small to have a significant impact on the development of the north korean middle class ( a factor in the development of a more representative society ) , and the number of the elites in the dprk with an economic interest in the complex probably is still relatively small .

if the project continues to develop and the dprk opens other free - trade zones , however , something akin to the economic reforms in china or the economic transformation that is now occurring in vietnam could occur in north korea .

this could weaken the hold by pyongyang on the daily lives of citizens and bring the country more into the globalized world .

such economic liberalization also could reduce pressures on north korea to engage in illicit trade in order to cover its trade deficit and diminish the need for pyongyang to saber rattle in order to divert attention from its domestic problems .

in the short run , however , increased revenues strengthen the regime's hand and make it less vulnerable to outside pressure .

also , spillover effects will depend on north korea adding much more value to the production processes which it has yet to do .

finally , there is some question about the extent to which kic is commercially viable , or whether incentives and supports given to south korean firms are critical as opposed to marginal in their profit and loss calculations .

trade between the dprk and south korea tends to be government - based , in contrast to trade between china and north korea .

this may blunt the lessons learned by pyongyang .

the united states currently has a mixed policy with respect to the kic .

since south korea is a close ally of the united states , washington has been supportive of efforts by south korea to engage the north in inter - korean projects that benefit south korea .

on the other hand , the united states has been firm in predicating any economic or other concessions on actions by the dprk to curtail or eliminate its nuclear program .

major policy considerations and options for congress , given the above u.s. interests , include the following: in considering whether or not to approve the korus fta , congress may express its support or non - support of the exclusion of the kic from the fta as negotiated .

congress may also specify the conditions under which the kic can or can not be brought under the provisions of the proposed fta .

congressional disapproval of the proposed korus fta likely would have a large negative impact on prospects for the future of the kic with respect to the united states .

in the debate over the korus fta , congress may focus attention on labor and other conditions in the kic and encourage reforms .

if the korus fta is approved , congress may provide close oversight of the committee on outward processing zones .

since the united states already imposes a range of economic and financial sanctions on the dprk , the united states could either tighten or loosen them .

this could affect non - south korean businesses in determining whether to invest in the kic or to purchase products made there .

the united states also could tighten ( or loosen ) u.s. controls on the export of dual - use technology items to the kic .

the united states could impose restrictions on or provide inducements to u.s. business activity in kic .

the u.s. government could encourage other countries ( or groups of countries , such as the european union ) to ( or not to ) include the kic in their respective ftas with south korea .

if the dprk takes the necessary steps to halt its nuclear program as outlined in the six - party talks , support ( or oppose ) measures leading toward normal trading relations status for the dprk and the lifting of economic sanctions .

the u.s. government could place restrictions on south korean firms that do business in north korea .

appendix a .

list of manufacturers in the kaesong industrial comple .

