a variety of efforts to address climate change are currently underway or being developed on the international , national , and sub - national levels ( eg , individual state actions or regional partnerships ) .

these efforts cover a wide spectrum , from climate change research to mandatory greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions reduction programs .

in the 110 th congress , members have introduced a number of proposals that would establish a national ghg emissions reduction regime .

ghg emissions reduction programs , both ongoing and proposed , vary considerably .

the primary variables are scope and stringency: which emission sources are covered by the program and how much emission reduction is required .

these factors largely determine the impacts of an emissions reduction program , but other design details can have substantive effects .

one such design element is the treatment of offsets .

an offset is a measurable reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of ghg emissions from a source not covered by an emission reduction program .

if a cap - and - trade program includes offsets , regulated entities have the opportunity to purchase them to help meet compliance obligations .

offsets have generated debate and controversy in climate change policy .

if congress establishes a federal program to manage or reduce ghg emissions , whether and how to address offsets would likely be an important issue .

because most current and proposed programs allow offsets ( see tables at the end of the report ) , offset projects will probably play some part in an emissions reduction program .

the first section of this report provides an overview of offsets by discussing different types of offset projects and describing how the offsets would likely be used in an emission reduction program .

the next section discusses the supply of offsets that might be available in an emission trading program .

the subsequent sections examine the potential offset benefits and the potential concerns associated with offsets .

the final section offers considerations for congress .

in addition , the report includes a table comparing the role of offsets in selected emission reduction programs: proposals in the 111 th and 110 th congresses , u.s. state initiatives , and international programs .

offsets are sometimes described as project - based because they typically involve specific projects or activities whose primary objective is to reduce , avoid , or sequester emissions .

because offset projects can involve different ghgs , they are quantified and described with a standard form of measure: either metric tons of carbon - equivalents ( mtc - e ) or metric tons of co 2 - equivalents ( mtco 2 - e ) .

to be credible as offsets , the emissions reduced , avoided , or sequestered must be additional to business - as - usual ( i.e. , what would have happened anyway ) .

this concept is often called "additionality. .

if congress establishes a ghg emission cap - and - trade program , only sources not covered by the cap could generate offsets .

emission reductions from regulated sources ( eg , coal - fired power plants ) would either be required or spurred by the emissions cap .

in contrast , if agricultural operations were not covered under an emissions cap , a project that collects methane emissions from a manure digester would likely be an additional ghg emission reduction .

if offsets are allowed as a compliance option in an emissions trading program , eligible offset projects could generate "emission credits," which could be sold and then used by a regulated entity to comply with its reduction requirement .

this approach is part of the european union's ( eu ) emission trading scheme ( ets ) , which eu members use to help meet their kyoto protocol commitments .

under the eu ets , regulated entities can purchase emission credits that are created from approved offset projects .

regulated entities can then apply the credits towards their individual emission allowance obligations .

for example , a regulated entity may consider purchasing offsets if the offsets are less expensive than making direct , onsite emission reductions .

assuming the offset is legitimate — i.e. , a ton of carbon reduced , avoided , or sequestered through an offset project equates to a ton reduced at a regulated source — the objective to reduce ghg emissions is met .

from a global climate change perspective , it does not matter where or from what source the reduction occurs: the effect on the atmospheric concentration of ghgs would be the same .

offsets increase emission reduction opportunities .

when offsets are not allowed , incentives to reduce emissions or sequester carbon are limited to the covered sources , and there is little motivation to improve mitigation technologies for non - covered sources .

including offsets in a cap - and - trade program would expand these incentive .

the inclusion of offsets in a cap - and - trade program could potentially provide multiple benefits .

perhaps the primary benefit would be improved cost - effectiveness .

the ability to generate offsets , which could be sold as emission credits , would provide an incentive for non - regulated sources to reduce , avoid , or sequester emissions .

the inclusion of offsets could expand emission mitigation opportunities , likely reducing compliance costs for regulated entities .

many offset projects have the potential to offer environmental benefits , as well .

developing countries , in particular , may gain if the united states includes international offsets in a ghg emission program .

in addition , the offset market may create new economic opportunities and spur innovation as parties seek new methods of generating offsets .

these issues are discussed below in greater detail .

although offsets have the potential to provide benefits under an emissions trading program , several issues associated with offsets have generated concern and some controversy .

perhaps the primary concern regarding offsets is their integrity .

to be credible , an offset should equate to an emission reduction from a direct emission source , such as a smokestack or exhaust pipe .

this issue is critical , if offsets are to be used in an emissions trading program .

however , implementing this objective would likely present challenges .

this and other concerns are discussed below .

from a climate change perspective , the location of an emission activity does not matter: a ton of co 2 ( or its equivalent in another ghg ) reduced in the united states and a ton sequestered in another nation would have the same result on the atmospheric concentration of ghgs .

moreover , unlike many air pollutants — eg , acid rain precursors sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide , particulate matter , and mercury — a localized increase or decrease of co 2 emissions does not directly impart corresponding local or regional consequences .

this attribute of co 2 emissions , the primary ghg , allows for offset opportunities .

if allowed as part of an emissions reduction program , offsets have the potential to provide various benefits .

the ability to generate offsets may provide an incentive for non - regulated sources to reduce , avoid , or sequester emissions ( where these actions would not have occurred if not for the offset program ) ; expand emission mitigation opportunities , thus reducing compliance costs for regulated entities ; offer environmental co - benefits for certain projects ; support sustainable development in developing nations ; and create new economic opportunities and spur parties to seek new methods of generating offsets .

the main concern with offset projects is whether or not they produce their stated emission reductions .

to be credible , an offset ton should equate to a ton reduced from a direct emission source , such as a smokestack or exhaust pipe .

if offset projects generate emission credits for activities that would have occurred anyway ( i.e. , in the absence of the emission trading program ) , these credits would not satisfy the principle of additionality .

for many offset projects , determining additionality will likely pose a challenge .

other offset implementation issues — baseline estimation , permanence , accounting , monitoring — may present difficulties as well .

if illegitimate offset credits flow into the trading program , the cap would effectively expand and credible emissions reductions would be undermined .

the program would fail to meets its ultimate objective: overall ghg emissions reductions .

offset projects vary by the quantity of emission credits they could generate and the implementation complexity they present .

for instance , domestic landfill methane projects are comparatively simple to measure and verify , but offer a relatively small quantity of offsets .

in contrast , biological sequestration activities , particularly forestry projects , offer the most offset - generating potential , but many of these projects pose multiple implementation challenges .

this may create a tension for policymakers , who might want to include the offset projects that provide the most emission reduction opportunities , while minimizing the use of offset projects that pose more implementation complications .

addressing these challenges may require independent auditing and / or an appreciable level of oversight and administrative support from government agencies .

a report from the national commission on energy policy stated , "proposals that expect to achieve significant ( > 10 percent ) compliance through offsets in the near term will be obligated to create a substantial enforcement bureaucracy or risk an influx of illegitimate credits. .

if concerns of legitimacy can be resolved , the next question for policymakers may be whether the potential benefits provided by offsets would outweigh any potential harm .

one debate may involve whether including offsets would send the appropriate price signal to encourage the development and deployment of new technologies , such as carbon capture and storage .

policymakers may consider striking a balance between sending a strong price signal and reducing the costs of the emissions reduction program .

another debate may focus on the possible effects of offsets in the developing world ( assuming international offsets are allowed in a federal program ) .

on one hand , many of the offset projects may offer significant benefits — more efficient energy infrastructure , improved air quality — to local communities .

on the other hand , some maintain that if developed nations use all of the low - cost offsets in developing nations , the developing nations will face higher compliance costs if and when they establish ghg emission reduction requirements .

moreover , there is some concern that international offsets may serve as a disincentive for developing nations to enact laws or regulations limiting ghg emissions because they would lose funding from the offset market .

whether to include international offsets in a federal program raises other considerations as well .

the ability to use international offsets for compliance purposes would substantially expand emission reduction opportunities , compared to only allowing domestic offsets .

the more emission mitigation opportunities available , the lower the carbon price .

this highlights the debate over the balance between overall program costs and price signal for technological development .

if eligible in a u.s. program , international offsets from countries without binding reduction targets are likely to dominate in early decades because of their comparatively lower costs .

certain domestic economic sectors , primarily agriculture and forestry ( if eligible as offsets ) , would benefit if international offsets are excluded .

however , the inclusion of international offsets may benefit other u.s. economic sectors through the transfer of technology and services to support the projects .

moreover , as noted above , the more offset opportunities , the lower the overall costs of the cap - and - trade program .

