the united states plays an overarching security role in the southwest pacific , but it is not the only provider of security , nor the principal source of foreign aid , and has relied upon australia and new zealand to help promote development and maintain political stability in the region .

some observers have characterized the u.s. role in the pacific as one of "benign neglect. .

others have described it as transient , responding to changes in the global security environment — from the cold war to the war on terrorism — rather than the long - term development needs of the region .

key areas of u.s. engagement in the pacific include its territories ( guam , the northern mariana islands , and american samoa ) , the freely associated states ( marshall islands , micronesia , and palau ) , military bases on guam and kwajalein atoll ( marshall islands ) , and relatively limited aid and economic programs .

the united states has security , political , economic , and environmental interests in the pacific , including providing security for and promoting economic development in the freely associated states and u.s. territories , maintaining its military bases and installations , preventing transnational crime and the harboring of terrorist cells , and working with australia and new zealand to meet common regional goals .

the pacific islands can be divided into four spheres of influence: american , australian , new zealander , and french .

the american sphere extends through parts of micronesia , which includes u.s. territories and the freely associated states ( fas ) , as well as polynesia , including hawaii and american samoa .

australia's regional interests focus on the islands south of the equator , including the relatively large melanesian nations of papua new guinea ( png ) and the solomon islands as well as vanuatu .

new zealand has long - standing ties with the territory of tokelau , former colony samoa ( also known as western samoa ) , and two self - governing but "freely associated" states , the cook islands and niue .

new zealand also has a large native polynesian population of maoris as well as large numbers of other more recently arrived pacific islanders .

france continues to administer french polynesia and new caledonia .

australia , japan , new zealand , the united kingdom , and the united states are the major providers of development assistance .

in the past several years , china has asserted increasing "soft power" in the region — primarily diplomatic and economic influence .

other than australia and new zealand , the only regional states with defense forces are papua new guinea , tonga , and fiji .

the united states is obligated by treaty agreement to defend the freely associated states .

several other states rely upon australia and new zealand for their external security .

since world war ii , the united states has sought to prevent any potential adversary from gaining a strategic posture in the south pacific that could be used to challenge the united states .

in pursuit of this goal , the united states has administered territories and entered into compacts of free association in the micronesian area of the pacific and maintained military bases on guam and kwajalein atoll .

since the end of the cold war , the united states' security , political , and economic engagement in the micronesian area has remained strong .

however , compared to australian and new zealand policy - makers , u.s. officials have expressed less direct concern about issues affecting other areas in the region as well as the southwest pacific as a whole .

usaid withdrew its mission in the pacific in the mid - 1990s .

the u.s. government has both tacitly and openly supported australia's growing leadership role in the region .

the bush administration may have signaled a move toward greater or renewed involvement when it declared 2007 the "year of the pacific. .

some experts suggest that the united states should pay greater attention to or more directly engage the southwest pacific .

in some pacific island countries , weak political and legal institutions , corruption , civil unrest , and economic scarcity could lead to "failed states" and / or become springboards for terrorism .

australia's decision to lead a regional peacekeeping mission to the solomon islands in 2003 to help quell ethnic strife reportedly was part of a larger effort to prevent transnational crime and terrorism from taking root in the region .

in 2004 , a report by an australian public policy institution warned that papua new guinea was headed for possible social and economic collapse , and that the country's weak government , border controls , and policing had allowed transnational criminal groups to enter the country .

the study called for australia and other countries to increase foreign aid to papua new guinea .

some analysts argue that addressing these issues would not only help promote political stability and economic development but also enhance u.s. security interests and counter possible adverse effects of china's growing influence in the region .

according to some observers , unconditional and unregulated foreign aid and business investment from china and taiwan — provided without goals related to democracy , sustainable development , fair working conditions , and the environment — may exacerbate underlying political , economic , and social problems in the region .

the western pacific or pacific island region ( excluding australia and new zealand ) covers 20 million square miles of ocean and 117,000 square miles of land area ( a bit larger than cuba ) , 80% of which is papua new guinea .

about 8% of the land is arable .

the area has a population of nearly 8 million among the 14 independent states ( see appendix ) .

the total gdp of these islands ( in purchasing power parity terms ) is approximately $24 billion in 2006 ( about the same as panama ) .

with the exception of fiji , which has a significant ethnic indian minority , the pacific island nations are populated predominantly with indigenous peoples — polynesians , melanesians , and micronesians .

these three groups differ historically by geography , language , culture , and physical characteristics .

polynesia is located roughly in the southeastern part of the region while melanesia lies in the southwest , closer to australia .

micronesia straddles the north .

the pacific island nations ( pins ) were among the last to regain independence following world war ii .

countries that remain as territories include: guam , the mariana islands , and american samoa ( united states ) , new caledonia and french polynesia ( france ) , tokelau ( new zealand ) , and easter island ( chile ) .

the 14 sovereign states of the region are formal democracies ( mostly parliamentary ) with loosely organized political parties and some incorporation of traditional tribal practices .

since gaining independence , most pins have experienced relatively little political violence .

human rights are generally respected and elections reported largely as "free and fair. .

freedom house rates eight countries as "free" and four ( fiji , papua new guinea , the solomon islands , and tonga ) as "partly free. .

fiji's rating has dropped since the december 2006 military coup .

most of these countries , with the exception of fiji , papua new guinea , and the solomon islands , have limited natural and human resources upon which to launch sustained development .

many small pacific island nations are hindered by weak resource and skilled labor bases , lack of economies of scale , primitive infrastructure , poor government services , and remoteness from international markets ; some are threatened by rising sea levels , as well .

the asian development bank ( adb ) groups its member pacific island nations into three categories: 1 .

countries with abundant natural resource endowments , good economic development potential , and relatively large populations ( the melanesian nations of papua new guinea , vanuatu , and solomon islands ) .

2 .

countries that are relatively advanced with moderately good natural resource bases and modest growth prospects ( fiji , samoa , micronesia , tonga , and cook islands ) .

3 .

island atoll nations with few natural resources and little development potential ( marshall islands , nauru , tuvalu , and kiribati ) .

although development potential among the melanesian nations is good , poverty reduction and government capacity - building are pressing concerns .

the adb recommends that foreign governments and multilateral institutions help the atoll nations to establish trust funds as principal sources of government revenue .

the freely associated states ( fas ) , together with guam and the northern mariana islands , have been regarded as a security border of the united states , the defense of which is considered to be key to maintaining vital sea lanes .

in addition to being home to the reagan ballistic missile defense test site at kwajalein atoll in the marshall islands , the fas are located strategically between hawaii and guam .

according to some military experts , the fas provide a vast buffer zone for guam , which serves as the "forward military bridgehead" from which to launch u.s. operations along the asia - pacific security arc stretching from south korea and japan , through thailand and the philippines , to australia .

the u.s. military is building up forces on guam to help maintain deterrence and respond to possible security threats in the pacific .

during the cold war , the fas helped the united states to bolster its security posture in the pacific , particularly in the 1980s as the status of u.s. bases in the philippines came into doubt and as the soviet union took steps to increase its presence in the region .

during this time , palau was considered as a possible alternative base location to the philippines .

with the end of the cold war , u.s. attention to the pacific region , including foreign aid and public diplomacy , has waned .

however , u.s. economic and security commitments to the fas have been maintained through the compact of free association .

the people's republic of china ( prc ) has become a growing force in the southwest pacific as a result , some argue , of a political vacuum created by u.s. neglect .

in order to garner political and economic influence in relation to taiwan , the united states , and u.s. allies as well as to access raw materials , china has expanded its diplomatic and commercial presence in the region .

by some accounts , the prc has become the third - largest source of foreign aid to the south pacific , which it largely provides without the kinds of conditions or performance criteria — some say heavy - handedness — that have engendered resentment among some pacific island countries toward their major benefactor , australia .

although china's influence is largely limited to diplomatic and economic "soft power," some analysts worry about the prc's long - term intentions .

the southwest pacific is in australia's and new zealand's immediate neighborhood and is of vital importance to these two nations .

many american strategic and regional analysts and practitioners familiar with australia's and new zealand's relationship with the south pacific have generally been comfortable relying on australia and new zealand to take the lead in promoting peace , stability , development , and other western interests in the region .

the two oceanic nations have provided development aid , helped to mediate regional conflict , sent peacekeeping forces to trouble spots , and responded quickly to natural disasters .

they share many u.s. strategic concerns while taking care to cultivate good relationships with china .

deputy assistant secretary of state glyn davies stated , "the bedrock of our relations in the region remains , of course , our treaty alliance with australia .

we simply have no more steadfast partner in the region and in the world today. .

australia has a long standing concern over what many have viewed as an arc of instability which spans the region to the north of australia , from the southwest pacific through archipelagic southeast asia .

while there has been some improvement , such as in aceh in indonesia , continuing instability and the potential for failed states continues in places such as east timor , west papua , bougainville in papua new guinea , and the solomon islands .

australia has supported pacific island countries' sustainable development through both bilateral and regional programs .

australian defense cooperation has sought to complement this assistance by contributing to pacific island countries' "efficient and sustainable use of maritime resources and enhancing regional security. .

australia has worked closely with papua new guinea to develop law and order , border security , and economic management capacity .

since 2001 , canberra has played a more assertive role in the region out of a desire to prevent further destabilization that could foster international crime or terrorist activity .

australian prime minister john howard has stated: "it is in australia's interests and in the interests of our pacific island neighbors to strive for a region that is economically viable , politically stable and free from crime .

the financial costs and potential threats to australia from failing states , including transnational crime and international terrorism , would be immense. .

australia has provided patrol boats and other support to pacific island nations to assist them in monitoring their maritime resources .

in 2006 , canberra sent troops and police officers to east timor , the solomon islands , and tonga to promote stability .

its presence in east timor and the solomons appears to be evolving into longstanding commitments .

australia has also played an increasingly active role in support of the pacific islands forum , while an australian , greg urwin , serves as secretary general of the pacific islands forum .

australia arguably is america's closest ally in the asia - pacific region , and under the leadership of prime minister john howard has been a staunch supporter of the bush administration's war against terror .

since the fall of singapore during world war ii , australia increasingly has looked to the united states as its key alliance partner .

this alliance relationship was codified in the australia , new zealand , united states ( anzus ) alliance of 1951 .

australians fought alongside americans in wwi , wwii , korea , and vietnam .

the australian government invoked the anzus alliance after the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 in the united states and sent troops to fight in afghanistan and iraq .

new zealand's anti - nuclear policies in the 1980s led the united states to suspend its anzus defense obligations to new zealand , although australia and new zealand maintain close military ties .

the anzus alliance has continued to function along bilateral lines between the united states and australia .

the australia - united states ministerial ( ausmin ) meeting has been a key institutional aspect of the relationship .

the australia - u.s. free trade agreement ( ausfta ) came into force in january 2005 .

it liberalized an already productive bilateral trade and investment relationship and established working groups to explore further trade reform .

australian attitudes towards china have moderated somewhat in recent years as a result of a rapid expansion in trade between the two countries .

this growing trade has evolved to a point where china is australia's second largest trading partner behind the united states .

australian exports to china grew by 39% in 2005-2006 to over $14 billion .

australia and china also concluded the 8 th round of free trade agreement negotiations in march 2007 .

while the united states remains australia's key strategic partner , china has become a key economic partner .

some analysts point to a potential tension in this dynamic should relations between the united states and china deteriorate .

as a result , australia does not wish to see rising tension between the u.s. and china nor is it likely to support a policy of containment of china .

that said , australia would likely be uneasy with a significant expansion of chinese influence , particularly diplomatic or defense related , in the south pacific , a region that it regards as within its area of immediate strategic interest .

deputy assistant secretary of state glyn davies described new zealand as a "key partner" in the pacific , stating in a march 2007 speech that "we are seeking greater cooperation with new zealand in a number of areas in which it can offer significant contributions , including non - proliferation , counter terrorism , humanitarian and disaster relief and peacekeeping. .

though a small country of approximately 4 million , new zealand is a key actor in the south pacific .

new zealand has particularly close ties with tokelau , niue , the cook islands , samoa , and tonga .

tokelau , administered by new zealand since 1926 , has moved towards greater political autonomy. .

new zealand's polynesian maori community ( 15% of the total population ) , as well as its pacific islander community ( 6.5% ) , have helped to define new zealand as a pacific nation .

for this reason , and because of its reputation as an honest broker , it is viewed as a natural regional partner by many in the pacific .

new zealand's key policy issues in the pacific include diplomatic ties , trade relations , security promotion , disaster assistance , and shared environmental concerns .

new zealand imposed sanctions against fiji in the wake of the december 5 , 2006 coup in an effort to foster the return of democracy .

defense ties , sporting links , and intergovernmental development assistance have been curtailed , although restrictions were not imposed upon trade , investment , or tourism .

new zealand has expressed concern that the situation in fiji could have a negative impact on regional stability .

new zealand exports to the pacific total over $700 million annually .

new zealand provides largely unrestricted access for imports from pacific countries under the south pacific regional trade and economic cooperation agreement ( sparteca ) .

other arrangements , such as the pacific agreement on closer economic relations ( pacer ) and the pacific island countries trade agreement ( picta ) also promote regional trade .

new zealand has worked to promote stability in bougainville ( png ) , east timor , the solomon islands , fiji , and tonga .

the biketawa declaration of 2000 provides a regional security framework for collective action in times of crisis .

there is a regional view that "ethnic tensions , inequalities of wealth , lack of good governance , land disputes and erosion of cultural values" are the key underlying causes of conflict in the region .

new zealand provides disaster assistance to pacific island states with australia and france through the franz arrangement reached in 1992 to coordinate disaster assistance efforts between the three states .

new zealand helps safeguard and manage the southwest pacific's fisheries and has taken a leading role on climate change and environmental concerns in the region .

new zealand has agreed to accept tuvalu's entire population should rising sea levels inundate the island , which lies within five meters above water .

the government of tuvalu expects this will happen in the next 50 years .

new zealand opposes the shipment of nuclear material through the region and has sought to reduce whaling through the establishment of a south pacific whale sanctuary and the convention on migratory species .

the united states and new zealand have worked together to address climate change issues through the u.s. - new zealand bilateral climate change partnership , established in 2002 .

china is new zealand's fourth largest export market with close to $1.3 billion in trade .

this trade accounts for 5.6% of new zealand exports .

new zealand and china initiated free trade agreement negotiations in 2004 .

the trade relationship has developed alongside an increasing number of high level exchanges between leaders of the two nations .

prc premier wen jiabao held discussions with new zealand foreign minister winston peters in beijing in may 2007 during which the two leaders pledged to engage the pacific in a cooperative manner. .

the legacy of the period of french colonization in the pacific can be seen today in the french administration of french polynesia and new caledonia .

french polynesia consists of some 118 islands grouped into five archipelagos with a population of over 270,000 .

french and tahitian are the official languages .

the capital of this overseas territory of france is papeete on tahiti .

french polynesia has an approximate per capita gnp of $17,500 .

the territory's statute of autonomy of 1984 led to enhanced self government which was extended in 2004 with a new autonomy statute .

the president is elected by the assembly of french polynesia .

there are centrist , pro - autonomy , and pro - independence political parties .

france ended nuclear testing in french polynesia in 1996 which had made it unpopular in the region .

new caledonia's population of some 230,000 is largely comprised of native melanesians ( known as kanaks ) and descendants of french settlers and convicts .

france annexed the islands in 1853 and established a penal colony there , which closed in 1896 .

there were two major kanak uprisings against the encroachment of french settlers on kanak lands in 1878 and 1917 .

new caledonia has great mineral wealth with deposits of nickel , cobalt , chrome , and gold .

new caledonia is the world's third largest producer of nickel with an estimated one quarter of world nickel reserves .

pro - independence sentiment coalesced again in the 1970s in response to global decolonization and by 1984 , a kanak national socialist liberation front ( flnks ) was established .

violence between kanaks and french settlers , which flared between 1984 and 1988 , was addressed by the 1988 matignon accords .

the agreements allowed greater autonomy for new caledonia as well as recognized the need to address the disparities between the french and kanak communities .

the noumea accord of 1998 committed france to transfer additional responsibilities to new caledonia's government but retained for france responsibility for defense , justice , public order , and some external affairs .

a future vote to be held between 2014 and 2018 will determine if new caledonia will become a fully independent nation or remain associated with france .

france's position in the south pacific has improved greatly as the result of its moves to allow the process of decolonization to proceed and to stop nuclear testing in the region .

france's relations with new zealand and other nations of the south pacific reached a low point when french agents sank the green peace ship rainbow warrior in auckland harbour in 1985 .

the ship had been making preparations for a protest voyage to mururoa atoll in french polynesia where france conducted nuclear tests .

france's more recent intent to have better relations with new zealand , australia , and other south pacific states was demonstrated by the positive atmosphere surrounding the second france - oceania summit held in paris in july 2006 .

the pacific community , originally known as the south pacific commission , was established in 1948 by the governments of australia , france , the netherlands , new zealand , the united kingdom , and the united states .

the secretariat of the pacific community ( spc ) provides technical assistance and advisory service on behalf of the 26 members of the pacific community .

the spc has three administrative divisions which handle land , marine , and social resources and provide information and expertise to member states .

the pacific islands forum , known as the south pacific forum until 2000 , has a more limited membership than the pacific community but a higher international political profile .

the south pacific forum was established by the independent and self governing states of the region in 1971 .

the group reaches decisions by consensus and since 1989 has held dialogue sessions after its forum meetings .

the pacific islands forum was critical of france's nuclear testing in the mid - 1990s and supported the south pacific nuclear free zone treaty ( spnfz ) , which is also known as the treaty of rarotonga .

the treaty prohibits nuclear weapons and nuclear tests in the south pacific .

the activities of the forum are handled by the pacific islands forum secretariat .

the 37 th forum communique of 2006 highlighted such issues as regional fisheries , deep sea bottom trawling , climate variability and sea level rise , sustainable development , and the regional assistance mission to the solomon islands .

in recent years the forum has increasingly focused on regional trade , good governance , and security .

