in 2007 , the bush administration requested about $310 million in the fy2008 defense budget to begin the design , construction , and deployment of a ground - based midcourse defense ( gmd ) element of the ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) in europe .

this program followed several years of discussions between the united states and poland and the czech republic .

the proposed system would have included 10 silo - based interceptor missiles to be deployed in poland , a fixed radar installation in the czech republic , and another transportable radar to be deployed in a country closer to iran ( which was never publicly identified ) .

deployment of the gmd european capability was scheduled to be completed by 2013 at an official estimated cost of at least $4 billion ( including fielding and operation and support ) .

the bush proposal raised a number of issues within europe and encountered strong opposition in russia .

the united states signed agreements with poland and czech republic in summer 2008 .

polish and czech ratification of those agreements stalled for various reasons .

on september 17 , 2009 , the obama administration announced it would cancel the bush administration's proposed european 3 rd site .

instead , defense secretary gates announced u.s. plans to develop and deploy a regional bmd capability that could be surged on relatively short notice during crises or as the situation may demand called the paa ( phased adaptive approach ) .

gates argued this new capability , based initially on expanding existing bmd sensors , communication systems , and interceptors into europe , would be more responsive and adaptable to the growing threat from short - and medium - range iranian ballistic missiles .

this capability would continue to evolve and expand over the next decade .

eventually , this regional bmd capability could cover all of europe , according to secretary gates , and defend against medium and prospective long - range iranian ballistic missiles .

more specifically , the obama administration has described the paa in four phases: phase 1 ( 2011 timeframe ) : use existing / maturing bmd systems against short - and medium - range iranian ballistic missile threats .

sea - based and other existing bmd capabilities will be used as necessary to defend parts of southern europe , and a forward - based sensor would be deployed to europe .

phase 2 ( 2015 timeframe ) : deploy enhanced bmd capabilities against short - and medium - range iranian ballistic missile threats .

this would include advanced sensors and an improved version of the aegis bmd ( sm - 3 ib interceptor ) , including a combination of sea - and land - based configurations .

phase 3 ( 2018 timeframe ) : deploy improved area coverage in europe against medium - and intermediate - range iranian ballistic missile threats .

this would include more capable aegis bmd interceptors ( sm - 3 iia ) in a combination of sea - and land - based configurations .

phase 4 ( 2020 timeframe ) : deploy bmd capabilities against potential iranian icbm ( intercontinental ballistic missile ) threats .

if an iranian icbm threat emerges , more advanced aegis bmd capabilities might be deployed ( sm - 3 iib ) to provide some capability against a regional icbm threat .

once proven and tested , this capability could be made available for deployment to nato europe .

secretary gates argued this new direction is needed to address growing concerns over the pace and direction of iranian short - and medium - range ballistic missile proliferation in a manner that can be deployed more quickly and effectively than the bush - proposed european site .

president obama pointed out that his decision came after extensive consultations with u.s. allies in 2009 .

some critics argued the obama administration's decision was meant to appease russia or garner russian support for other issues because of its strong opposition to the bush plan .

they also said that the obama administration harmed relations with poland and the czech republic by cancelling agreements reached with those two countries .

some critics also charged that the obama administration was ignoring the growing nuclear and ballistic missile threat from iran .

the response throughout europe appears to have been largely positive .

the leaders of germany , france , the uk , austria , and slovakia , for example , all praised the policy reversal .

nato secretary general anders fogh rasmussen stated that the decision was a "positive step" that would "not weaken the defense of any ally. .

the alliance chief suggested further that a joint nato - u.s. - russia missile defense system be taken into consideration .

reaction in poland and the czech republic was mixed .

although polish and czech leaders were not publically critical of the obama administration's announcement , some polish tabloids spoke of "betrayal," while former polish president lech walesa and former czech prime minister mirek topolanek criticized the obama administration's policy toward the region .

polish prime minister donald tusk claimed that the shift "should not affect the security of poland" and would not undermine relations with the united states .

foreign minister radek sikorski stated that , even though the interceptors would not be emplaced in poland , the united states would still transfer a patriot air - and missile defense battery with a complement of about 100 u.s. troops , as had been promised under an agreement the two governments signed in august 2008 .

in addition , the obama administration left open the door to the possibility of basing missile defense facilities on czech and polish soil in the future — possibly by date 2015 .

the polish government subsequently stated its willingness to host more advanced sm - 3 ( standard missile 3 ) missile defenses .

czech president vaclav klaus pronounced himself unsurprised by the announcement , and assured that he was "100 percent convinced that this decision ... does not signal a cooling of relations" between the two countries .

however , a group of ruling party senators expressed concern over the "somersault in the u.s. foreign policy. .

in addition , agence france presse reported that czech foreign minister jan kohout "called for the united states to 'fill the empty space' left by the scrapped missile plan 'with concrete projects.' .

some polish and czech elected officials are likely displeased with the decision because they believe that they needlessly expended considerable political capital in supporting the bush administration plan — which had significant popular opposition in both countries .

u.s. analysts , however , counter that the czechs and poles have dragged their heels on agreeing to host the facilities .

although formal negotiations over the interceptor and radar bases began in january 2007 , and discussions were initiated years before , final agreements were not struck until july and august of 2008 , and parliamentary ratification of the accords — a u.s. congressional precondition for site construction and deployment of the missile defense complexes — was still pending at the time of the plan's cancellation .

in russia , president dmitry medvedev initially called the decision "a responsible move," adding that "we value the responsible approach of the u.s. president to our agreement .

i am ready to continue our dialogue. .

however , moscow eventually found reason to object to the obama administration's paa , and sought unsuccessfully to oppose the plan as a bargaining chip in arms treaty negotiations with the united states .

most of this report that follows is designed to retain background information and analysis of the bush - proposed european bmd initiative up to the obama administration's decision to cancel it .

this report will be available primarily for historical purposes .

it will not be updated .

when it first requested funding in 2007 , the bush administration argued that the proposed gmd european capability would help defend u.s. forces stationed in europe , u.s. friends and allies in the region , as well as to defend the united states against long - range ballistic missile threats from iran .

in its last budget request for fy2009 , the bush administration requested $712 million for development , fielding , and military construction of the european gmd element .

some $618 million was available from the fy2009 defense budget for the european 3 rd site , had polish and czech ratification gone forward .

in its first budget request , the obama administration proposed an additional $50.5 million for fy2010 , before announcing its decision to cancel the program in september 2009 .

the prospect of a fixed , silo - based gmd capability based in europe raised a number of significant international security and foreign policy questions .

central to the debate for many was how the proposed u.s. system might affect u.s. - european - russian relations .

in fy2008 , congress eliminated funding to start construction of the european site pending final approval of international agreements with poland and the czech republic and receipt of an independent study of alternative missile defense options for europe .

congress largely supported the administration's request for fy2009 , but restricted funding for site construction until after the polish and czech parliaments ratified the agreements reached with the bush administration .

congress continued to withhold funding for deployment of the ground - based interceptor missiles themselves until after the secretary of defense certified to congress that those interceptor missiles would work effectively .

congress also supported a relatively small request for the european 3 rd site in fy2010 .

the bush administration argued that north korea and iran constituted major strategic threats .

north korea claims to have tested a nuclear device and has a ballistic missile and satellite launch program .

the bush administration argued that iran continued to acquire and develop ballistic missiles of various ranges .

iran successfully launched a small satellite into orbit for the first time in early february 2009 .

the bush administration argued that iran had an active nuclear weapons development program , but in november 2007 , a u.s. national intelligence estimate ( nie ) stated that "in fall 2003 , tehran halted its nuclear weapons program," and that iran is keeping open the option to develop nuclear weapons at some point .

the iranian nuclear weapons program reportedly also included developing a warhead that could fit atop an iranian ballistic missile .

the bush administration regarded both countries as unpredictable and dangerous , and did not believe they could be constrained by traditional forms of military deterrence , diplomacy , or arms control .

on a trip to attend a meeting of nato foreign ministers in early december 2007 , secretary of state rice told reporters: "i don't see that the nie changes the course that we're on" to deploy a european missile defense system .

accompanying her on the trip , undersecretary of state john rood , lead u.s. negotiator for the european missile defense talks , added: "the missile threat from iran continues to progress and to cause us to be very concerned.... missile defense would be useful regardless of what kind of payload , whether that be conventional , chemical , biological , or nuclear. .

according to long - standing unclassified u.s. intelligence assessments , iran may be able to test an icbm ( intercontinental ballistic missile ) or long - range ballistic missile capability by 2015 if it receives significant foreign assistance , such as from russia or china .

many in congress and elsewhere share this specific assessment , or that the potential threat may not emerge by 2015 but is sufficiently worrisome to address it now .

many therefore believe it was prudent to move forward with plans to deploy a long - range missile defense system in europe to defend u.s. forward deployed forces in europe , friends and allies , and the united states against long - range iranian ballistic missile threats .

some in the larger international security policy and ballistic missile proliferation community argue that evidence of an iranian icbm program is scant and unpersuasive .

additionally , the iranian government reports ( which cannot be verified ) that iran only has a limited missile capability with a range of about 1,200 miles and that it has stopped development of icbm range missiles .

nonetheless , iran continues to test ballistic missiles , some of which are capable of reaching as far as nato's southern flank ( i.e. , turkey ) .

also , iran successfully tested a short - range ballistic missile using solid rocket motors , a development many see as indicative of iran's interest in building longer range ballistic missiles .

this , and other developments , such as iran's demonstrated ability to flight test a number of different ballistic missiles at the same time , was cited by the obama administration as part of the reason to address such iranian threats with current bmd capabilities sooner than that of the bush administration .

although some europeans have expressed concern about iran's suspected nuclear weapons program , some u.s. friends and allies in europe continue to question assessments of iran's potential icbm threat or of iran's threat to europe itself .

hence , some questioned the need for a european 3 rd site .

in december 2008 , the european council of the european union approved a two - year study of ballistic missile proliferation trends .

in congressional testimony in 2009 , mda director gen. o'reilly testified that mda's projections of the threat from long - range ballistic missiles from rogue nations was off "by a factor of 10-20. .

secretary gates and the obama administration determined that iran in recent years had shifted to greater emphasis on developing , deploying , and testing short - and medium - range ballistic missiles in ways that made less sense to focus on deploying only 10 fixed , long - range interceptors in central europe .

iran had demonstrated in the past couple years the ability to simultaneous test launch a number of short - range ballistic missiles , and had not made progress on developing a long - range ballistic missile .

this apparently lead secretary gates and the pentagon to conclude the need to expand current bmd capabilities into southern europe to deal with the scope of the current iranian ballistic missile threat , and develop a more flexible plan for a potential long - range iranian threat over the next decade .

the u.s. department of defense began deploying long - range missile interceptors in alaska and california in late 2004 to address long - range missile threats , primarily from north korea .

currently , the u.s. gmd element of the integrated ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) includes more than two dozen silo - based interceptors in alaska and several in california .

as part of the bmds capability , the united states also has a number of ground - based radars in operation around the world , space - based assets supporting the bmds mission , command and control networks throughout the united states and the pacific , as well as ground - mobile and sea - based systems for shorter - range bmd .

what remained necessary as part of the global bmds , according to the bush administration , was an ability in the european theater to defend against intermediate - to - long - range ballistic missiles launched from iran .

the department of defense ( dod ) argued it was important to u.s. national security interests to deploy a gmd capability in europe to optimize defensive coverage of the united states and europe against potential threats both into europe and against the united states .

there have not been a large number of intercept flight tests of the deployed gmd element , and the flight test record has been mixed .

nonetheless , the bush administration and many u.s. military leaders expressed confidence in the deployed system .

however , most agree there is the need for further operational testing .

some observers continue to question how much confidence there should be in the system's potential operational or combat effectiveness based on the types of tests conducted and the test results to date .

the current gmd program began flight tests in 2002 .

this effort was built on several earlier long - range bmd programs with decidedly mixed results themselves since the early 1980s .

since 2002 , a number of gmd intercept flight tests have taken place with mixed results .

in each of these tests , most all other flight test objectives were met .

some have argued the flight test results have demonstrated significant improvement in the system capabilities , but other technical experts have noted these tests are scripted to achieve those successes .

in 2002 , the gmd moved to the operational booster and interceptor .

the interceptor system flew two developmental tests in 2003 and 2004 , and the gmd element of the bmds was deployed in late 2004 in alaska and california .

two planned intercept flight tests of the new configuration for december 2004 and february 2005 were not successful .

after technical review , the interceptor successfully demonstrated a booster fly - out in 2005 .

in september 2006 , a successful flight test exercise of the gmd element as deployed took place .

 ( although a missile intercept was not planned as the primary objective of this data collection test , an intercept opportunity occurred and the target warhead was successfully intercepted. ) .

additional intercept flight tests of the deployed element whose primary objectives were intercepts of long - range ballistic missile targets were originally scheduled for later in 2006 , but then subsequently postponed .

then a may 2007 intercept test was scrubbed when the target missile failed to launch as planned .

a follow - on attempt scheduled for summer 2007 was completed successfully on september 29 , 2007 .

mda reported a successful intercept in december 2008 , but some were critical of this assessment as the test objective was for the intercept to occur amidst a field of decoys , which decoys failed to deploy from the test target .

a january 2010 test against a representative long - range iranian ballistic missile reportedly failed because of the sea - based x - band radar .

supporters and many military officials express confidence in the deployed system , but others continue to question the system's potential effectiveness based on the mixed intercept flight test record .

most observers agreed , however , that additional , successful flight testing remain necessary .

supporters add that a significant number of non - flight tests and activities are conducted that demonstrate with high confidence the ability of the gmd element to perform its intended mission .

what would the european element of the bmds have looked like ? .

the bush proposal was to deploy up to 10 ground - based interceptors ( gbi ) in silos at a former military base in poland .

it should be noted that the proposed gbi for the european gmd site were not identical to the gbis deployed now in alaska and california .

although there is significant commonality of hardware , there are some differences .

for example , the european gbi would consist of two rocket stages in contrast to the three - stage gbi deployed today .

this particular two - stage configuration was never tested and was a basis for additional questions about the proposed system's effectiveness .

proponents of the system would argue that the two - stage version is fundamentally the same as the three - stage system , however .

in europe , the gbi reportedly would not need the third stage to achieve the range needed to intercept its intended target .

this issue raised the question for some observers at the time as to whether other u.s. systems designed for shorter or medium - range ballistic missile threats , such as patriot , thaad ( terminal high altitude area defense ) , or aegis ( sea - based bmd ) might be more appropriate for addressing the current and prospective iranian ballistic missile threat to europe .

dod's missile defense agency ( mda ) argued during the tenure of the bush administration that those systems would not have been adequate to counter prospective iranian ballistic missile threats over the mid - term and longer .

deployment of the silos and interceptors in poland was scheduled to begin in 2011 with completion in 2013 .

this timeline was not certain , however , given the delay in ratifying the bmd agreement .

the interceptors were to have been deployed at redzikowo , near the town of slopsk in northern poland .

the field of the 10 interceptors itself would likely have comprised an area somewhat larger than a football field .

the area of supporting infrastructure was likely to be similar to a small military installation .

in addition , a u.s. x - band radar ( a narrow - beam , midcourse tracking radar ) , that was being used in the pacific missile test range , would have been refurbished and transported to a fixed site at a military training base in the czech republic .

the site currently identified was in the heavily forested brdy military training area , about 150 kilometers southwest of prague .

the x - band radar with its large , ball - shaped radome ( radar dome ) is several stories in height .

a second , transportable forward acquisition radar would have to have been deployed in a country never identified , but closer to iran .

some european press accounts once mentioned the caucasus region , but the bush administration never publicly indicated where this radar might be located .

it remains uncertain how far discussions with any country may have advanced to deploy this radar .

additionally , the proposed gmd european capability would have included a communications network and support infrastructure ( eg , power generation , security and force protection systems , etc. ) .

a few hundred u.s. personnel would have been stationed there to secure and operate both the interceptor and radar sites .

the bush administration intended for the united states to have full command authority over the system .

the initial request in fy2008 included $310.4 million for the proposed european gmd across several program elements of the missile defense agency ( mda ) budget .

the bush administration estimated the costs for the european site were about $4 billion ( fy2007-fy2013 ) , including operation and support costs through 2013 .

although relatively small in u.s. defense budget terms , the fy2008 request represented a significant commitment to the proposed european system .

the fy2009 request was for $712 million , most of which remained unspent because the agreements were not ratified in poland and the czech republic .

the obama administration's fy2010 request was for $50.5 million , taking into account unspent appropriations from previous years that awaited polish and czech ratification .

in 2007 , both the house and senate armed services committees asked for studies of alternatives to the administration's proposed european gmd deployment ( see " congressional actions " ) .

this classified review was provided to congress in august 2008 .

some , such as representative ellen tauscher , suggested the administration consider instead a combination of sea - based ( aegis sm - 3 ) and land - based systems ( pac - 3 , thaad ) .

then mda director general henry obering argued that most of the current aegis fleet would be required to defend europe , and that the cost would be considerably greater than the current bush administration proposal .

mda's assessments , however , assumed the need for 24 / 7 coverage .

other assessments based on deployment on a contingency basis or crisis reduced significantly the estimated cost of such alternatives .

in may 2009 , the u.s. - based eastwest institute released a report critical of the ability of the european 3 rd site to defeat iranian ballistic missile threats .

the report concluded that the threat from iran was not imminent and that the proposed european 3 rd site would not be effective against an iranian ballistic missile threat .

most would agree , however that this report sparked a highly constructive technical debate in open - source literature about collaboration between iranian and north korean ballistic missile programs .

similarly , a fact sheet prepared by staff of the house armed service committee said the proposed european 3 rd site would not provide any capability against iran's current ballistic missile inventory .

missile defense supporters took strong issue with the report's conclusions .

in 2002 the bush administration began informal talks with the governments of poland and the czech republic over the possibility of establishing missile defense facilities on their territory .

discussion of a more concrete plan — placing radar in the czech republic and interceptor launchers in poland — was reported in the summer of 2006 .

the issue was increasingly debated in both countries .

in january 2007 , the u.s. government requested that formal negotiations begin .

agreements were struck with both countries — the czech republic in spring 2008 and poland in summer 2009 .

neither country ratified their agreements before the obama administration cancelled the program .

u.s. proponents of the missile defense program note that the bases being planned would be part of a limited defensive system , not an offensive one .

the missiles would not have explosive payloads , and would be launched only in the event that the united states or its friends or allies in europe were under actual attack .

critics responded that europe did not currently face a significant threat from iran or its potential surrogates , but that polish and czech participation in the european gmd element would have created such a threat .

if american gmd facilities were installed , they argued , both countries would likely have been targeted by terrorists , as well as by missiles from rogue states — and possibly from russia — in the event of a future confrontation .

the obama administration requested $50.5 million for the european 3 rd site .

this is in addition to some $618 million that remained available from fy2009 appropriations , pending polish and czech ratification of the missile defense agreements reached with the united states .

in june 2009 , the house armed services committee marked up h.r .

2647 , the fy2010 national defense authorization act .

the committee reserves $343.1 million from funds available for the mda in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 to develop missile defenses in europe for one of two purposes: ( 1 ) either the secretary of defense continue with research , development , test and evaluation of the proposed radar and interceptor site in poland and the czech republic pending czech and polish ratification , and certification by the secretary of defense that the proposed interceptors will be operationally effective , or ( 2 ) the secretary may pursue development , testing , procurement and deployment of an alternative integrated missile defense system to protect europe from threats posed by all types of ballistic missiles .

this option is conditional on certification from the secretary of defense that the alternative is consistent with nato efforts to address ballistic missile defense threats , that any alternative addresses ballistic missile threats to europe in a prioritized manner that includes the level of imminence of the threat and level of risk , and that any alternative be cost - effective , technically reliable and operationally available in protecting europe and the united states .

the house approved the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

2647 ) on june 25 , 2009 , including the above provision on the european 3 rd site .

the senate armed services committee marked up its version of the defense authorization bill in july 2009 ( s. 1390 ) .

it included $50 million to fund the european 3 rd site as requested .

the senate approved this amount in passing s. 1390 on july 23 , 2009 .

the fy2010 defense authorization bill was signed into law ( p.l .

111-84 ) in october 2009 .

it included the $50.5 million requested by the obama administration for the european site .

the house appropriations committee provided $50.5 million as requested in the defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3326 ) , and rescinded $114.7 million previously appropriated for the european site .

on july 30 , the house passed its version of the defense appropriations bill , which included the committee recommendations .

the senate appropriations committee provided $50.5 million for the european bmd program in its version of h.r .

3326 , which was approved on september 10 , 2009 .

the fy2010 defense appropriations bill was signed into law ( p.l .

111-118 ) in december 2009 after president obama's announced change to the bush proposed european site .

in a "joint explanatory statement" by house and senate negotiators who drafted the final language of the bill , the missile defense agency ( mda ) was encouraged to spend at least $50 million in fy2010 funds to continue to develop the 2-stage gbi , and directed dod to submit a plan to congress for developing that gbi and how mda would use that development to modernize the gmd system deployed in alaska and california .

for fy2009 , the bush administration requested $712 million for the european gmd element .

the reported cost of the european element is $4 billion ( fy2008-fy2013 ) , according to the administration , which includes fielding and operation and support costs .

on may 14 , 2008 , the house armed services committee approved its version of the fy2009 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

5658 ) .

the committee provided $341 million for the proposed european gmd site , reducing the total by $371 million ( $231 million in r&d funding and $140 million in military construction ) .

the committee expressed concerns about the slower - than - expected pace of the iranian long - range missile program , the effectiveness of the gmd system based on program testing results , the ability to spend the proposed funds , and the lack of signed and ratified agreements with poland and the czech republic .

on april 30 , 2008 , the senate armed services committee approved its version of the fy2009 defense authorization bill ( s. 3001 ) .

the committee provided full funding for the european gmd element , but noted that certain conditions have to be met before those funds could be expended: ( 1 ) military construction funds cannot be spent until the european governments give final approval ( including parliamentary approval ) of any deployment agreement , and 45 days have elapsed after congress has received a required report that provides an independent analysis of the proposed european site and alternatives , and ( 2 ) acquisition and deployment funds , other than for long - lead procurement , cannot be expended until the secretary of defense ( with input from the dir. , operational test and operations ) certifies to congress that the proposed interceptor has demonstrated a high probability of accomplishing its mission in an operationally effective manner .

president bush signed a continuing resolution into law on september 30 , 2008 ( p.l .

110-329 ) , which incorporated defense appropriations and authorizing language for fy2009 .

according to a press release from the senate appropriations committee dated september 24 , 2008 , congress provided $467 million for the european bmd sites and development and testing of the two - stage interceptor .

according to authorizing language , funding for the czech radar and site will then be available only after the czech parliament has ratified the basing agreement reached with the united states and a status of forces agreement ( sofa ) to allow for such deployment and stationing of u.s. troops is in place .

funding for the polish interceptor site will only be available after both the czech and polish parliaments ratify the agreements reached with the united states , and a sofa with poland is also in place for the site .

additionally , deployment of operational gbis is prohibited until after the secretary of defense ( after receiving the views of the director of operational test and evaluation ) submits to congress a report certifying that the proposed interceptor to be deployed "has demonstrated , through successful , operationally realistic flight testing , a high probability of working in an operationally effective manner and the ability to accomplish the mission. .

in its report on the fy2008 defense authorization bill , the house armed services committee cited its concern from last year ( fy2007 ) that investment in the european bmd site was premature .

in part , the committee's concerns focus on the need to complete scheduled integrated end - to - end testing of the system now deployed in alaska and california .

additionally , the committee notes its reluctance to fund the european site without formal agreements with poland and the czech republic and without knowing the terms under which the estimated $4 billion program costs would be expended .

therefore , the committee recommended that no funds be approved for fy2008 for construction of the european gmd site .

the committee did , however , recommend $42.7 million to continue procurement of ten additional gmd interceptors that could be deployed to the european site or for expanded inventory at the gmd site in alaska ( as noted in mda budget documents ) .

also , the committee expressed concern over the testing plan and risk reduction strategy for the proposed two - stage gmd interceptor for europe .

the committee further directed that two studies be done: ( 1 ) the secretary of defense and the secretary of state are to submit a report to congress by january 31 , 2008 , to include how the administration will obtain nato's support for the european gmd proposal , and how other missile defense capabilities such as aegis and thaad ( terminal high altitude area defense ) could contribute to the missile defense protection of europe ; and ( 2 ) an independent assessment of european missile defense options should be done in a timely manner .

in the senate defense authorization bill , the armed services committee recommended limiting the availability of funding for the european gmd site until two conditions were met: ( 1 ) completion of bilateral agreements with poland and the czech republic ; and ( 2 ) 45 days have elapsed following the receipt by congress of a report from an ffrdc ( federally funded research and development center ) to conduct an independent assessment of options for missile defense of europe .

the committee recommended a reduction of $85 million for site activation and construction activities for the proposed european gmd deployment .

the committee also limited fy2008 funding for acquisition or deployment of operational interceptor missiles for the european system until the secretary of defense certified to congress that the proposed interceptor to be deployed had demonstrated , through successful , operationally realistic flight testing , that it had a high probability of working in an operationally effective manner .

the committee noted that the proposed 2-stage version of the interceptor has not been developed and was not scheduled to be tested until 2010 .

therefore , the committee noted , it could be several years before it is known if the proposed interceptor will work in an operationally effective manner .

the committee indicated that it would not limit site surveys , studies , analysis , planning and design for the proposed european gmd site , but that construction and deployment could not take place prior to ratification of formal bilateral agreements , which mda estimates would not take place before 2009 .

finally , the committee notes there were a number of near - term missile defense options to provide defense of europe against short - range , medium - range and future intermediate - range ballistic missiles , such as the patriot pac - 3 , the aegis bmd system , and thaad .

in floor debate , the senate approved an amendment by senator sessions ( 90-5 ) to the defense authorization bill stating that the policy of the united states is to develop and deploy an effective defense system against the threat of an iranian nuclear missile attack against the united states and its european allies .

further debate and passage of the defense authorization bill was postponed at the time by the majority leader until after debate over iraq war funding .

on november 13 , 2007 , president bush signed into law the fy2008 defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3222 ; p.l .

110-116 ) .

this bill eliminated the proposed $85 million for fy2008 for the european missile defense site construction , but permitted $225 million for studies , analyses , etc .

of the proposed european gmd element .

the house passed the fy2008 national defense authorization bill ( h.r .

1585 ) on may 17 , 2007 .

the senate passed its version on october 1 , 2007 .

house and senate negotiators filed the defense authorization report on december 6 , 2007 .

the house adopted the report on december 12 , 2007 .

the conference report contained a number of provisions pertaining to the proposed european gmd element .

first , it cut the $85 million requested for site activation and construction activities .

this left about $225 million to fund surveys , studies , analysis , etc .

related to the european gmd element in fy2008 .

second , the conference report required an independent assessment of the proposed deployment of long - range missile defense interceptors and associated radar in europe and a second independent analysis of missile defense options in europe before site construction and activation could begin .

the conferees noted that if the polish and czech governments gave final approval to any successfully completed agreements during fy2008 , the department of defense had the option of submitting a reprogramming request for those funds ( $85 million ) to begin site construction in europe .

third , the conferees strongly supported the need to work closely and in coordination with nato on missile defense issues .

finally , the defense authorization bill required that the secretary of defense certify that the proposed two - stage interceptor "has demonstrated , through successful , operationally realistic flight testing , a high probability of working in an operationally effective manner" before funds could be authorized for the acquisition or deployment of operational missiles for the european site .

