the increased international attention given to the situation of north koreans seeking refuge , primarily in china , has led congress to take a greater interest in the refugee situation and the underlying causes within north korea and across its borders .

food shortages , persecution , and human rights abuses have prompted thousands and perhaps hundreds of thousands of north koreans to go to china where they often become victims of further abuse , neglect , and lack of protection .

those who remain in north korea ( formally known as the democratic republic of north korea , or dprk ) also continue to suffer from a lack of food and other basic humanitarian provisions .

both the house and senate have held hearings and passed resolutions addressing the status of the refugees .

additionally , several members of congress have written letters regarding the issue to the u.s. and chinese governments .

in 2004 the 108 th congress passed , and president bush signed , the north korean human rights act ( h.r .

4011 ; p.l .

108-333 ) .

the north korean human rights act ( nkhra ) authorizes the president new funds to support human rights efforts , improve the flow of information , and to require the president to appoint a special envoy on human rights in north korea .

it also identifies the need for humanitarian food assistance and refugee care .

north korea has been viewed as a threat to u.s. interests for a number of important security reasons that go well beyond refugee concerns and human rights issues .

these include the pursuit of nuclear weapons and missile programs ; a history of proliferating missiles ; reported threats to export parts of its self - declared nuclear arsenal ; and possible possession of chemical and biological weapons programs .

north korea is also on the u.s. list of states that sponsor terrorism .

amid an atmosphere of continuing tensions over north korea's nuclear program , the potential remains for worsening humanitarian conditions and a possible increase in north koreans fleeing the country .

the situation raises the questions of what more , if anything , can and should be done — by the united states and the international community — not only to focus attention on the abuses of the dprk regime , but to alleviate the suffering of north koreans .

increasingly , some argue it is the suffering of ordinary north koreans that brings into sharp relief the continuing violation of fundamental rights — rights pertaining to food security , refugee status , and individual freedoms — and raises questions about how those rights should be protected and by whom .

china generally refuses international agencies and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) access to the north koreans who cross its border ; this and its periodic practice of deportation , have led many to ask about international law and the protection of refugees in china .

china's obligations under international refugee law will be discussed later in the report .

formulating policy toward north korea has been characterized as deciding among a range of bad options .

the following outlines some basic approaches to dealing with north korea's human rights and refugee issues advocated by various constituencies , with an analysis of some of the possible diplomatic and security - related ramifications .

united states policy has adopted elements of several of these strategies in the past and future policies will likely be a combination of approaches .

putting aside the significant humanitarian concerns about north korean refugees , some commentators have advocated the use of refugee flows for the political ends of weakening the regime in pyongyang .

liberal u.s. resettlement policies and official encouragement to north korean refugees to seek asylum at american diplomatic posts in the region could act as a magnet for drawing larger numbers of north koreans over the border .

if the united states weighed in as an official advocate for fleeing north koreans , it could arguably foster the underground railroad system by pressuring beijing to assist in the relocation process .

some calculate that a large outflow could lead to the collapse of the precarious system of political control enforced by the north korean government .

such advocates argue that regime change in north korea is the only solution given the scale of human rights abuses in the country .

critics of this approach point out that the more likely response to a massive movement of people across the border would be a bloody crackdown by chinese and north korean authorities , not necessarily leading to a regime collapse .

in addition , some argue that a sudden political collapse would lead to a chaotic aftermath in which human rights and lives would be direly threatened .

the united nations high commissioner for refugees has examined the legal aspects of who among the north koreans in china qualifies for refugee status .

south korea recognizes that once refugees are on south korean territory , it has an obligation to protect them ; however , it cannot protect the north korean refugees while they are in china .

politically , it is both a domestic and bilateral problem for china to acknowledge refugee status for the north koreans .

and given the circumstances , unhcr believes there may be overriding , practical reasons not to do so .

first , it is possible that there could be relatively few cases that might technically qualify as refugees .

second , it is probable that granting refugee status decreases china's tolerance dramatically for the refugees in general , at least in the short - and medium - term .

the question thus becomes whether it is helpful to push the refugee status issue or find another way to achieve the solution being sought: protect the north korean refugees in china .

granting some form of humanitarian status — rather than refugee status — is one way to provide a broader definition of who can be helped that may be more politically acceptable to china .

the unhcr department of international protection , which is responsible for the agency's core protection mandate , in march 2006 proposed a humanitarian program , or enclave , be developed with other humanitarian agencies to make sure the refugees have or gain access to humanitarian services .

discussions between unhcr and representatives suggest that china could justify a "good neighbor approach" on the one hand , without pushing human rights or asylum , or on the other hand , pushing for deportation .

china has expressed a willingness to consider the option of protection in the form of such a humanitarian enclave , but no further progress has been made .

unhcr also believes there may be too much emphasis on the "pull factor" on the part of china and others .

unfettered travel in north korea is difficult and both countries have demonstrated their ability to control their respective borders .

china clearly does not want a political confrontation or fallout with north korea .

unhcr has been opening the dialogue with china behind the scenes because it also views open confrontation with china as unproductive , given china's current political structure .

the proposal to give humanitarian status as a means of increasing protection for the north koreans in china is seen by some as far less provocative than granting refugee status and as offering a practical solution that can be implemented .

although not necessarily the approach sought by some high - profile ngos , unhcr believes it has to minimize its visibility and publicity to make the most progress .

some advocates support a program that builds considerably on the past acceptance of a few dozen north korean refugees .

advocates of granting u.s. asylum to north koreans say it would help share the burden of accepting the refugees with the south korean government .

some korean - american groups have indicated that their community is willing to facilitate increased resettlement in the united states .

other supporters of the nkhra applaud the admission of refugees but insist that south korea will remain the primary destination for defectors from the north .

administration officials have cited reluctance by china and southeast asian countries to be involved in transferring north korean refugees to american officials , as well as the complicated vetting procedure required by american immigration officials , particularly for citizens from a country on the state sponsors of terrorism list .

refugee experts have also voiced concern about north koreans' ability to adjust to an american lifestyle , particularly if language skills are not strong upon arrival .

while the u.n. charter obligates u.n. members to promote respect for human rights and asserts as a primary purpose of the organization is the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all , it also recognizes the doctrine of non - intervention .

thus , article 2 , paragraph 7 , of the u.n. charter states that "nothing in the charter authorizes the united nations to interfere in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state. .

because of the traditional approach towards human rights as a matter exclusively within the domestic jurisdiction of sovereign states , article 2 ( 7 ) has been viewed by some as an obstacle to the implementation of the human rights provisions of the charter .

states accused of human rights violations frequently cite this provision in response to criticisms by other states ( or international organizations ) relating to human rights conditions within their borders .

however , many advocates argue that there is substantial justification for state responsibility for the protection of the human rights of individuals and for some level of "interference" by the international community on behalf of those whose rights have been infringed .

activity for the protection of human rights has been constantly subjected to tension between state sovereignty as protected by the doctrine of non - intervention and state obligations to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms .

increasingly , protection of populations affected by conflict within a country is seen as partly the responsibility of the international community .

for example , some observers have more recently argued that the dprk government is a threat to its own people and that north korea has violated its responsibility to protect its own citizens from crimes against humanity .

they suggest that action by the international community and the u.n. security council is warranted .

at the 2005 u.n. world summit , the "responsibility to protect" was introduced , putting forward the idea that each state has a responsibility to protect its people from genocide , war crimes , ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and that human rights violations committed in one state are the concern of all states .

it is an agreement in principle that speaks to the obligations of a state to protect its own people and the obligations of all states when that fails , but this u.n .

resolution does not make action easy or even probable .

lee feinstein , senior fellow for u.s. foreign policy and international law at the council on foreign relations , observes that "adoption of the responsibility to protect begins to resolve the historic tension between human rights and states' rights in favor of the individual .

where the state had been erected to protect the individual from outsiders , the responsibility to protect erects a fallback where individuals have a claim to seek assistance from outsiders in order to substitute for or protect them from the state. .

still , as the case of north korean refugees demonstrates , translating principle into action remains an enormous challenge .

as members of the united nations , both china and north korea are bound by the u.n. charter .

both china and north korea have ratified several key international treaties that could be used as leverage to change their human rights practices .

china is party to the refugee convention and protocol , which obligates china to cooperate with unhcr and prohibits china from repatriating refugees to any countries where they are at risk for serious human rights abuses .

china also ratified the u.n. convention against torture and other cruel inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment , which states that no government shall repatriate "a person to another state where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture. .

in addition , china has ratified the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women , the international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination , the convention on the rights of the child , and the international covenant on economic , social and cultural rights .

north korea is party to two international treaties that prohibit human rights violations: the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women and the convention on the rights of the child .

it is also party to two covenants: the international covenant on civil and political rights and the international covenant on economic , social , and cultural rights .

to the extent that beijing and pyongyang wish to be acknowledged as legitimate members of the international community , the argument that their governments have a responsibility to uphold widely recognized human rights principles might be invoked .

supporters of the nkhra point out the value of having u.s. officials raise human rights issues to the international community .

special envoy jay lefkowitz has been charged with leading this effort , and insists it can be done on a track parallel to the security negotiations .

some analysts have dubbed this approach a "name and shame" strategy that depends on the regime in north korea feeling sufficient pressure from the international community to curb its human rights practices .

an extension of this strategy may involve singling out the chinese and south korean governments for their failure to publicly condemn pyongyang's human rights violations , therefore pressuring officials in beijing and seoul to take a more proactive stance .

security analysts warn that the high - profile nature of this approach threatens to derail existing talks on the nuclear weapons issue given north korea's demonstrated sensitivity to international criticism and past boycotts of the talks based on similar condemnation from state department human rights reports or statements from u.s. officials .

however , others point out that north korea has used many issues as a pretext for boycotting talks , and that the human rights issue will not be an insurmountable obstacle if kim jong - il is committed to a deal .

the strategy of offering diplomatic recognition and other incentives in exchange for dialogue on human rights and other issues has been adopted by european countries .

after establishing normalized relations with north korea in 2001 , the european union became a significant trade partner with north korea , in addition to offering food aid and technical and humanitarian assistance .

modest "human rights dialogues" between pyongyang officials and ambassadors from e.u .

countries have been held .

supporters of the policy argue that having regular exchanges and embassies on the ground in pyongyang may eventually build up the trust necessary to make progress on human rights .

by most accounts , north korea's human rights record has not demonstrably improved since relations were established , although supporters of the approach point to isolated cases of progress .

some observers insist that increased contact with north korean leadership is the only way to improve human rights in the state , and argue as a result for early normalization of relations between the united states and dprk .

however , the u.s. offer is conditional upon thorough and verifiable nuclear disarmament .

some advocates argue that behind - the - scenes discussions with pyongyang and beijing are the most effective way to improve human rights in north korea .

by staying out of the public eye , the danger of appearing to be interfering in internal affairs could be reduced .

although there were few direct exchanges between high - level north korean and u.s. officials when the six - party talks stalled , a revival in direct bilateral contact may provide more opportunities to discreetly raise human rights concerns .

in terms of protecting individual north korean refugees , some refugee advocates argue that beijing is receptive to their appeals to take small humanitarian steps if the exchange remains out of the public eye .

for example , china might be convinced to quietly stop deportations and arrests , and perhaps even offer legal resident status to north koreans who have married chinese nationals .

high - level u.s. officials could raise the issues quietly with their counterparts in bilateral talks .

in addition , quiet pressure on other regional countries not to repatriate north korean refugees and to streamline asylum seekers' cases with the south korean government and unhcr could help alleviate humanitarian concerns for fleeing north koreans .

the bush administration's hope that a normalization of diplomatic relations between the united states and dprk could begin after the successful elimination of north korea's nuclear weapons and related programs is further demonstrated by discussion of other plans , such as the negotiation of a permanent peace treaty on the korean peninsula , development of a multinational security organization for northeast asia , and economic aid to north korea .

however , not mentioned in these headlines are humanitarian and human rights issues , at least for the moment .

depending upon the outcome of the current negotiations with north korea and fulfillment of its obligations , refocusing attention on the humanitarian and human rights issues may support the need for additional legislation and oversight by congress .

one option that congress might consider is developing legislation that requires north korea to make progress on addressing human rights conditions in exchange for diplomatic relations and an end to u.s. economic sanctions .

for example , although the political situations are very different in these two countries , the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 could provide a useful model for such legislation .

since 1988 the united states has imposed a wide range of sanctions against burma , which , by 2004 , meant that nearly all economic relations with burma had terminated .

the burmese freedom and democracy act bans imports from burma into the united states , which affects mainly imports of burmese textiles .

the united states has not had an ambassador to burma since 1992 when the senate foreign relations committee refused to confirm the nomination of an ambassador because of the human rights abuses .

the conditions set forth in the burmese freedom and democracy act for the lifting of sanctions show that the sentiment in congress favors maintaining the full range of u.s. sanctions ( once again renewed in august 2007 ) until the ruling state peace and development council ( spdc ) and the burmese military terminate major human rights abuses and make fundamental political concessions to the democratically elected government .

it should be noted , however , that the president has the authority to exercise these options under existing legislation .

appendix a. overview of the u.s .

refugee program the admission of refugees to the united states and their resettlement here are authorized by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended .

under the ina , a refugee is a person who is outside his or her country and who is unable or unwilling to return because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

in special circumstances , a refugee also may be a person who is within his or her country and who is persecuted or has a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

excluded from the ina definition of a refugee is any person who participated in the persecution of another .

each fiscal year , following consultations with congress , the president issues a presidential determination setting the refugee admissions ceiling and regional allocations for that year .

for fy2008 , the worldwide refugee ceiling is 80,000 .

this total includes 70,000 "admissions numbers" allocated among the regions of the world and an unallocated reserve of 10,000 "numbers. .

an unallocated reserve is to be used if , and where , a need develops for refugee slots in excess of the allocated numbers .

refugees are processed and admitted to the united states from abroad .

the state department handles overseas processing of refugees , which is conducted through a system of three priorities for admission .

these priorities are separate and distinct from whether such persons qualify for refugee status .

priority assignment , however , reflects an assessment of the urgency with which such persons need to be resettled .

priority one ( p - 1 ) covers compelling protection cases and individuals for whom no durable solution exists , who are referred to the u.s. refugee program by unhcr , a u.s. embassy , or a non - governmental organization ( ngo ) .

north koreans , like all nationalities , are eligible for p - 1 processing .

priority two ( p - 2 ) covers groups of special humanitarian concern to the united states .

it includes specific groups within certain nationalities , clans , or ethnic groups , such as iranian religious minorities .

north koreans are not among those eligible for p - 2 processing .

priority three ( p - 3 ) comprises family reunification cases involving spouses , unmarried children under age 21 , and parents of persons who were admitted to the united states as refugees or granted asylum .

seventeen nationalities , including north koreans , are eligible for p - 3 processing in fy2008 .

all refugee applicants are checked through the state department's consular lookout and support system ( class ) .

certain applicants are subject to additional security checks .

individuals who are preliminarily determined to qualify for a processing priority are presented to the department of homeland security's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( dhs / uscis ) for an in - person interview .

uscis makes determinations about whether individuals are eligible for refugee status and are otherwise admissible to the united states .

appendix b .

maps of north kore .

