v ocational rehabilitation and employment for veterans ( vr&e ) is an entitlement program that provides job training and related services "to enable veterans with service - connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and , to the maximum extent feasible , to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment. .

the program is administered by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

the vr&e program provides comprehensive services to enable veterans with service - connected disabilities and employment handicaps to become employable and maintain suitable employment .

for severely disabled veterans for whom employment is not possible , the program strives to help them achieve the highest quality of independent living possible with a future chance of employment , given medical and technological advances .

this report provides an overview of the vr&e program .

after a brief background section , it describes how the program establishes individual veterans' entitlements and the scope of benefits and services available to qualified veterans .

the final section provides participation and outcome data .

there are two determinations between a veteran's application for vr&e and his or her receipt of services: eligibility and entitlement .

after a veteran is found to be entitled to vr&e services , a case manager is assigned to work with the veteran .

the case manager works in conjunction with a vrc and the veteran to determine an employment goal and assess obstacles to employment .

a written rehabilitation plan is then developed , describing the goal of the vr&e program and the services required to achieve the goal .

the required services may be provided by the vrc or the case manager may provide referrals for other services .

the plan is reviewed with the participation of the client at least once a year .

the most common services provided by vr&e agencies are funding for higher education , career counseling , and short - term employment services like job search assistance .

the full range of services that vr&e agencies are required to make available to entitled clients , however , is much broader and includes a variety of specialized services for workers with disabilities .

 table 2 shows participation data from fy2011 through fy2016 .

the categories for "applicants," "eligible," "completed evaluation," "entitled to services," and "new plans of service" trace the number of individuals who continued through each stage of the application process , and in many cases , a single veteran may be counted in multiple categories .

the "rehabilitated" category includes veterans who secured and maintained suitable employment or completed an independent living program .

"participants" include veterans in any stage of the vr&e process after the applicant and evaluation phases have been completed .

it includes veterans who began a vr&e plan in a prior year as well as those in interrupted rehabilitation plan status .

due to the multiyear nature of many rehabilitations and the complex and diverse nature of the vr&e population , the data in table 2 cannot be used to calculate the share of program participants who have been rehabilitated .

historically , the most precise indicator of efficacy may have been the vr&e rehabilitation rate , which was based on the share of veterans exiting the program who were rehabilitated .

the va is in the process of replacing the rehabilitation rate with a more comprehensive "positive outcomes performance standard. .

data using this new standard are not currently available .

table 3 shows the types of programs that beneficiaries participated in during fy2016 .

the table only includes individuals who were concurrently receiving a subsistence allowance while they completed an educational program .

it does not include individuals who were receiving training without an accompanying subsistence allowance nor does it include individuals who received nonmonetary benefits from vr&e such as counseling or job search assistance .

table 4 presents more detail on vr&e participants who completed the rehabilitation process in fy2016 .

about 85% of veterans who were rehabilitated achieved an employment outcome .

among rehabilitated veterans who achieved an employment outcome , the average annual wage after rehabilitation was $46,208 .

