although long a component of u.s. foreign policy , successive u.s .

administrations have explicitly identified weak or failing states as u.s. national security concerns since 1998 .

the past three u.s. national security strategy documents all point to several threats emanating from states that are variously described as weak , fragile , vulnerable , failing , precarious , failed , in crisis , or collapsed .

these threats include providing safe havens for terrorists , organized crime , and other illicit groups ; causing or exacerbating conflict , regional instability , and humanitarian emergencies ; and undermining efforts to promote democracy , good governance , and economic sustainability .

the president , in his 2005 national security presidential directive ( nspd ) 44 , asserts that "the united states should work ... to anticipate state failure , avoid it whenever possible , and respond quickly and effectively when necessary and appropriate...." to this end , the administration has established as a goal the "transformation" of u.s. national security institutions "to meet the challenges and opportunities of the 21 st century," which includes strengthening weak and failing states .

however , as u.s. policy toward these states has grown in priority and cost — particularly since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 — some u.s. officials and other analysts have begun to question the effectiveness of the administration's policies for dealing with these types of problem states .

as the debate continues into the next presidential term , this is likely to continue to be a contentious area , with congressional involvement in u.s. policy toward weak and failing states flowing from its funding and oversight responsibilities .

currently , policy makers and observers are advocating competing visions for addressing state weakness , which could pose significant consequences for u.s. national security policy and u.s. preparedness for combating 21 st - century security threats .

on one side of the spectrum are those who advocate a "whole - of - government" vision for strengthening weak states .

advocates of this approach perceive weak states to present multiple , interdependent challenges to political stability , military and security capabilities , and development and humanitarian needs .

as a result , they recommend developing mechanisms and procedures for interagency planning that coordinate all aspects of u.s. policy toward weak states .

the implications of enhancing u.s. government interagency processes could be substantial for the legislative and executive branches .

supporters have discussed the potential for significant reform of congressional funding and authorizing responsibilities , as well as a substantial organizational overhaul of several federal agencies .

at the other extreme are those who are critical of u.s. nation - building activities ; they fundamentally question the appropriateness of state weakness as a lens through which to identify national security threats .

instead , such analysts recommend developing strategies to combat specific threats , such as ungoverned territories conducive to criminal exploitation , international terrorism , transnational crime , and nuclear weapons proliferation , regardless of how strong a state's government is .

in the case of conflict or post - conflict situations , some critics also discourage institutionalizing potentially costly u.s. stabilization and reconstruction capabilities .

some critics also claim that the concept of strengthening states inherently prescribes a western model of state function that may not be appropriate in all situations .

if u.s. national security policy priority on weak and failing states is not necessary or desirable , the existence and funding levels of several recently created programs and strategies to combat weak states threats may be called into question .

u.s. policy toward weak and failing states currently hangs in an uneasy balance between these two perspectives .

in recent years , this has resulted in a proliferation of new programs designed to address the challenges of strengthening weak and failing states .

the office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization ( s / crs ) in the department of state , stood up in july 2004 , is mandated with leading and coordinating u.s. efforts for conflict prevention and response in failing states ; in this capacity , s / crs has sought to implement a whole - of - government approach for addressing conflict in failed states since at least 2006 .

at the same time , dod has expanded its role in conflict prevention and stability operations — revising military doctrine to elevate these activities to primary missions , devoting greater resources to such activities , and establishing new institutions to train dod personnel and facilitate dod's involvement in stability operations , including "phase zero" or "shaping" operations that , prior to 2004 , had not been the purview of dod strategy or mission goals .

u.s. weak states initiatives , however , remain limited by a lack of interagency cohesion and unclear resources across agencies to carry out programs to strengthen weak states and combat potential national security threats emerging from such states .

pointing to these limitations , some observers question whether u.s. commitment to strengthening weak states is in decline .

in light of the current debate , possible oversight questions for congress relating to u.s. policy toward weak and failing states include the following: is there a need for an interagency strategy to coordinate agency responses to weak and failing states ? .

when is it appropriate for the united states to prevent or respond to situations of state failure abroad ? .

how effective are u.s. programs in preventing state failure ? .

to what extent are u.s. government "early warning" predictors of state failure influencing policy planning ? .

what do other countries do and how can international cooperation on weak and failing states be improved ? .

what types of unintended consequences could u.s. policies to strengthen weak states have in the short - and long - term ? .

this report is intended to serve as a primer on weak and failing states and related u.s. policy issues .

the report first provides definitions of weak states and describes the links between weak states and u.s. national security and development challenges .

second , it surveys recent key u.s. programs and initiatives designed to address threats emanating from weak states and identifies remaining issues related to the new programs .

finally , it highlights potential legislative issues that congress may be asked to consider .

no universal definition for "weak state" or "failing state" exists .

some analysts describe state weakness as the erosion of state capacity — a condition characterized by gradations of a regime's ability to govern effectively , which , in its most extreme form , results in the complete collapse of state power and function .

most countries in the developing world fall along this spectrum , exhibiting at least some elements of weakness .

failing states , which are seen as including only a handful of countries in the world , exhibit more pronounced weaknesses than others .

among the universe of weak and failing states , there is no single pathway to failure .

in some cases , states are characterized by gradual , yet persistent , institutional decay and political instability .

in other cases , states rapidly tumble into failure , faltering under the weight of political instability , an acute natural disaster , or economic crisis .

based on quantitative development indicators , weak and failing states tend to be among the least - developed and most underperforming states in the world .

notable u.s. government and government - affiliated efforts to describe weak and failing states focus on four major , often overlapping , elements of state function .

factors stressed include ( 1 ) peace and stability , ( 2 ) effective governance , ( 3 ) territorial control and porous borders , and ( 4 ) economic sustainability .

peace and stability: failing states are often in conflict , at risk of conflict and instability , or newly emerging from conflict .

lacking physical security , other state functions are often compromised ; frequently cited examples of such states today include sudan and iraq .

effective governance: countries can also be hampered by poor governance , corruption , and inadequate provisions of fundamental public services to its citizens .

in some cases , as in north korea or zimbabwe , this may occur because leaders have limited interest , or political "will," to provide core state functions to all its citizens .

a government's perceived unwillingness to provide adequate public services can incite destabilizing elements within a state .

territorial control and porous borders: weak and failing states may lack effective control of their territory , military , or law enforcement — providing space where instability can fester ; such places may also be called "ungoverned spaces" or "safe havens. .

the pakistan - afghanistan border and the sahel region of northern africa are common examples where such elements of state weakness exist .

economic sustainability: many weak states are also among the poorest countries in the world .

arguably as a consequence of other security and political deficiencies , weak and failing states often lack the conditions to achieve lasting economic development .

such countries include bangladesh and many in sub - saharan africa .

failed states have appeared as a matter of concern in u.s. national security strategy documents since 1998 , though the term had long been the topic of significant academic debate and implicitly informed u.s. national security policy since at least the end of world war ii .

as the cold war concluded in the early 1990s , analysts became aware of an emerging international security environment , in which weak and failing states became vehicles for transnational organized crime , nuclear proliferation pathways , and hot spots for civil conflict and humanitarian emergencies .

the potential u.s. national security threats weak and failing states pose became further apparent with al qaeda's september 11 , 2001 , attack on the united states , which osama bin laden masterminded from the safe haven that afghanistan provided .

the events of 9 / 11 prompted president george w. bush to claim in the 2002 u.s. national security strategy that "weak states , like afghanistan , can pose as great a danger to our national interests as strong states. .

in 2005 , secretary of state condoleezza rice further emphasized how weak and failing states pose "unparalleled" danger to the united states , serving as "global pathways" that facilitate the "movement of criminals and terrorists" and "proliferation of the world's most dangerous weapons. .

many national security observers highlight such administration language to indicate that u.s. interest in weak and failing states has become more substantial since 9 / 11 and is motivated largely by national security interests .

in addition to the potential transnational security threats that weak and failing states pose to the united states , they also present unique challenges from a development perspective — a dimension of u.s. international policy that the 2002 u.s. national security strategy elevated in priority to be equivalent to u.s. policy on defense and diplomacy .

according to some u.s. officials , the primary programs to support development are inappropriate for fragile states .

for example , weak and failing states have greater difficulty achieving the u.n. millennium development goals and qualifying for u.s. assistance programs under the millennium challenge act ( 22 u.s.c .

7701 et seq .

 ) , which essentially precludes assistance under this act to most weak and failing states .

some weak states also have difficulty absorbing large amounts of foreign assistance , even when donor countries provide funding .

according to the world bank , fragile states grow only one - third as fast and have one - third the per capita income , 50% higher debt - to - gross domestic product ratios , and double the poverty rates of other low - income countries .

the world bank also finds that nearly all fragile states identified in 1980 are still fragile today , highlighting the difficulty in achieving sustained progress in weak and failing states .

statistical estimates by world bank analysts predict that a fragile states is likely to remain so for 56 years , and the probability of a fragile state experiencing a "sustained turnaround" in any given year is a mere 1.8% .

the united states does not have an official strategy or interagency guidelines for dealing with weak and failing states .

however , several notable programs and initiatives have been created since 9 / 11 that aim to help prevent state failure , strengthen weak states , and counter existing threats emanating from weak and failing states .

these programs span all aspects of state weakness issues to include ( 1 ) identifying threats and monitoring weak states , ( 2 ) engaging weak states through diplomacy , ( 3 ) directing foreign assistance toward the alleviation of state weakness symptoms , and ( 4 ) implementing on - the - ground civilian and military stabilization operations .

depending on the level of state weakness , available resources , and political considerations , u.s. policy makers may decide to apply one or more of these programming areas to weak states .

some analysts remain critical of recent u.s. programs designed to address issues of state weakness .

the following sections describe new u.s. programs and initiatives and highlight existing criticism and concerns .

the following sections identify several wide - ranging legislative issues that relate to u.s. programs and initiatives for weak and failing states .

they include ( 1 ) civilian post - conflict management authorities , ( 2 ) dod transfer authority to the state department for security and stabilization assistance , ( 3 ) dod global train and equip authorities and funding , ( 4 ) foreign police training authorities , and ( 5 ) interagency policy effectiveness .

building civilian post - conflict capabilities in weak states is a key area of focus , which policymakers have been debating at least since 2004 .

at the state department's request , congress is considering new authorizations to develop civilian post - conflict stabilization capabilities in the reconstruction and stabilization civilian management act of 2008 ( s. 613 , h.r .

1084 , and h.r .

5658 ) .

these bills seek to authorize funding for stabilization and reconstruction assistance in failing states , as well as the creation of a response readiness corps .

this response readiness corps would include what s / crs currently calls the "active response corps" and the "standby response corps. .

congress has appropriated up to $75 million in initial funding for the response readiness corps to the state department and usaid in fy2008 emergency supplemental appropriations ( p.l .

110-252 ) .

congress also appropriated an additional $50 million for the creation of the third component of the s / crs civilian stabilization initiative , the "civilian reserve corps," in fy2007 supplemental appropriations ; this funding , however , is contingent upon specific authorization .

for fy2009 , the state department included in its budget request to congress a total of $248.6 million to stand up the civilian stabilization initiative and other costs associated with s / crs .

the state department did not include in its fy2009 request funding for a conflict response fund ; instead it requests the continuation of dod's authority to transfer funds to the state department for security and stabilization assistance , which currently is set to expire at the end of fy2008 .

supporters of the bill , including defense secretary robert m. gates , maintain that the state department's ability to perform its mandated mission in post - conflict situations is hindered by the lack of support for a conflict response fund and a civilian reserve corps ; critics remain hesitant to provide additional funding to a relatively new office , charged with developing new concepts .

unlike the state department , which has had difficulty in obtaining permanent funding for civilian stabilization capabilities , the department of defense has obtained more congressional funds for u.s. stabilization operations in afghanistan and iraq .

some analysts have pointed to dod's commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) as a potentially useful example of an emergency funding mechanism for strengthening weak and failing states .

through cerp , u.s. commanders can rapidly disburse discretionary funds for humanitarian relief and reconstruction needs of local civilians .

international support for the development of civilian post - conflict capabilities appears to be developing , albeit slowly .

in early 2008 , british prime minister [author name scrubbed] proposed a 1,000-person civilian rapid reaction force that could respond to crises in fragile and failing states .

this force would resemble the state department's proposed civilian stabilization initiative , consisting of police , emergency service personnel , judges , trainers , and other crisis experts who could be called upon in humanitarian or post - conflict emergencies .

u.s. foreign assistance for stabilization efforts in fragile states is funded in part by dod through a controversial , temporary transfer authority .

under authority stated in section 1207 of the national defense authorization act for fy2006 ( p.l .

109-163 , h.r .

1815 ) , congress provided the state department a mechanism to receive dod funds for "reconstruction , security , or stabilization assistance to a foreign country. .

in the conference report that accompanied h.r .

1815 ( h.rept .

109-360 ) , the conferees noted that they viewed this provision as a "temporary authority to provide additional resources , if needed , to the department of state until s / crs is fully stood up and adequately resourced. .

s.rept .

110-77 , which accompanied the fy2008 national defense authorization act , also described it as a "pilot project. .

nevertheless , section 1210 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) extended the original transfer authority to september 30 , 2008 .

for fy2009 , dod is requesting an increase in the transfer authority cap , up to $200 million per fiscal year from the current $100 million .

dod is also requesting that the transfer authority be extended to other u.s. agencies , besides the state department .

supporters of the extended transfer authority provision argue that the state department's stabilization capabilities remain underfunded and prevent effective civilian management of post - conflict situations .

critics echo the 2006 conference report , which states that the conferees "do not believe it is appropriate , and are not inclined , to provide long - term funding from the department of defense to the department of state so that they department of state can fulfill its statutory authorities. .

highlighting continued debate over the appropriateness of dod's section 1207 authority , the house version of the fy2008 bill did not extend the transfer authority , while the senate version extended the transfer authority through september 30 , 2008 , and increases such authorized funding from $100 million to $200 million .

in the final fy2008 defense authorization , congress ultimately agreed to extend the transfer authority , but maintained the funding limit of $100 million through fy2008 .

an ongoing congressional concern is the extent to which dod should be involved in strengthening weak states' militaries to combat terrorism and other transnational threats that are perceived to emanate through such states .

at the heart of this debate is a temporary congressional authority to allow dod to train and equip foreign military forces for counter - terrorism operations and military and stability operations in which u.s. armed forces are involved ( under section 1206 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 [ p.l .

109-163 ] ) .

in 2006 , dod obligated $100.1 million under this authority ; in 2007 , $279.5 million ; and as of may 2008 , $24.8 million .

this new authority , which began as a two - year pilot program , has raised concerns among some analysts that it is contributing to a perceived shift in u.s. foreign assistance funding control from the state department to dod .

supporters of section 1206 , however , argue that dod may be better able to operate such train and equip programs than the department of state .

to this end , the administration has requested that congress broaden dod's section 1206 authorities to include ( 1 ) training and equipping foreign gendarmerie , constabulary , border protection , and internal defense forces ; ( 2 ) increasing funding authorization levels from $300 million to $750 million ; ( 3 ) allowing the president or the secretary of state to waive any legislative restrictions , including human rights restrictions , that may apply to assistance for military or other security forces ; and ( 4 ) making the authorities permanent .

although congress raised the initial amount of authorized funding from $200 million to $300 million per year in section 1206 of the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 ( p.l .

109-364 ) , congress has turned down the administration's request to broaden section 1206 authorities further .

additionally , congress has not appropriated funds in any fiscal year for the purpose of section 1206 authorities .

for fy2009 , the house version of the national defense authorization act ( h.r .

5658 ) , which passed on may 22 , 2008 , would extend section 1206 authorities to fy2010 .

the senate version would extend the authorities to fy2011 , increase the authorized funding cap to $400 million per fiscal year , and extend the authorities' use beyond foreign national militaries to include building the capacity of a foreign country's coast guard , border protection , and other security forces engaged primarily in counter - terrorism missions .

the u.s. government's ability to assist foreign countries in law enforcement is a critical component in stabilizing weak states .

section 660 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-195 ) , as amended by the 1973 foreign military sales and assistance act ( p.l .

93-189 ) , restricts the use of foreign assistance funds for the training of foreign police , unless congress grants an exception .

some observers consider section 660 as "among the most significant restrictions for stabilization and reconstruction operations" in weak and failing states .

such analysts recommend repealing this prohibition to allow for greater flexibility in developing strategies to address weaknesses in foreign police forces .

on the other hand , some observers also point to congress's willingness to grant numerous exemptions to section 660 over the years as indication that congress has already taken sufficient account of the potential importance of foreign police training assistance for strengthening weak states .

according to some observers , the issues surrounding challenges posed by weak and failing states highlight the broader problem of interagency coordination in national security affairs .

in one recent , congressionally mandated effort to address long - term strategies related to foreign assistance policy , the bipartisan "help commission" recommended that congress rewrite the foreign assistance act of 1961 to address , among other considerations , the perceived need for improved coordination between security concerns and development priorities in failed and failing states .

"once thought to be distinct and removed from one another , security and development now intersect regularly," the commission explains .

"moving states from failed and failing to capable requires going beyond assistance , linking trade , democratic principles of governance , and security with traditional assistance. .

other groups are exploring options for reforming interagency coordination on national security issues , which could include rewriting the national security act of 1947 and revising congressional rules governing committee structure and practice to improve oversight of interagency activity .

the implications of enhancing u.s. government interagency processes , not only could be substantial ; observers often compare calls for interagency reform of u.s. national security institutions to the goldwater - nichols act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-433 ) , which fundamentally altered how the various branches of the u.s. armed services coordinate capabilities and function .

advocates of interagency reform call for institutionalized mechanisms to require interagency strategic and operational planning , as well as coordinated resource allocation and execution .

critics , however , caution that such proposals could potentially involve significant reform of congressional funding and authorizing responsibilities for national defense , foreign operations , and intelligence .

appendix a. definitions of weak states selected u.s. government and government affiliated efforts to define weak states include the following: u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) in the 2005 fragile states strategy , usaid uses the term "fragile states" to include those that fall along a spectrum of "failing , failed , and recovering from crisis. .

the most severe form of fragile states are "crisis states," where conflict is ongoing or "at great risk" of occurring and the central government does not exert "effective control" over its territory , is "unable or unwilling to assure the provision of vital services to significant parts of its territory," and holds "weak or non - existent legitimacy among its citizens. .

national intelligence council ( nic ) the nic describes "failed or failing states" as having "expanses of territory and populations devoid of effective government control" and are caused by internal conflicts , in the 2020 project's 2004 final report , mapping the global future .

in this report , the nic considers the terms "post - conflict" and "failed state" to be synonymous .

national security council ( nsc ) the nsc defines "weak states" as lacking the "capacity to fulfill their sovereign responsibilities" in the 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism ( nsct ) .

the strategy document also describes some weak states as lacking "law enforcement , intelligence , or military capabilities to assert effective control over their entire territory. .

the nsc describes "failing states" in the 2006 nsct as similar to "states emerging from conflict. .

u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) gao , in its 2007 report forces that will shape america ' s future , defines "failed or failing states" as "nations where governments effectively do not control their territory , citizens largely do not perceive the governments as legitimate , and citizens do not have basic public services or domestic security. .

u.s. interagency working group on international crime in the 2000 international crime threat assessment report , an interagency working group created under the clinton administration defines "failed states" as "unwilling or unable" to meet "many of the accepted standards and responsibilities of sovereign control over its territory," which may lead to "significant economic deterioration and political unrest that threatens both internal and regional stability. .

organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) the oecd's development assistance committee ( dac ) , of which the united states is a member , defines "fragile states" as lacking "either the will or the capacity to engage productively with their citizens to ensure security , safeguard human rights , and provide the basic function for development. .

they are further characterized as possessing "weak governance , limited administrative capacity , chronic humanitarian crisis , persistent social tensions , violence , or the legacy of civil war. .

political instability task force ( pitf ) originally commissioned by the cia's directorate of intelligence in 1994 and called the "state failure task force," pitf defines "state failure" as a "range of severe political conflicts and regime crises" and is characterized by a "total or near - collapse of central political authority. .

the task force's statistical methodology identifies instances of politicide , genocide , adverse regime changes , and ethnic and revolutionary wars as situations when total or partial state failure occur .

u.s. commission on weak states this bipartisan commission , sponsored by the washington think tank center for global development , in its final 2003 report entitled on the brink: weak states and u.s. national security , defines "weak states" as those with "governments unable to do the things that their own citizens and the international community expect from them: protecting people from internal and external threats , delivering basic health services and education , and providing institutions that respond to the legitimate demands and needs of the population. .

world bank the world bank's fragile states initiative , previously called the low - income countries under stress ( licus ) initiative , describes "fragile states" as often characterized by poor governance , internal conflicts or tenuous post - conflict transitions , weak security , fractured societal relations , corruption , breakdowns in the rule of law , and insufficient mechanisms for generating legitimate power and authority .

all are low - income , which is defined as countries with a 2006 gross national income ( gni ) per capita of $905 or less , calculated using the world bank's atlas method .

appendix b .

various lists identifying "at risk" state .

