conference committees have long been known as "the third house of congress. .

in a bicameral legislature like the u.s. congress , they are usually the principal forum for reconciling major bills passed in dissimilar form by the two houses .

these bicameral units often write the final version of major measures that both chambers will vote upon .

as one senator said , conferences are "where the final touches are put on legislation which constitutes the laws of the country. .

a house member stated , "let's face it , the conference committee is where it all happens. .

or as a congressional scholar put it , in "the legislative process , all roads lead to the conference committee. .

current developments suggest , however , that the "third house" characterization might require modification .

it is not that conference committees are unimportant , it is that another method for adjusting and reconciling bicameral differences on significant legislation has taken on greater prominence in the contemporary congress .

this method is the exchange of amendments — or "messages" — between the houses , the so - called "ping pong" procedure .

some lawmakers even state that conferences are becoming a thing of the past .

a member of the senate noted , "processing bills by exchanging messages [amendments] with the house is becoming the norm rather than the exception .

formal conferences are becoming rare. .

if the conference committee is being somewhat eclipsed by the ping pong procedure as an important way to achieve bicameral reconciliation on consequential legislation , that would represent an important institutional change .

this apparent development merits some attention and analysis .

accordingly , this report's purposes are fundamentally twofold: to examine the reasons for the heightened salience of the ping pong approach and to consider several reasons for and the implications that seem to flow from using this procedure rather than convening conferences to resolve inter - chamber disagreements on major legislation .

to fulfill these two purposes , the report is organized into six sections as follows .

first , it will provide an overview of the methods congress employs to achieve inter - chamber agreement on legislation , including ping pong's place in the bicameral resolution process .

second , it will briefly discuss how each chamber gets to conference , underscoring how the convening of conference committees in the senate can be effectively blocked , even if a majority of senators would agree to send the measure to conference .

third , it will examine why there seems to be more reliance in recent years on the ping pong method in reconciling bicameral differences on significant legislation than on the conference committee route .

important to underscore at the outset is that informal negotiations among key bicameral actors suffuse the lawmaking process .

unsurprisingly , confidential bargaining to achieve mutually acceptable agreements is part and parcel of both the conference committee and the amendment exchange procedure .

key bicameral actors typically craft policy compromises in closed session and then use the amendment exchange method to win house - senate agreement on them .

on capitol hill , private negotiating sessions and discussions among house and senate members are a day - to - day occurrence ; these confidential meetings influence lawmaking from the introduction of a bill to bicameral reconciliation .

procedures usually are not isolated actions ; they are employed in a policy , political , and legislative context .

hence , the fourth section of the report provides an overview of three case examples to illustrate in a concrete setting the factors that may trigger use of ping ponging over the convening of conference committees .

the three measures are the energy independence and security act ( h.r .

6 ) ; the honest leadership and open government act ( s. 1 ) ; and the reauthorization of the state children's health insurance program ( or schip , h.r .

976 ) .

a brief summary of the key elements associated with ping ponging each bill will conclude the discussion .

these three bills were selected because they were the only ones in 2007 where the senate majority leader employed a strategic maneuver called "filling the amendment tree" during the bicameral resolution stage .

this procedural device is a way for the majority leader to protect an informally negotiated bicameral compromise from amendment .

to be sure , there are other significant measures where ping ponging without any tree - filling has occurred in the senate .

the tree - filling maneuver may not have been necessary or appropriate because , for example , the bicameral compromise enjoyed broad bipartisan support ; tree - filling might create more legislative problems than it could solve , such as arousing the ire of lawmakers who wanted to offer amendments of their own ; or deadline pressures prompted agreement to the bicameral accord .

still , tree - filling can sometimes be a useful procedure in facilitating passage of priority legislation , which is why these measures were chosen for examination .

fifth , the report will discuss several reasons for , and implications of , ping ponging amendments back - and - forth between the chambers instead of forming conference committees to achieve bicameral agreement on legislation .

lastly , summary observations will be presented , including why the exchange of amendment pattern has seemingly evolved to become a more important feature of bicameral lawmaking activity .

under the constitution , before measures can be sent to the white house for presidential consideration , they must pass the house and senate with exactly the same bill number and legislative text .

the issue , then , is how to unite what the constitution divides when one chamber agrees to a measure at variance with a comparable bill adopted by the other house ? .

although the constitution is silent on the matter , congress has devised three basic methods or procedures to achieve "bicameral ignition. .

first , one house enacts unchanged the other's bill .

most measures ( anywhere from 63 to around 85 percent in a biennial congress ) are enacted into law when one chamber adopts verbatim the legislation received from the other body .

one chamber's deference to the other house's bill has various explanations , ranging from the lack of controversy to political necessity because time is running out in a legislative session .

the hike over time in the percentage of measures "rubber stamped" into enactment ( see table 1 ) probably reflects a number of factors ( setting aside their noncontroversial character ) , such as members' electoral imperative — the urge felt by many to claim credit for passing constituency - focused legislation — and the artful drafting of legislation to assure that it has broad bipartisan and bicameral appeal .

to be sure , house and senate members and their staff aides often consult informally prior to a bill's introduction in either chamber to facilitate its approval by the second - acting house without amendment .

the other two methods specifically deal with reconciling bicameral differences when the two chambers pass different versions of the same bill .

the house and senate can message — or "ping pong" — amendments back - and - forth between them until substantive disagreements on a measure are worked out .

with the ping pong — or exchange of amendments — approach , one chamber may adopt the other house's amendments or further modify the other's amendments until both finally agree to identical language for all the provisions of the legislation .

as a legislative scholar explained: when the house or senate passes a measure , it is sent to the other chamber for further consideration .

if the second chamber passes the measure with one or more amendments , it is then sent back to the originating chamber .

in modern practice , the second chamber typically substitutes its version of a measure as a single amendment to the measure as passed by the first chamber .

the first chamber then may accept the amendment or propose its own further amendment .

in this way , the measure may be messaged back and forth between the house and senate in the hope that both houses will eventually agree to the same version of a measure .

the ping pong method of bicameral reconciliation is "frequently used in the closing days of a congress to save time," wrote a congressional journalist .

"bills may be sent back and forth on an hourly basis until there is a meeting of the minds , or one side backs down , or the two chambers give up in failure. .

a week before christmas 2007 , for example , the house and senate agreed to enact the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2008 ( h.r .

2764 ) .

with congress unable to enact 11 of 12 appropriations bills by the start of the new fiscal year ( october 1 , 2007 ) — largely because of sharp conflicts over spending priorities between congressional democrats and president bush , as well as with congressional republicans — the two chambers opted to use the ping pong route .

given clashes between democrats and republicans and lawmakers anxious to depart for the holiday season , political and temporal considerations were among the factors that prompted use of the amendment exchange method as the preferred way to reconcile inter - chamber differences on h.r .

2764 .

roughly 11% to 24% of public laws enacted during recent biennial congresses took the ping pong , or "amendments between the houses," route .

the 12% figure for the 2005-2007 period , as indicated by table 1 , represents a 50% decline from the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1995 ) .

however , the numerical dropoff does not reflect the higher policy significance of the legislation subject to the ping pong method in recent years compared with earlier congresses .

bicameral ignition may also occur when the house and senate agree to establish a conference committee .

each chamber selects a number of conferees from the relevant committees of jurisdiction to reconcile the items in bicameral disagreement .

only a relatively small number of public laws passed by a congress ( anywhere from around 5% to 13% , as revealed in table 1 ) reach the conference stage , but these are often the most complex , controversial , and consequential .

on some occasions a combination of the two approaches — ping pong and a conference committee , or vice versa — will be employed to reconcile matters in bicameral disagreement .

for example , the chambers may start out using the ping pong procedure but then convene a conference committee to reconcile outstanding disagreements .

it is quite common for house and senate committee and party leaders , along with relevant staff , to conduct private , pre - conference negotiations prior to the formal convening of a conference .

these might be characterized as "virtual" conferences .

for example , meeting behind closed doors , "senate and house leaders are taking the unusual step of negotiating a final bill to address the nation's housing crisis even before the senate adopts its own version , trying to short - circuit a legislative process that might otherwise drag well into the summer. .

in these cases , sometimes the creation of a conference committee "will be more an indication that a deal is done than a forum to find one. .

private negotiating sessions also occur regularly , as noted earlier , with the exchange of amendment procedure .

for example , confidential negotiations occurred when the house passed a genetic nondiscrimination measure ( h.r .

493 ) on april 25 , 2007 , which the senate considered the following year ( april 24 ) .

the senate replaced the language in h.r .

493 with a complete substitute and returned the bill , as amended , to the house , where it was cleared on may 1 for presidential consideration .

the point is that the senate's complete substitute was the result of informal bicameral negotiations .

as the ranking senator on the relevant committee of jurisdiction stated a few days before the house approved the substitute: "it has even been preconferenced with the house side .

so we are pretty sure that once it finishes here it will go right over to the house and the house will take care of it too.... we let them into the process early so that everybody would know what was happening. .

a number of commonly occurring factors explains why the senate sometimes experiences delay or difficulty in getting to conference .

for example , senate ( and house ) leaders — who want or expect to go to conference — may delay the appointment of conferees , because there is a dispute over conferee selection: the number to be chosen and the party ratio .

at issue in these cases might be concern over the representation of diverse views in conference .

limiting the size of the conference delegation could block certain lawmakers from serving on the conference committee .

conversely , increasing the number of conferees could ensure that certain members would serve on the conference committee .

party leaders , too , may want to conduct informal pre - conference negotiations with the white house ( or house ) before the senate officially names conferees .

delay in forming a conference may be a tactic to pressure the other body to concede on certain policies in bicameral disagreement .

or delay might be a form of "hostage politics:" the naming of conferees on a certain bill will not occur until the other body appoints conferees on a different measure in bicameral dispute .

three other overlapping reasons , however , largely account for the contemporary senate's difficulty in convening conferences .

each merits additional discussion .

they are the senate's tradition of extended debate ( the filibuster ) ; the polarization that characterizes the modern senate ; and the exclusion of minority party conferees from participating in the bicameral bargaining process .

the recent tendency to bypass the conference stage underscores that house - senate interrelationships change and adapt to the broader legislative - political environment of which they are a part .

compared with the 1950s or 1960s , today's congress is more open , partisan , workload - packed , and deadline - driven ; there are many more interest groups that influence and monitor legislative proceedings ; and individual lawmakers are not reluctant to utilize parliamentary tools to advance their objectives .

because these developments have sometimes made the convening of conference committees problematic , the exchange of amendment procedure — and the concomitant informal negotiations that accompany it — has become a more efficient method for resolving bicameral differences on major legislation .

several of the reasons for the heightened importance of the ping pong approach , and the implications that flow from its use on major legislation , seem directly or indirectly related to at least six factors ( setting aside the earlier discussion about the relative ease of blocking the appointment of conferees in the senate ) .

the six are ( 1 ) a further enhancement of the role of party leaders ; ( 2 ) limits on the role of committees and their leaders ; ( 3 ) a marginal role of the minority party ; ( 4 ) constraints on the deliberative process ; ( 5 ) the avoidance of procedural / political issues ; and ( 6 ) the lack of transparency .

whether these factors are causes or effects of ping ponging , or both , merits brief mention .

because cause and effect are hard to disentangle , it is probably safe to say that the six factors reflect both ingredients to one degree or another .

for example , the apparent increase in reliance on ping ponging might be viewed as either a cause or effect of enhanced party leadership influence .

a cause because party leaders today play a larger role throughout all lawmaking stages , including bicameral negotiations .

the preference of party leaders , in short , might be to utilize amendment exchange rather than conference committees so as to better ensure the achievement of party - preferred goals .

an effect because difficulties in creating conference committees have provided central party leaders with more opportunities to step in and assume wider responsibility for reconciling bicameral differences on major legislation through the ping pong ( and informal negotiating ) method .

perhaps more useful than making judgments about cause and effect is to consider whether difficulties in forming conference committees helped to encourage these six developments .

although table 1 does not reflect a numerical increase in the ping pong method , its recent use on major bills is something that does seem significant .

volleying amendments between the houses on consequential legislation is outside what might be considered the "regular order" — the creation of a conference committee , the usual venue for reconciling bicameral differences on major measures .

as a result , there are at least five issues associated with ping ponging that merit discussion .

first , the more prominent role of ping ponging may reflect the gradual institutionalization of a leadership - influenced bicameral bargaining process that has been evolving for several years .

bicameral bargaining is not a static process ; it has undergone many changes over the years .

the "old" conference style , where a limited number of conferees from a single committee in each chamber haggle over inter - chamber differences , no longer suffices as the prime method for reaching bicameral compromises .

today , party leaders exercise large influence in achieving and coordinating inter - chamber agreement on major bills , often resorting to the ping pong method for this purpose .

the bicameral role of party leaders results from various developments , such as the need to mobilize support for party - preferred policies from a diverse array of engaged actors ( interest groups , executive officials , nonconferee lawmakers , bloggers , and so on. ) .

second , there is arguably little significant difference between convening "virtual" conferences , where bicameral compromises are worked out in private among key lawmakers , and employing the amendment exchange method where inter - chamber accords are also hammered out in closed meetings by a select number of house and senate leaders .

there are differences , however .

the threat or reality of a filibuster in today's senate appears so severe that it has produced a changed bicameral dynamic for reconciling house - senate differences on legislation .

further , there are numerous house and senate rules and practices triggered by the conference method that can be avoided by the ping pong approach .

these include such things as potential controversies involving conferee selection , the instruction of conferees , or scope violations .

third , the bargaining dynamic associated with ping ponging may have its roots in senate developments that have occurred over several decades .

the thrust of these changes has led to a more individualistic and partisan senate where lawmakers' individual or partisan preferences sometimes take precedence over institutional requirements .

congressional scholars have examined how the senate has changed over several decades , and these changes influence today's conferee appointment process .

a capsule summary might include the following developments .

during the 1970s , there was an increase in the number of filibusters and other delaying tactics as the chamber witnessed a heightened sense of influence on the part of each senator .

many senators , regardless of party , were more willing to employ their formidable parliamentary prerogatives to advance individual goals even if that meant blocking the senate's business or foiling the agenda - setting authority of the majority leader .

professor richard f. fenno , jr. , a noted legislative scholar , studied how the 1950s senate evolved from a "communitarian" institution , where members were expected to use filibusters sparingly and only for high - stakes national issues , to today's "individualistic" senate .

he found that with "more openness , more media visibility , more candidate - centered elections," more interest groups , more political obligations , and more staff , members became independent entrepreneurs unwilling to submerge their personal and political objectives "to the norms of any collectivity. .

by the late 1980s and 1990s , the senate seemed to become increasingly contentious , "with polarization along partisan and ideological lines that largely coincide. .

this pattern continued into the 2000s .

given any lawmaker's ability to stall legislative action , and a narrowly divided chamber's oft - inability to invoke cloture , it became much more difficult for the senate to convene conference committees .

as a result , majority party leaders in both houses turned to amendment exchanges and informal negotiations to iron out bicameral differences .

this negotiating pattern has persisted in recent years regardless of which party has been in charge of the congress .

fourth , bypassing the conference stage is not without its own complications .

a brief summary of a 2008 housing measure ( h.r .

3221 ) will help make the point .

remember that the aforementioned h.r .

3221 started out as an energy bill with many of its provisions folded into h.r .

6 ( the energy case example ) during the exchange of amendments between the chambers .

the bill remained in the senate , however , and became the vehicle to carry a major housing initiative .

the senate devised a package of housing proposals that contained energy tax incentives and , as mentioned before , the constitution requires the house to originate tax measures .

so the senate deleted the legislative text contained in h.r .

3221 and replaced it with housing and energy - relevant proposals .

the legislation passed the senate on april 10 , 2008 , as a senate amendment to h.r .

3221 .

the amended bill was returned to the house , including with a new title ( the "foreclosure prevention act" ) .

on may 7 , 2008 , the house rules committee reported a procedural resolution ( h.res .

1175 ) that made it in order for the house to take up h.r .

3221 , with the senate amendments thereto .

worth underscoring are two points: first , senate amendments to house - passed measures lack privilege — an automatic right to the floor — and require a special rule for this purpose ; second , the house can respond to senate amendments in any way that it wants .

in this case , the special rule permitted the financial services chair to make a motion to concur in the senate amendments with three house amendments .

all three were adopted by the house , along with an amended title .

h.r .

3221 became the "american housing rescue and foreclosure prevention act," and was volleyed back to the senate ( the three house amendments to the senate amendments to h.r .

3221 ) .

things quickly became procedurally complicated in the senate , leading to complex parliamentary maneuvers .

there were three motions for cloture ; an unsuccessful motion to refer the house amendments to the banking committee ; tree - filling by the majority leader ; controversy over whether an amendment involving energy tax incentives was germane to the housing bill ; multiple amendments offered to the house amendments ; and other procedural twists and turns .

in brief , consideration of house amendments in the senate provides numerous opportunities for delay and produces complications that are procedurally and politically complex .

the senate finally cleared all the procedural hurdles , and the housing bill , as amended — renamed the "housing and economic recovery act" — was returned to the other body for its consideration of the senate amendments to the house amendments to the senate amendments to h.r .

3221 .

house negotiators returned to the drawing board to develop a housing package ( another house amendment ( s ) — technically a third - degree amendment violation ) that the senate could accept and thus end the back - and - forth volley of proposals .

to be sure , the respective house and senate chairs were in regular communication , working together to develop a housing package ( the new house amendment ) that could pass the senate .

in the end , the house on july 23 agreed to the inter - chamber negotiated compromise , which included provisions addressing housing foreclosures and credit markets , by a 272 to 152 vote .

three days later , after the filing of cloture and tree - filling by the senate majority leader , the chamber voted 72 to 13 to concur in the amendment of the house .

on july 30 , the legislation was signed into law ( p.l .

110-289 ) by the president .

lastly , the history of congress is the history of change .

lawmaking processes adapt in big and little ways to new pressures , actors , and events .

yet one constant is that both chambers must pass a measure in absolutely identical fashion before it can be sent to the white house for presidential consideration .

recall that table 1 provides data on the methods used to secure bicameral concurrence on legislation .

what the table cannot reveal is that many respected individuals believe that a once little - discussed method — the exchange of amendments between the houses — recently has taken on larger importance in reconciling house - senate differences on major legislation .

whether this development is an anomaly , unique to recent congresses , or reflects the wave of the future is not clear .

prediction is very hard , yogi berra is reputed to have said , especially about the future .

one thing does seem certain , however .

if there are continuing issues in convening conference committees , or circumstances warrant their calculated circumvention , institutional leaders seem certain to employ the ping pong method or devise other ways to resolve bicameral differences on legislation .

