in the relatively short period of time since the united states resumed "normal trade relations" ( ntr ) with vietnam in 2001 , there have been several controversies regarding the importation of clothing from vietnam into the united states .

the controversies surrounding u.s. clothing imports from vietnam include allegations of dumping , illegal transshipments , violations of the world trade organization ( wto ) agreements , and a controversial import monitoring program .

in addition , u.s. trade policy governing the import of vietnamese clothing has changed course several times , leading to claims of significant market disruption and regulatory uncertainty .

these claims are bolstered by the volatility of u.s. import data for vietnamese clothing over the last seven years .

there have been several shifts in u.s. trade policy with vietnam since it was first granted ntr status in 2001 that have possibly affected u.s. clothing imports from vietnam .

a bilateral trade agreement concluded on july 13 , 2000 , significantly lowered tariff rates on clothing imported from vietnam .

a bilateral textile agreement that ran from may 1 , 2003 , until january 11 , 2007 , imposed quantity quotas on the import of certain categories of clothing imported from vietnam .

also , as part of its accession into the wto , vietnam entered into an agreement with the united states that , among other provisions , requires that vietnam terminate various non - wto compliant subsidy programs for its clothing and textiles industries .

finally , on december 8 , 2006 , congress passed legislation granting vietnam permanent ntr status as of december 29 , 2006 .

much of the recent contention about vietnamese clothing exports to the united states has focused on the u.s. department of commerce's ( doc ) implementation of an "import monitoring program" for selected categories of vietnamese clothing on the day vietnam joined the wto — january 11 , 2007 .

the announced import monitoring program began on the same day vietnam joined the wto and is to expire with the end of the bush administration ( taken to be january 19 , 2008 , by the doc ) .

under the program , the doc will collect monthly data on the quantity and unit values of five categories of clothing imported from vietnam — shirts , sweaters , swimwear , trousers , and underwear — to determine if there is sufficient evidence to warrant the self - initiation of an anti - dumping investigation .

while acknowledging that the program would have "an impact on a broad array of parties," the doc maintained that the monitoring of some vietnamese clothing imports "is not meant to inhibit legitimate trade. .

supporters of the program — principally u.s. textile manufacturers — maintain that the monitoring is necessary because the vietnamese government is "illegally" subsidizing its clothing industry and that vietnamese exporters are dumping their products in the united states .

according to the program's backers , the data being collected by the monitoring program will provide the necessary evidence to initiate an anti - dumping action against vietnamese clothing exports .

opponents of the program — a mixture of clothing manufacturers , retailers and importers — assert that the collection of the data violates various provisions of the wto agreement , runs counter to past anti - dumping practices , and has already had a negative effect on vietnam's exports to the united states .

interest in the monitoring program was heightened by expectations of the doc's first formal review of the vietnamese clothing imports being monitored .

according to the federal register announcement of the program , the doc "intends to conduct its formal evaluations of the information gathered under the monitoring program on a biannual basis. .

the doc has also indicated that the categories of products covered by the monitoring program ( shirts , sweaters , swimwear , trousers , and underwear ) are not "static," and may be changed "in response to input received from interested parties , changes in the trade , or as the department [of commerce] broadens its understanding of the composition and structure of the domestic textile and apparel industry. .

trade statistics for the first six months of 2007 provided some support to both supporters and opponents of the monitoring program ( see table 1 ) .

u.s. imports of sweaters made in vietnam from january to june 2007 increased by over 85% when compared to the same period last year .

meanwhile , the volume of shirts and trousers imported from vietnam — the two largest imported categories being monitored in the doc program — during the first six months of 2007 rose by 28.1% and 25.8% respectively , when compared to the first half of 2006 .

however , the amount of swimwear imported by the united states from vietnam from january to june 2007 was virtually unchanged from a year ago , and the amount of underwear imported declined by over 20% when compared to last year .

however , evaluating the growth in clothing imports from vietnam using year - on - year data may be potentially misleading for various reasons .

first , under the terms of the u.s. - vietnam bilateral textile agreement , the united states was permitted to set quotas on the volume of clothing imported from vietnam in the years 2003 to 2006 .

as a result , the import figures for the last four years may have been kept artificially low , and the ensuing growth in 2007 artificially enhanced .

second , the international trade in clothing is comparatively seasonal , so comparisons based on data from only part of a year may be biased .

third , because there is an approximately six month lead time in the contracting of clothing , the trade volumes for january to june 2007 supposedly reflect arrangements made prior to the announcement of the monitoring program , and therefore will not reflect the alleged negative impact the monitoring program has had on vietnam's clothing exports to the united states .

on october 26 , 2007 , the doc issued a press release stating that it had concluded its first review of vietnamese clothing imports and determined that , "there is insufficient evidence to warrant self - initiating an anti - dumping investigation. .

according to the press release , there were no imports from vietnam for 317 of the 486 clothing items being monitored , and unit prices had increased for many of the items where there had been imports from vietnam .

comparisons of imports from vietnam to imports from other nations also failed to provide sufficient evidence to warrant self - initiating an anti - dumping investigation .

assistant secretary for import administration david spooner said that , despite the lack of evidence of dumping , "the department will continue to monitor apparel imports from vietnam until the end of the administration and work with all stakeholders to ensure an open and transparent monitoring process. .

on may 6 , 2008 , the doc completed its second six - month review of the monitoring data , and once again decided that "there is insufficient evidence to warrant self - initiating an antidumping investigation. .

according to the doc , there were no clothing imports from vietnam for 208 of the "nearly 500 ten - digit harmonized tariff system ( hts ) lines" covered by the monitoring program .

as was done in the first review , the doc compared trends in unit values and import levels to other nations supplying these products to the united states , and concluded that the data did not support an antidumping investigation .

the doc also announced that a third six - month review was to be done in september 2008 .

while there was no requirement that the doc take any action following the evaluations of the trade data , the program's continuation arguably will keep the monitoring program an issue of concern for the u.s. clothing manufacturers , the u.s. textile industry , major clothing importers , and large retail outlets in the united states .

among the possible administration actions that could have been taken were the self - initiation of an anti - dumping investigation on select clothing imports from vietnam , the opening of negotiations for a new bilateral textile agreement , and / or the termination of the monitoring program .

for the next six months , it appears that the administration has decided to take none of these options , but it is to continue to monitor clothing imports from vietnam .

the recent conduct of clothing trade between the united states and vietnam has been relatively short in duration , but varied in practice .

after president clinton terminated a u.s. trade embargo against vietnam on february 3 , 1994 , trade between the united states and vietnam grew rather slowly , in part because of the nonpreferential treatment vietnam received under u.s. trade laws .

vietnam was not a member of the world trade organization ( wto ) so it was not eligible for "normal trade relations" ( ntr ) status via that mechanism .

also , under u.s. law , vietnam could only be granted permanent ntr status by the passage of legislation , or granted temporary ntr status by the conclusion of a bilateral trade agreement and compliance with the "freedom of emigration" requirements of the jackson - vanik amendment .

lacking ntr status , vietnam's exports to the united states were subject to higher tariff rates than products from almost all other nations .

for clothing imports , products from vietnam faced tariff rates two to nine times higher than goods imported from countries with ntr status .

as a result , while u.s. imports from vietnam steadily increased from virtually nothing in 1993 to just over $1 billion in 2001 , u.s. clothing imports from vietnam rose from zero to $48 million over the same period ( see figure 1 ) .

in both its initial and subsequent request for comments , the doc indicated that it intended to conduct biannual reviews of the import data gathered by the monitoring program .

these reviews would examine the trade data at the 10-digit hts level to see if there is sufficient evidence to self - initiate an anti - dumping investigation .

the completion of the first six - month review was announced on october 26 , 2007 ; the completion of the second six - month review was announced on may 6 , 2008 .

both reviews determined that there was insufficient evidence to self - initiate an antidumping investigation of clothing imports from vietnam .

despite these findings , the doc also announced that it would continue to review the import monitoring program .

the third — and possibly final — six - month review is scheduled to begin in september 2008 .

below is a brief summary of findings of each of the six - month reviews , and the response of interested parties in the united states and vietnam to the doc's announcements .

there are sharp differences of opinion regarding the current structure of vietnam's clothing industry .

as was discussed above , some of the supporters of the monitoring program maintain that vietnam's clothing industry is dominated by state - owned and - operated enterprises that are heavily subsidized by the vietnamese government , gaining unfair advantage in the global market .

many opponents to the monitoring program contend that vietnam's clothing industry consists of hundreds of small , privately - owned and - operated companies that receive little help from the central government when facing a highly competitive global market .

vietnam's exports of clothing have experienced rapid growth over the last 12 years , but this expansion has largely been in line with the overall increase in vietnam's total exports .

what has changed is the mix of vietnam's major markets for its clothing exports , with the rapid rise in the importance of the u.s. market over the last few years .

over the last five years , there has been a marked increase in u.s. clothing imports from vietnam .

despite repeated changes in u.s. trade policy towards vietnam — including the conferral of normal trade relations , the imposition of import quotas for selected clothing items , and compliance with vietnam's wto accession — there has been steady growth in vietnam's clothing exports to the united states , and , with it , a rise in vietnam's overall market share in the united states .

however , vietnam remains a comparatively modest supplier of u.s. clothing imports .

even in the market segments where vietnam is among the top three suppliers to the united states , its portion of import supply with few exceptions remains below 10% .

recent trends in the gross output of the u.s. clothing industry provide an ambiguous picture of the possible effect of the recent rise in clothing imports from vietnam ( see figure 3 ) .

between 1997 to 2004 , there was a general decline in the value of u.s. clothing production that corresponded with the period of most rapid growth in the clothing imports from vietnam .

in 2005 , u.s. clothing production rose slightly , at the same time that the growth in clothing imports from vietnam slowed down .

both of these trends were generally consistent with the argument that clothing imports from vietnam were displacing clothing manufactured in the united states .

however , there are aspects of the recent trade trends that raise doubts about a causal link between the rise in clothing imports from vietnam taken alone and the decline in u.s. clothing production .

first , the decline in u.s. production predates the end of the u.s. trade embargo on vietnam , indicating that other factors may be involved .

second , the decline in u.s. production between 2000 and 2004 — over $30 billion — is nearly 13 times the size of the increase in clothing imports from vietnam during the same time period — another possible indication that other factors may be responsible for the decline in u.s. clothing production .

third , both u.s. clothing production and clothing imports from vietnam rose in 2005 , which is contrary to the relationship expected if clothing imports from vietnam were causing a decline in u.s. production .

finally , because its has been a relatively short period of time since vietnam has been allowed to export clothing to the united states , it is difficult to demonstrate any reliable trends or conduct time series analysis that will provide statistically significant results .

the completion of the two reviews by the department of commerce of its monitoring program provided little resolution or clarity to a number of questions raised about the authority and the necessity of establishing such a monitoring program .

the doc press releases appear to have been carefully worded to avoid a flat denial that there was evidence of dumping by vietnam , while simultaneously providing possible grounds for the continuation of the monitoring of selected vietnamese clothing imports .

in addition , there is sufficient ambiguity in the language of the press releases to allow the doc to amend or alter the categories of vietnamese clothing imports it monitors , if it chooses to do so .

one possible response for congress is to take no action .

given that the doc is monitoring trade flows , and has so far determined that there is insufficient evidence to initiate an anti - dumping investigation , it would appear that clothing imports from vietnam are generally in compliance with current u.s. laws and regulations .

if congress were to consider taken some action on this issue , there are several aspects of the current status of u.s. - vietnamese trade relations for clothing that might be examined .

first , the department of commerce has not publicly responded to requests from some members of congress , the vietnamese government , and some major u.s. clothing importers for the legal basis for establishing the monitoring program .

the federal register announcement of the creation of the monitoring program did not include the usual federal law citation establishing the authority to create the program .

congress could act to revisit the question of doc's legal authority for establishing the monitoring program .

second , there was concern by several members of congress that the current u.s. trade policy towards vietnam's clothing imports may violate both the spirit and the letter of the u.s. commitments to other wto members .

as such , congress might act to review the monitoring program to decide whether or not it violates existing wto agreements , exposing the united states to the risk of a formal complaint from vietnam .

third , congress could investigate vietnam's compliance with its promise to terminate all wto - prohibited subsidies to its clothing and textile industry .

as indicated by their submitted comments on the monitoring program , some u.s. textile manufacturers are concerned that vietnam is not living up to its promise , and continues to use direct and indirect subsidies to support its clothing exports .

such an investigation might also include research into vietnam's labor market to ascertain if the vietnamese government is suppressing the wages of clothing and textile workers below fair market values .

fourth , possibly based in part of the results the investigation mentioned above , congress could choose to pass legislation designed to counteract perceived unfair trade practices by vietnam in its export of clothing to the united states .

the proposed legislation might incorporate provisions that would make it easier to initiate anti - dumping or countervailing duty investigations in cases involving nonmarket economies , such as vietnam .

fifth , congress may decide to consider the claims of major clothing retailers and importers that the monitoring program has stunted trade with and investments in vietnam , thereby possibly causing them economic harm .

the doc review was designed to examine trade data to determine whether or not there was sufficient evidence to self - initiate an antidumping investigation against vietnam .

it did not analyze the trade data to determine if the program had distorted trade during its first six months of operation .

sixth , congress could also investigate the administration and operation of the monitoring program to determine if it is correctly identifying the types of clothing in which there might be possible dumping by vietnam .

among the criteria typically considered as being necessary conditions for proof of possible dumping are below market prices and significant market share .

in its review of clothing imports from vietnam , the doc reported rising unit prices and implied that prices were comparable to other clothing suppliers .

as for market share , some experts assert that unless a supplier provides more than 4% of the overall supply of a product , it cannot cause sufficient harm to substantiate dumping claims .

at present , there are very few categories of clothing for which vietnam achieves the market threshold level .

finally , congress might decide to authorize its own study of the monitoring program data to see if there is any evidence of dumping and / or sufficient evidence to warrant the continuation of the program .

one criticism previously raised with the doc's biannual review process was the problem of the seasonal nature of the global clothing market .

by assessing the monitoring program for a full year , congress could take into account the seasonal characteristics of the clothing market in evaluating the trade data .

