caregiving encompasses a wide range of activities , services , and supports to assist persons who are limited in their capacity for self - care because of a physical , cognitive , or mental disability or condition that results in a functional impairment and dependence on others .

those in need of assistance over an extended period of time often require long - term care services and supports .

although the need for long - term care affects people of all ages , the likelihood of needing long - term care assistance increases with age .

caregiving assistance to older persons with long - term needs can be provided in a variety of settings , including the care recipient's or caregiver's home ; in a community residential setting , such as an assisted living facility ; or in an institution , such as a nursing home .

formal caregiving refers to care that is provided by paid individuals who are employed by a long - term care service organization or agency , such as a nursing home or home health care agency , or who are self - employed .

informal caregiving refers to assistance provided by unpaid individuals , such as a family member , friend , or neighbor .

this report focuses on family caregiving — informal care provided primarily by spouses and children — to the older population .

family caregiving activities include assistance with personal care needs , or activities of daily living ( adls ) , such as eating , bathing and showering , dressing , using the toilet , walking across a small room , and transferring ( getting in and out of a bed or chair ) .

they may also include assistance with activities that are necessary for independent living , or instrumental activities of daily living ( iadls ) , such as shopping for groceries or personal items , performing housework or yardwork , managing money , preparing meals , using a telephone , doing laundry , getting around outside the home , and taking medications .

other family caregiver activities may include accessing the health care and social services systems , communicating with providers and insurers , and advocating for the care recipient .

in addition to hands - on assistance , caregivers may arrange , supervise , or pay for formal care to be provided to the care recipient , either as temporary relief from the caregiver's responsibilities ( i.e. , respite care ) or on a more permanent basis .

as caregiving needs change over time , formal and informal care arrangements can also shift .

formal or paid care may supplement or substitute for the informal caregiving activities provided by a family member .

family caregivers fulfill the majority of the need for long - term care by older persons with chronic disabilities in the united states .

more than 90% of older care recipients receive informal care , either alone or in combination with formal care .

demographic trends such as increases in life expectancy , as well as advances in medical care , have enabled persons with disabilities to live longer .

as a result , the demand for informal care provided to older relatives can last many years .

the aging of the baby - boom generation is also likely to increase demand for family caregiving to the older population .

moreover , most older individuals prefer to remain in their own homes and live in the community for as long as possible .

finally , the difficulty of recruiting and retaining paid long - term care workers has placed increased pressure on family caregivers .

the growing demand for care provided in the home has focused the attention of federal and state governments on efforts to expand programs that provide services and supports to family caregivers .

as demand for caregiving to older persons with disabilities is likely to increase , other demographic trends , such as smaller family sizes and increased divorce rates , may limit the number of available caregivers to older individuals , as well as the capacity for caregivers to provide needed care .

increased labor force participation among women , who traditionally have assumed the role of family caregiver , may make them unavailable to take on this role .

also , family members who no longer live in close proximity may limit the direct - care assistance that families are able to provide .

family caregivers are diverse in terms of gender , age , relationship to the care recipient , and life circumstances .

for many , caregiving is a rewarding activity ; however , some may face challenges associated with their caregiving responsibilities .

adult children caring for an elder parent might experience increasing stress or financial hardship as a result of the competing demands of work or child care .

others may experience increased physical and emotional strain sometimes associated with assisting a spouse or parent who has a disability or is cognitively impaired .

research indicates that , over time , a larger proportion of family caregivers were providing assistance to persons with higher levels of disability .

moreover , technical advances in home care mean that caregivers are more likely to assist with medical equipment and medications that require more skilled forms of care in the home , including oxygen equipment , intravenous medications , and catheters .

these caregivers may have little training or formal assistance in providing such care .

the federal government has expressed an interest in directly supporting family caregivers who provide the majority of long - term care assistance to older individuals , as evidenced by the national family caregiver support program enacted under the older americans act amendments of 2000 ( p.l .

106 - 501 ) .

sustaining informal caregiving can offset the need for publicly financed care .

however , demographic shifts that may affect the supply of family caregivers raise concerns about whether caregivers will be able to meet the potential increase in demand for long - term care assistance by older individuals in the future .

a recent study projects that the disabled older population , even under the most optimistic scenario , will increase by 50% between 2000 and 2040 .

over this same period , the share of older adults receiving paid long - term care is projected to increase ( from about 22% to 26% ) , while those receiving unpaid assistance from an adult child will fall ( from 28% to 24% ) .

recognizing family caregivers as an important part of the nation's long - term care delivery system , the federal government has established programs and initiatives that provide direct support to caregivers .

direct supports such as respite care , education and training , tax relief , and cash assistance are targeted at caregivers to reduce stress and financial hardship , and to improve caregiving skills , among other things .

other federal programs and initiatives provide home and community - based long - term care services and supports to the care recipient .

these programs can indirectly benefit caregivers in relieving caregiver burden by either supplementing the informal care being provided or substituting some informal care with paid support .

services provided to care recipients that can indirectly assist caregivers may include formal personal care services , assistive devices , and home modifications , among other things .

access to federal services that provide direct and indirect benefits to caregivers have different eligibility criteria and benefits .

as a result , these services are often limited and may be insufficient in terms of the scope and duration of benefits .

about 5.5 million adults aged 65 and older — about 16% of the u.s. population aged 65 and older — receive long - term care services and supports .

of those receiving services , the majority ( 70% , or 3.8 million ) live in the community ; the remaining 30% ( 1.7 million ) live in institutional settings .

generally , those individuals who live in long - term care facilities are the most impaired ; however , many older individuals with fairly significant limitations live in the community .

eligibility for assistance through publicly and privately financed long - term care benefits typically requires people to have limitations in or need supervision with at least two or more adls .

of those aged 65 and older who live in the community and receive long - term care , more than half ( 55.6% ) have three or more limitations in adls , 29.3% have limitations in one or two adls , and 15.1% have less intensive needs , requiring assistance only with iadls ( see table 1 ) .

among those older individuals who live in the community and receive long - term care , the vast majority receive some form of informal care .

for two - thirds of this group ( 65.5% ) , informal care is the only source of care provided in the home ; another quarter ( 25.9% ) receive some combination of informal and formal care , and the remainder ( 8.5% ) receive formal care alone .

although the presence of formal care is more likely to increase as a care recipient's level of disability increases , half of those most severely impaired with five or six adls ( 50.6% ) rely on informal caregivers alone for their personal care needs ( see table 2 ) .

other factors , such as gender and living arrangement , influence the type and amount of informal care received .

research findings indicate that women are more likely than men to receive any help , but that men receive a greater amount of care .

older men typically receive assistance from one caregiver , primarily their spouses , whereas older women are more likely to have multiple caregivers .

variation in the amount of care may be related to gender differences in the types of care received .

for example , men are more likely to receive help with personal care , housekeeping , and meal preparation activities , whereas women are more likely to receive help with transportation , shopping , and home repairs .

those who live with someone else receive a substantially greater amount of informal care than those who live alone .

alternatively , research has found that those who live alone , are not married , and live in public housing are more likely to use paid care .

income of the care recipient may also influence the type of care received .

data from a 2002 nationally representative study of the older population found that poor and near poor older care recipients living in the community with severe disabilities ( i.e. , three or more adls ) were more likely to receive paid personal care assistance than those with incomes greater than 125% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

greater reliance on paid help among the poor elderly most likely reflects assistance from medicaid and other public support programs .

the same study found that those with incomes between 125% and 400% of the fpl were more likely to rely on unpaid assistance only and received less paid support than those with lower incomes .

these individuals are less likely to meet income eligibility requirements for public benefits , such as medicaid , and may be unable to afford the costs of privately paid care .

the federal government has established programs and initiatives that provide direct support to family caregivers , including grant programs authorized under the older americans act and title xx of the social security act ( the social services block grant program ) .

these programs provide family caregivers with information and referral , respite care , and training .

in addition , some states' medicaid home and community - based waivers offer respite care as a covered service .

recently , some states began allowing family caregivers to be hired by the medicaid beneficiary , giving some cash assistance to caregivers .

other initiatives that offer direct assistance to caregivers include the family and medical leave act , which provides unpaid leave to eligible employees in order to care for a spouse , parent , or child with a serious health condition .

furthermore , tax provisions in current law offer caregivers some direct tax relief .

other federal programs and initiatives provide home and community - based long - term care services and supports to the care recipient .

these programs can indirectly benefit caregivers by relieving caregiver burden through supplementing the informal care being provided by caregivers or substituting it with paid support .

services provided to care recipients that can indirectly assist caregivers include formal personal care services , adult day health care , assistive devices , transportation , and nutrition services ( i.e. , home - delivered meals ) .

many of these services are offered through the same programs mentioned above ( i.e. , older americans act , social services block grant , and medicaid waivers ) .

access to benefits that directly assist caregivers are often limited by program funding and may be insufficient in coverage and duration .

furthermore , coverage for direct benefits to caregivers may be uneven across states .

federal programs that provide long - term care services to care recipients that , as a result , indirectly assist caregivers are often limited to those recipients who meet certain age requirements and financial and functional eligibility criteria ( eg , limitations with two or more adls ) .

in addition , some states use state - funds to provide programs and services , such as respite care , or offer state tax benefits to assist family caregivers .

these state initiatives are outside of the scope of this report .

the following describes the various federal government initiatives and programs .

a summary table of these federal programs and initiatives is provided in the appendix .

as the nation prepares for the growing older population and likely increase in demand for long - term care services among the frail elderly , congress will face a decision whether to expand the role of the federal government in providing direct support to family caregivers .

some policy makers may favor enhancing services and supports that provide either direct assistance or federal income tax relief to caregivers .

in doing so , the federal government would devote additional funding to new or existing programs or reduce federal revenues , implying increasingly difficult tradeoffs between support to caregivers and federal programs that benefit other populations .

alternatively , other policy makers may feel that greater state assistance to family caregivers is warranted , and that the federal government can best serve family caregivers by providing technical assistance to states in service planning and delivery .

still others may believe the federal government has a limited responsibility in assisting families who provide unpaid assistance , many by choice , to older individuals .

thus , congress may decide that no additional federal assistance can be made available to help family caregivers .

in this case , federal policy makers may want to evaluate how best to spend existing funds .

this section briefly describes three sets of policies that would expand or enhance the federal government's role in providing direct assistance to family caregivers to older adults .

these policy issues , which have either received recent congressional attention or otherwise been the subject of discussion among federal policy makers and other interested stakeholders , are organized into the following topics: enhancing and expanding caregiver services and supports , assisting employed caregivers through flexible workplace accommodations and income security , and providing caregivers with opportunities for additional tax credits .

many family caregivers identify the need for enhanced services and supports that can help them with their current caregiving responsibilities and provide further information assistance as caregiving demands change over time .

policy makers indicate that services such as respite care can improve care quality , avoid burnout , and allow caregivers to continue providing informal care to an older relative , thus potentially avoiding or delaying unnecessary institutionalization .

proponents of increased federal funding for services and supports to caregivers have indicated the need for enhanced education and training for caregivers so that they can develop the skills necessary to provide quality care to a frail elderly population .

others have suggested targeting services and supports to those caring for individuals with specific illnesses or disease , such as alzheimer's .

advocates have also suggested adding an assessment of the caregiver's needs to the existing eligibility determination and assessment processes for public benefits .

the caregiver assessment process would identify and link appropriate services and support for family caregivers .

these services could provide back - up support , in cases of emergency , counseling , or respite care .

caregiver assessments would also elicit information about the caregiver's health , willingness to provide care , and training and support needs .

through the assessment process family caregivers could learn about the resources available to them in their communities .

employed family caregivers often face disruptions in their work patterns as a result of elder care responsibilities .

these disruptions may include arriving to work late or leaving early , taking time off during the day , reducing the number of hours worked from full - time to part - time status , or taking a leave of absence .

major changes to employee work schedules and work disruptions can affect income and job security .

those who do leave the workforce to care for an older disabled family member have less opportunity to save or accrue benefits over their lifetime , which may leave them economically vulnerable in retirement .

workplace accommodations that allow employees to take unpaid leave for the purposes of assisting with the long - term care needs of older relatives can directly assist caregivers .

requiring employers to provide paid time off to their employees to care for the medical needs of certain family members may assist in alleviating some of the financial burden associated with caring for an older family member .

federal policies that support flexible workplace accommodations may prevent individuals from leaving the workforce altogether .

publicly funded programs that allow payment of family caregivers through consumer - directed service delivery models may provide caregivers with some income security .

as previously mentioned , for many family caregivers , providing assistance to a frail older individual can impose a substantial financial burden .

targeted tax relief to caregivers could offset some of the direct expenses associated with caregiving , including transportation for long - distance caregivers , purchase of assistive devices and technology ( i.e. , grab bars , bed rails , emergency response systems ) or home modifications ( i.e. , wheel chair ramps , shower stalls ) that can assist with the delivery of personal care , dietary supplements for the care recipient , adult day health care , and other medical or health - related services and products .

additional tax relief measures that would directly assist families caring for a disabled older individual include a targeted tax credit to caregivers .

other tax policies that would directly assist family caregivers would expand on current tax relief measures by broadening the taxpayer population eligible for these benefits .

for example , expanding the dependent definition under the dctc to include disabled older relatives who do not live with the taxpayer may include additional eligible taxpayers .

other policy proposals have included expanding the definition of dependent care expenses to include eldercare - related expenses and services .

this report will be updated as warranted .

