cellulosic biofuels are produced from cellulose derived from renewable biomass feedstocks such as corn stover ( plant matter generally left in the field after harvest ) , switchgrass , wood chips , and other plant or waste matter .

current production consists of a few small - scale pilot projects — and significant hurdles must be overcome before industrial - scale production can occur .

ethanol produced from corn starch and biodiesel produced from vegetable oil ( primarily soybean oil ) are currently the primary u.s. biofuels .

high oil and gasoline prices , environmental concerns , rural development , and national energy security have driven interest in domestic biofuels for many years .

however , the volume of fuel that can be produced using traditional row crops such as corn and soybeans without causing major market disruptions is limited ; to fulfill stated goals , biofuels must also come from other sources that do not compete for the same land used by major food crops .

proponents see cellulosic biofuels as a potential solution to these challenges and support government incentives and private investment to hasten efforts toward commercial production .

some federal incentives — grants , loans , tax credits , and direct government research — attempt to push cellulosic biofuels technology to the marketplace .

demand - pull mechanisms such as the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) mandate the use of biofuels , creating an incentive for the development of a new technology to enter the marketplace .

in contrast , petroleum industry critics of biofuel incentives argue that technological advances such as seismography , drilling , and extraction continue to expand the fossil - fuel resource base , which has traditionally been cheaper and more accessible than biofuel supplies .

other critics argue that current biofuel production strategies can only be economically competitive with existing fossil fuels in the absence of subsidies if significant improvements are made to existing technologies or new technologies are developed .

until such technological breakthroughs are achieved , critics contend that the subsidies distort energy markets and divert research funds from the development of other renewable energy sources not dependent on internal combustion technology , such as wind , solar , or geothermal , which offer potentially cleaner , more bountiful alternatives .

still others debate the rationale behind policies that promote biofuels for energy security , questioning whether the united states could ever produce and manage sufficient feedstocks of starches , sugars , vegetable oils , or even cellulose to permit biofuel production to meaningfully offset petroleum imports .

finally , there are those who argue that the focus on development of alternative energy sources undermines efforts to score energy savings through lower consumption .

feedstocks used for cellulosic biofuels are potentially abundant and diverse .

initially it was thought that a major advantage of cellulosic biofuels over corn - starch ethanol was that they could be derived from potentially inexpensive feedstocks that could be produced on marginal land .

corn , on the other hand , is a resource - intensive crop that requires significant use of chemicals , fertilizers , and water , and is generally grown on prime farmland .

however , field research now suggests that establishment costs , as well as collection , storage , and transportation costs , associated with the production of bulky biomass crops are likely to be more challenging than originally thought .

cellulose , combined with hemicellulose and lignin , provides structural rigidity to plants and is also present in plant - derived products such as paper and cardboard .

feedstocks high in cellulose come from agricultural , forest , and even urban sources ( see table 1 ) .

agricultural sources include crop residues and biomass crops such as switchgrass ; forest sources include tree plantations , natural forests , and cuttings from forest management operations .

municipal solid waste , usually from landfills , is the primary urban source of renewable biomass .

cellulosic feedstocks may have some environmental drawbacks .

some crops suggested for biomass are invasive species when planted in non - native environments .

municipal solid wastes may likely require extensive sorting to segregate usable material and may also contain hazardous material that is expensive to remove .

in general , calculation of the estimated cost of biofuels production does not reflect environmental or related impacts , but such impacts are relevant to overall consideration of biofuels issues .

biomass feedstocks are bulky and difficult to handle , presenting the industry with a major challenge .

whether feedstocks are obtained from agriculture or forests , specialized machinery would need to be developed to harvest and handle large volumes of bulky biomass .

for instance , harvesting corn for both grain and stover would be more efficient with a one - pass machine capable of simultaneously segregating and processing both — a combination forage and grain harvester .

currently , machines such as these are being developed to handle biomass crops , but few are commercially available .

storage facilities capable of keeping immense volumes of cellulosic material in optimal conditions may need to be developed , if an industry is to grow .

breaking down cellulose and converting it into fuel requires complex chemical processing — technology that is now rudimentary and expensive ( see table 2 ) .

starches ( such as corn ) and sugars ( such as cane sugars ) are easily fermented into alcohol , but cellulose must first be separated from hemicellulose and lignin and then broken down into sugars or starches through enzymatic processes .

alternatively , biomass can be thermochemically converted into synthesis gas ( syngas ) , which can then be used to produce a variety of fuels .

regardless of the pathway , as discussed below , at the present time processing cellulose into fuels is expensive relative to other conventional and alternative fuel options .

distribution and absorption constraints may hinder the use of cellulosic biofuels even if they are ultimately produced on an industrial scale .

in the coming years , greater volumes of advanced biofuels ( i.e. , cellulosic or non - corn - starch ethanol , biodiesel , or imported sugar ethanol ) would need to be blended into motor fuel to fulfill the rising advanced biofuel mandate .

private investment is viewed by many to be critical to the development of the cellulosic biofuels industry .

however , the aggregate value of required private investment is difficult to determine .

anecdotal evidence suggests the main sources of capital are venture capitalists and petroleum companies — commercial banks have a minor role .

venture capitalists generally have an extended ( 10-year ) perspective , which fits well with nascent technologies and is insulated from shorter - term financial volatility .

petroleum companies , faced with mandatory blending of biofuels with gasoline , have been eager to invest in the cellulosic industry .

numerous partnerships have been formed: british petroleum ( bp ) and verenium announced a partnership in august 2008 to accelerate the commercialization of cellulosic ethanol , with bp investing $90 million in the deal .

in another collaboration , royal dutch shell has teamed up with imogen corporation to develop cellulosic ethanol processes .

mascoma , a major ethanol producer , raised $30 million to support its investment in cellulosic feedstock conversion with technical support from general motors and marathon oil .

a collaboration between monsanto and mendel biotechnology inc. will focus on the breeding and development of crops for production of cellulosic biofuels .

usda and doe are currently engaged in a variety of activities to encourage development and demonstration of cellulosic biofuels technologies .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110 - 140 ) , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( the 2008 farm bill , p.l .

110 - 246 ) , and other legislation support research and development of a broad range of cellulosic technologies through usda and doe programs .

many of these programs extend the goals of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l .

109 - 58 ) and president bush's 20 in 10 initiative .

the biomass research and development initiative ( brdi ) coordinates federal interagency technology - push efforts , such as r&d , loans , and grants , under the guidance of the biomass research and development board .

the board was authorized in the biomass research and development act of 2000 and is co - chaired by usda and doe .

brdi plays a major role in r&d for the cellulosic biofuels industry .

in october 2008 , then - usda secretary ed schafer and doe secretary samuel w. bodman released the national biofuels action plan ( nbap ) , which provided an outline of the major challenges facing the cellulosic biofuels industry: feedstock production and logistics ; conversion science and technology ; distribution infrastructure and blending .

the plan reflects current federal and industry efforts to develop the cellulosic biofuels industry .

congress has shown a strong interest in the development of biofuels in general and cellulosic biofuels in particular .

debate may continue on the appropriate level of incentives needed to jump start the industry .

perhaps the most critical emerging issue is the federal mandate for cellulosic biofuels under the rfs — and the industry's potential to meet that mandate .

in the long term , congress might also consider the ongoing level of government support that is appropriate for the cellulosic biofuels industry — considered by some to be essential , especially if the rfs is to be met .

others contend such support could distort market signals .

the general level of support in the form of grants and loans has been determined in the 2008 farm bill but will likely be revisited as appropriations are considered .

the cellulosic biofuels tax credit applies to fuel produced from 2009 through 2012 and extension of this credit could be the subject of debate during the 112 th congress .

in addition , congress has considered the definition of biofuels and biofuel feedstocks that qualify for federal incentives .

estimates for commercial production of cellulosic biofuels vary widely .

some small - scale plants came online in 2010 .

however , the pace of plant construction falls short of doe's stated goal to make cellulosic ethanol competitive as a mature technology by 2012 .

some analysts have predicted a growth trend for the cellulosic ethanol industry similar to that for corn - starch ethanol .

however , there is a major difference between the two: the basic process for making corn - starch ethanol ( fermentation ) is thousands of years old , whereas that for cellulosic is very new .

the usda office of energy and new uses projects that cellulosic biofuels are not expected to be commercially viable on a large scale until at least 2015 .

however , the cellulosic biofuel portion of the rfs mandate is set at 3 billion gallons by 2015 , a substantial amount .

in its january 2009 baseline , the food and agricultural policy research institute ( fapri ) of the university of missouri assumes cellulosic biofuel production will fall behind the rfs and , as a consequence , the mandate will be waived by epa .

in an august 2009 baseline update , fapri projects cellulosic ethanol production in 2013 at 245 mgpy , about one - third of the 1 billion gallons in the rfs for that year .

