islamist extremism and militancy has been a menace to pakistani society throughout the post - 2001 period , becoming especially prevalent in 2007 and 2008 .

the numerous militant groups operating in pakistan , many of which have in the past displayed mutual animosity , may be increasing their levels of coordination and planning .

moreover , a new generation of militants is comprised of battle - hardened jihadis with fewer allegiances to religious and tribal leaders and customs .

deputy secretary of state negroponte warned in late 2008 that , "the united states and our allies face near - term challenges from pakistan's reluctance and inability to roll back terrorist sanctuaries in the tribal region. .

one western press report called pakistan's federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) "the most ungoverned , combustible region in the world," and an unrelenting surge in islamist - related violence in pakistan has some observers fearing a total collapse of the pakistani state .

this untenable state of affairs is compounded by pakistan's deteriorating economic conditions .

in 2008 , the influence of islamist militants appears to have grown unchecked in large parts of pakistan beyond the fata , bringing insecurity even to the north west frontier province ( nwfp ) capital of peshawar , which reportedly is in danger of being overrun by pro - taliban militants .

in late 2008 , militants in the region have attempted to assassinate the u.s. consul general in peshawar and undertook the targeted killing of an american aid worker there .

other so - called "settled areas" of pakistan beyond the tribal regions have come under attack from pro - taliban militants .

indeed , the "talibanization" of western pakistan appears to be ongoing and may now threaten the territorial integrity of the pakistani state .

the instability in western pakistan has broad implications for international terrorism , for pakistani stability , and for u.s. efforts to stabilize afghanistan .

from the state department's country reports on terrorism 2007 ( released april 2008 ) : the united states remained concerned that the federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) of pakistan were being used as a safe haven for al qaeda terrorists , afghan insurgents , and other extremists.... extremists led by baitullah mehsud and other al qaeda - related extremists re - exerted their hold in areas of south waziristan.... extremists have also gained footholds in the settled areas bordering the fata .

the report noted that the trend and sophistication of suicide bombings grew in pakistan during 2007 , when there was more than twice as many such attacks ( at least 45 ) as in the previous five years combined .

rates of such bombings have only increased in 2008 .

cia director hayden said in march 2008 that the situation on the pakistan - afghanistan border "presents a clear and present danger to afghanistan , to pakistan , and to the west in general , and to the united states in particular. .

he agreed with other top u.s. officials who believe that possible future terrorist attacks on the u.s. homeland likely would originate from that region .

u.s. policy in the fata seeks to combine better coordinated u.s. and pakistani military efforts to neutralize militant threats in the short term with economic development initiatives meant to reduce extremism in pakistan over the longer - term .

congressional analysts have identified serious shortcomings in the bush administration's fata policy: in april 2008 , the government accountability office issued a report in response to congressional requests for an assessment of progress in meeting u.s. national security goals related to counterterrorism efforts in pakistan's fata .

their investigation found that , "the united states has not met its national security goals to destroy terrorist threats and close safe haven in pakistan's fata," and , "no comprehensive plan for meeting u.s. national security goals in the fata has been developed. .

house foreign affairs committee chairman representative howard berman called the conclusions "appalling. .

in late 2008 , u.s. officials have indicated that they are seeing greater pakistani cooperation .

in february 2008 , pakistan stopped attending meetings of the tripartite commission under which nato , afghan , and pakistani forces meet regularly on both sides of the border .

however , according to general mckiernan on november 18 , 2008 , the meetings resumed in june 2008 and three have been held since then , with another planned in december 2008 .

gen. mckiernan , pakistan's chief of staff ashfaq pervez kayani , and afghan chief of staff bismillah khan represent their respective forces in that commission .

in april 2008 , in an extension of the commission's work , the three forces agreed to set up five "border coordination centers" — which will include networks of radar nodes to give liaison officers a common view of the border area .

these centers build on an agreement in may 2007 to share intelligence on extremists' movements .

only one has been established to date , at the torkham border crossing .

according to u.s. army chief of staff gen. george casey in november 2008 , cooperation is continuing to improve with meetings between u.s. and pakistani commanders once a week .

also , u.s. commanders have praised october 2008 pakistani military moves against militant enclaves in the tribal areas , and u.s. and pakistani forces are jointly waging the "operation lionheart" offensive against militants on both sides of the border , north of the khyber pass .

in addition , afghanistan - pakistan relations are improving since musharraf's august 2008 resignation .

karzai attended the september inauguration of president asif ali zardari , widower of slain former prime minister benazir bhutto .

the "peace jirga" process — a series of meetings of notables on each side of the border , which was agreed at a september 2006 dinner hosted by president bush for karzai and musharraf — has resumed .

the first jirga , in which 700 pakistani and afghan tribal elders participated , was held in kabul in august 2007 .

another was held in the improving climate of afghanistan - pakistan relations during october 2008 ; the afghan side was headed by former foreign minister dr. abdullah .

it resulted in a declaration to endorse efforts to try to engage militants in both afghanistan and pakistan to bring them into the political process and abandon violence .

although u.s. - pakistan military cooperation is improving in late 2008 , u.s. officials are increasingly employing new tactics to combat militant concentrations in pakistan without directly violating pakistan's limitations on the u.s. ability to operate "on the ground" in pakistan .

pakistani political leaders across the spectrum publicly oppose any presence of u.s. combat forces in pakistan , and a reported defense department plan to send small numbers of u.s. troops into the border areas was said to be "on hold" because of potential backlash from pakistan .

this purported u.s. plan was said to be a focus of discussions between joint chiefs chairman mullen and kayani aboard the aircraft carrier u.s.s .

lincoln on august 26 , 2008 , although the results of the discussions are not publicly known .

on september 3 , 2008 , one week after the meeting , as a possible indication that at least some aspects of the u.s. plan were going forward , u.s. helicopter - borne forces reportedly crossed the border to raid a suspected militant encampment , drawing criticism from pakistan .

however , there still does not appear to be u.s. consideration of longer term "boots on the ground" in pakistan .

u.s. forces in afghanistan now acknowledge that they shell purported taliban positions on the pakistani side of the border , and do some "hot pursuit" a few kilometers over the border into pakistan .

since well before the september 3 incursion , u.s. military forces have been directing increased u.s. firepower against militants in pakistan .

missile strikes in pakistan launched by armed , unmanned american predator aircraft have been a controversial , but sometimes effective tactic against islamist militants in remote regions of western pakistan .

pakistani press reports suggest that such drones "violate pakistani airspace" on a daily basis .

by some accounts , u.s. officials reached a quiet january understanding with president musharraf to allow for increased employment of u.s. aerial surveillance and predator strikes on pakistani territory .

musharraf's successor , president asif zardari , may even have struck a secret accord with u.s. officials involving better bilateral coordination for predator attacks and a jointly approved target list .

neither washington nor islamabad offers official confirmation of predator strikes on pakistani territory ; there are conflicting reports on the question of the pakistani government's alleged tacit permission for such operations .

three predators are said to be deployed at a secret pakistani airbase and can be launched without specific permission from the islamabad government ( pakistan officially denies the existence of any such bases ) .

pentagon officials eager to increase the use of armed drones in pakistan reportedly meet resistance from state department diplomats who fear that pakistani resentments built up in response to sovereignty violations and to the deaths of civilians are harmful to u.s. interests , outweighing potential gains .

a flurry of suspected predator drone attacks on pakistani territory in the latter months of 2008 suggests a shift in tactics in the effort to neutralize al qaeda and other islamist militants in the border region .

as of later november , at least 20 suspected predator attacks had been made on pakistani territory since july , compared with only three reported during all of 2007 .

such strikes have killed more than 100 people , including numerous suspected foreign and indigenous fighters , but also women and children .

the new commander of the u.s. central command , gen. david petraeus , claims that such attacks in western pakistan are "extremely important" and have killed three top extremist leaders in that region .

officially , pakistan's foreign ministry calls predator attacks "destabilizing" developments that are "helping the terrorists. .

strident pakistani government reaction has included summoning the u.s .

ambassador to lodge strong protest , and condemnation of missile attacks that islamabad believes "undermine public support for the government's counterterrorism efforts" and should be "stopped immediately. .

during his first visit to pakistan as centcom chief in early november , gen. petraeus reportedly was met with a single overriding message from pakistani interlocutors: cross - border u.s. military strikes in the fata are counterproductive .

pakistan's defense minister warned gen. petraeus that the strikes were creating "bad blood" and contribute to anti - american outrage among ordinary pakistanis .

in november 2008 , pakistan's army chief , gen. ashfaq pervez kayani , called for a full halt to predator strikes , and president zardari has called on president - elect obama to re - assess the bush administration policy of employing aerial attacks on pakistani territory .

some reports indicate that u.s. military assistance to pakistan has failed to effectively bolster the paramilitary forces battling islamist militants in western pakistan .

such forces are said to be underfunded , poorly trained , and "overwhelmingly outgunned. .

however , a july 2008 pentagon - funded assessment found that section 1206 "global train and equip" funding — which supplements security assistance programs overseen by the state department — is important for providing urgently needed military assistance to pakistan , and that the counterinsurgency capabilities of pakistani special operations forces are measurably improved by the training and equipment that come through such funding .

major government - to - government arms sales and grants to pakistan since 2001 have included items useful for counterterrorism operations , along with a number of "big ticket" platforms more suited to conventional warfare .

the united states has provided pakistan with nearly $1.6 billion in foreign military financing ( fmf ) since 2001 , with a "base program" of $300 million per year beginning in fy2005 .

these funds are used to purchase u.s. military equipment .

defense supplies to pakistan relevant to counterinsurgency missions have included more than 5,600 military radio sets ; six c - 130e transport aircraft ; 20 ah - 1f cobra attack helicopters ; 26 bell 412 transport helicopters ; night - vision equipment ; and protective vests .

the defense department also has characterized transferred f - 16 combat aircraft , p - 3c maritime patrol aircraft , and tow anti - armor missiles as having significant anti - terrorism applications .

in fact , the state department claims that , since 2005 , fmf funds have been "solely for counterterrorism efforts , broadly defined. .

such claims elicit skepticism from some observers .

other security - related u.s. assistance programs for pakistan are said to be aimed especially at bolstering islamabad's police and border security efforts , and have included u.s. - funded road - building projects in the nwfp and fata .

the bush administration has launched an initiative to strengthen the capacity of pakistan's frontier corps ( fc ) , an 80,000-man paramilitary force overseen by the pakistani interior ministry .

the fc has primary responsibility for border security in the nwfp and baluchistan provinces .

some $400 million in u.s. aid is slated to go toward training and equipping fc troops by mid - 2010 , as well as to increase the involvement of the u.s. special operations command in assisting with pakistani counterterrorism efforts .

some two dozen u.s. trainers began work in october 2008 .

fewer than 100 americans reportedly have been engaged in training pakistan's elite special service group commandos with a goal of doubling that force's size to 5,000 .

the united states also has undertaken to train and equip new pakistan army air assault units that can move quickly to find and target terrorist elements .

some in congress have expressed doubts about the loyalties of locally - recruited , pashtun fc troops , some of whom may retain pro - taliban sympathies .

congress has appropriated billions of dollars to reimburse pakistan and other nations for their operational and logistical support of u.s. - led counterterrorism operations .

these "coalition support funds" ( csf ) account for the bulk of u.s. financial transfers to pakistan since 2001 .

more than $9 billion has been appropriated or authorized for fy2002-fy2009 pentagon spending for csf for "key cooperating nations. .

pentagon documents show that disbursements to islamabad — at some $6.7 billion or an average of $79 million per month since 2001 — account for roughly 80% of these funds .

the amount is equal to about one - quarter of pakistan's total military expenditures .

according to secretary of defense gates , csf payments have been used to support scores of pakistani army operations and help to keep some 100,000 pakistani troops in the field in northwest pakistan by paying for food , clothing , and housing .

they also compensate islamabad for ongoing coalition usage of pakistani airfields and seaports .

concerns have grown in congress and among independent analysts that standard accounting procedures were not employed in overseeing these large disbursements from the u.s. treasury .

the state department claims that pakistan's requests for csf reimbursements are carefully vetted by several executive branch agencies , must be approved by the secretary of defense , and ultimately can be withheld through specific congressional action .

however , a large proportion of csf funds may have been lost to waste and mismanagement , given a dearth of adequate controls and oversight .

senior pentagon officials reportedly have taken steps to overhaul the process through which reimbursements and other military aid is provided to pakistan .

the national defense authorization act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) for the first time required the secretary of defense to submit to congress itemized descriptions of coalition support reimbursements to pakistan .

the government accountability office ( gao ) was tasked to address oversight of coalition support funds that go to pakistan .

a report issued in june 2008 found that , until about one year before , only a small fraction of pakistani requests were disallowed or deferred .

in march 2007 , the value of rejected requests spiked considerably , although it still represented one - quarter or less of the total .

the apparent increased scrutiny corresponds with the arrival in islamabad of a new u.s. defense representative , an army officer who reportedly has played a greater role in the oversight process .

gao concluded that increased oversight and accountability was needed over pakistan's reimbursement claims for coalition support funds .

since the 2001 renewal of large overt u.s. assistance packages and reimbursements for militarized counterterrorism efforts , a total of about $12 billion in u.s. funds went to pakistan from fy2002-fy2008 .

the majority of this was delivered in the form of coalition support reimbursements ; another $3.1 billion was for economic purposes and nearly $2.2 billion for security - related programs .

according to the state department , u.s. assistance to pakistan is meant primarily to maintain that country's ongoing support for u.s. - led counterterrorism efforts .

pakistan's tribal areas are remote , isolated , poor , and very traditional in cultural practices .

the social and economic privation of the inhabitants is seen to make the region a particularly attractive breeding ground for violent extremists .

the u.s. - assisted development initiative for the fata , launched in 2003 , seeks to improve the quality of education , develop healthcare services , and increase opportunities for economic growth and micro - enterprise specifically in pakistan's western tribal regions .

a senior usaid official estimated that , for fy2001-fy2007 , about 6% of u.s. economic aid to pakistan has been allocated for projects in the fata .

the bush administration urges congress to continue funding a proposed five - year , $750 million aid plan for the fata initiated in fy2007 .

the plan will support islamabad's own ten - year , $2 billion sustainable development effort there .

skepticism has arisen about the potential for the new policy of significantly boosted funding to be effective .

corruption is endemic in the tribal region and security circumstances are so poor that western nongovernmental contractors find it extremely difficult to operate there .

moreover , as much as half of the allocated funds likely will be devoted to administrative costs .

islamabad is insisting that implementation is carried out wholly by pakistani civil and military authorities and that u.s. aid , while welcomed , must come with no strings attached .

the related establishment of reconstruction opportunity zones ( rozs ) that could facilitate further development in the fata ( and neighboring afghanistan ) , an initiative of president bush during his march 2006 visit to pakistan , ran into political obstacles in congress and is yet to be finalized .

the roz program would provide duty - free access into the u.s. market for certain goods produced in approved areas and potentially create significant employment opportunities .

while observers are widely approving of the roz plan in principle , many question whether there currently are any products with meaningful export value produced in the fata .

one senior analyst suggests that the need for capital and infrastructure improvements outweighs the need for tariff reductions .

a pakistani commentator has argued that an extremely poor law and order situation in the region will preclude any meaningful investment or industrialization in the foreseeable future .

in march 2008 , more than two years after the initiative was announced , s. 2776 , which would provide duty - free treatment for certain goods from designated rozs in afghanistan and pakistan , was introduced in the senate .

a related bill , h.r .

6387 , was referred to house subcommittee four months later .

neither bill has emerged from committee to date .

