in recent years , congress has expressed interest in intellectual property protection for industrial designs .

in the 111 th congress , legislation was introduced that would have established a "repair" exemption within the patent act .

although potentially of broad application , this legislation appears to have been motivated by intellectual property rights in the designs of automobile parts .

also in the 111 th congress , proposed legislation would have provided proprietary rights in fashion designs .

the senate has also recently provided its consent to ratify the geneva act to the hague agreement concerning the international registration of industrial designs , an international agreement that would allow u.s. designers to obtain intellectual property protection overseas more readily .

in addition to these legislative activities , industrial designs have also been subject to notable developments in the federal courts and internationally .

many of these issues may be subject to continued discussion in the 112 th congress .

a review of intellectual property issues pertaining to industrial designs therefore appears timely .

the term "industrial design" broadly refers to the creation of the form and function of objects of everyday use .

virtually every manufactured product , including such items as automobiles , clothing , computers , footwear , furniture , and telephones , embodies an industrial design .

industrial designers perform the tasks previously accomplished by individual artisans with respect to mass - produced goods , commonly endeavoring to make products more convenient to use and more visually appealing .

as explained by the industrial designers society of america: industrial design is the profession that determines the form of a manufactured product , shaping it to fit the people who use it and the industrial processes that produce it .

industrial designers work to make our lives more comfortable , pleasurable and efficient .

by studying people at work , at home and in motion , they create products like office chairs that promote proper posture , kitchen tools that are comfortable even for elderly hands and toys that provide safe play and learning for all children .

in particular , industrial designers deal with the parts of a product that humans interact with , striving to give universal access to products that are ecologically responsible and safe to use .

also , they give a product with distinctive elegance that makes us want it .

"intellectual property" is a phrase that refers to proprietary rights in creations of the mind .

currently , some measure of protection for industrial designs can be found under three different intellectual property laws: copyright , trademark , and patent .

perceived shortcomings with these systems as applied to industrial designs have led to proposals to establish specialized , or sui generis , regimes that apply to particular sorts of designs .

congress established such a regime for boat hulls in 1988 , and serious discussion is ongoing with respect to the merits of sui generis intellectual property rights for fashion designs .

this report identifies several current issues relating to intellectual property in industrial designs .

it begins by describing the different sorts of intellectual property protection that apply to industrial designs .

the report then identifies current issues at the interface between intellectual property and industrial designs .

the report closes by reviewing the impact that sui generis  rights regimes may have upon innovation and competition in the united states .

industrial designs that are well - received in the marketplace may attract competition .

william t. fryer iii , a member of the faculty of the university of baltimore school of law , asserts that "[o]nce an effective product design is successful , competitors rush in and copy the product , particularly the product appearance. .

advocates of enhanced protection for industrial designs therefore assert that intellectual property rights potentially provide an important mechanism for allowing innovators to reap the economic rewards of their investments .

on the other hand , some observers are concerned that overly expansive intellectual property rights may raise prices and decrease the availability of consumer goods .

under current intellectual property laws , industrial designs may potentially be protected through copyright , trade dress , and design patents .

congress has also established a specialized , or sui generis , intellectual property right for the protection of boat hull designs .

multiple forms of intellectual property protection are potentially available to industrial designs .

some observers believe that this "ragged quilt of protection" does not adequately protect designers , however .

in particular , the inability of copyright , trademark , and design patent law to protect industrial designs that have some functional component is frequently criticized .

others disagree , believing that there is no compelling case for expanding intellectual property protection for industrial designs and that doing so would limit competition and the availability of products for consumers .

recent debate about the scope of intellectual property rights for industrial designs has occurred within several specific contexts .

this report next turns to a review of these issues .

congressional interest in industrial designs spans a number of different issues and industries .

this breadth of interest in strengthening intellectual property rights for industrial designs arguably reflects the changing nature of the u.s. economy .

given the increasing sophistication of foreign manufacturing , the protection of industrial designs provides one mechanism for sustaining competitive domestic design - based industries .

as attorney regan keebaugh explains , "[i]f economic reality means the united states can no longer compete in the production side of manufacturing , then one way to maintain jobs in the manufacturing industry is through developing a strong design industry to ensure that products made overseas are designed in the united states. .

intellectual property laws are said to promote innovative industries by establishing exclusive rights in new inventions , industrial designs , and other creations .

absent such rights , "free riders" could easily duplicate and exploit the innovative developments of others .

further , because they incurred no design and development costs , copyists could likely undersell the original innovator .

the resulting inability of innovators to capitalize on their creations would lead to an environment where too little research and development occurs .

intellectual property rights may also encourage others to design around these proprietary interests , pointing the way to new products , markets , economies of production and even entire industries .

although the established intellectual property paradigms of copyrights , trademarks , and patents provide protection for traditional works of authorship , brand names , and inventions , they also limit or deny protection for other sorts of subject matter .

as this report has explained , copyright , trade dress , and design patent law to varying degrees deny protection to industrial designs with a functional component .

sui generis protection systems may potentially fill gaps that may not have been anticipated by the framers of the traditional intellectual property regimes .

sui generis protection regimes also offer a potential advantage when compared to the copyright , trademark , and patent statutes .

although the established forms of intellectual property apply broadly to numerous industries and types of innovations , sui generis protection regimes may be more precisely tailored to meet the needs of particular industries .

for example , the acquisition of rights could be designed to fit the perceived needs of particular industries , the scope and term of protection may be particular product cycles , and competitors and consumers could enjoy the privilege to use protected subject matter in certain circumstances .

policy makers may also appreciate that the designs of previous sui generis regimes have tended to be based upon one of the established intellectual property paradigms .

for example , the rights established under the semiconductor chip protection act of 1984 are similar to copyright .

on the other hand , both the design and plant patent systems were incorporated into the existing utility patent laws and therefore follow a patent - like model .

some observers believe that copyright - or trademark - like protection represents the most appropriate scheme of protection for industrial designs because neither regime requires courts or government officials to analyze the merits of "creative expression applied to goods. .

on the other hand , other experts believe that the design patent law , which does entail an analysis of whether an industrial design would have been obvious to a skilled artisan , has historically served as the "best option" for protecting industrial designs .

although the establishment of sui generis  regimes may reduce harmful free riding that results in reduced investment in innovation , experts have also expressed concerns about the expansion of intellectual property rights .

they observe that the primary mechanism through which intellectual property rights create incentives to innovate is to limit the ability of others to participate in the marketplace .

from the perspective of the government , such systems are inexpensive when compared to prizes or other potential incentives .

yet they also limit the ability of firms to compete and possibly raise prices and limit the products available to the public , at least in the short term .

in this regard , it should be appreciated that the traditional intellectual property regimes often did not leave certain subject matter outside the scope of protection by accident .

rather , this circumstance resulted from a purposeful legislative choice .

for example , the patent statute stipulates that designs that would have been obvious to a skilled artisan should not be awarded proprietary rights .

the supreme court recently explained this rule as resulting from the judgment that "[w]ere it otherwise patents might stifle , rather than promote , the progress of useful arts. .

to the extent that proposed sui generis regimes lower this threshold and award proprietary rights in "subpatentable" innovations , they may diminish the public domain and hamper both future innovation and competition .

finally , congressional award of proprietary rights to some industries may inspire additional lobbying efforts by others .

other sorts of potentially innovative products — including databases and other compilations of information ; perfumes , colognes , and scents ; and computer software — are among those that , at least according to some observers , do not interface well with the traditional copyright , trademark , and patent regimes .

mark janis , a member of the faculty of the university of iowa college of law , explains that once one industry has made its case for a sui generis regime of intellectual property rights , "[i]t takes little imagination to extend this reasoning to justify the creation of a multitude of additional second tier ... regimes having specialized subject matter requirements. .

determining which industries , if any , deserve sui generis rights outside the established intellectual property paradigms ultimately remains a matter of legislative judgment .

