congress has expressed ongoing concern about the high rate of violent crimes committed by drug traffickers , organized criminal groups , and gangs in central america , particularly in the "northern triangle" countries of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras ( see figure 1 ) .

central american governments , the media , and some analysts have attributed a significant proportion of homicides to maras ( gangs ) , many of which have ties to the united states .

u.s. concerns about gangs are due in part to the role gangs have played in the violence , extortion , and forced recruitment that has fueled internal displacement , as well as the record - level emigration of unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) and families to the united states .

the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) has asserted that gang violence is contributing to a "refugee - like" situation in the northern triangle .

governments maintain that recent migration has been due to a number of factors and that their efforts are reducing violence and illegal emigration .

in recent years , congress has considered what level of u.s. assistance is most appropriate to help central american countries combat gang activity and what types of programs are most effective in that effort .

members of congress have also taken an interest in the impact on the gang problem of u.s. deportations of individuals with criminal records to central america , as well as the evolving relationship between mexican transnational criminal organizations ( tcos ) and the gangs .

congress is currently examining the degree to which governments in the region are taking steps to address gangs in a way that does not cause human rights abuses , as required by conditions included in the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

this report describes the gang problem in central america , discusses country approaches to deal with the gangs , and analyzes u.s. policy with respect to gangs in central america .

it concludes with possible questions for oversight that congress may consider .

country efforts to deal with gangs vary .

in general , governments in the northern triangle have adopted more aggressive law - enforcement approaches than other central american countries .

tough anti - gang approaches carried out in the mid - 2000s failed to stave off rising crime rates in the region and resulted in negative unintended consequences .

el salvador's ill - managed truce ( see " el salvador's 2012 gang truce and dissolution ," below ) has discouraged governments from negotiating with the gangs .

experts have urged governments to move away from enforcement - only policies toward "second - generation" anti - gang programs similar to the types of efforts that have been employed in u.s. cities such as boston and los angeles .

these approaches involve prevention of violence , intervention to prevent retaliatory violence , enforcement , and reentry of rehabilitated gang members .

regional cooperation to address gang challenges is occurring among security and defense ministers , as well as attorney generals .

prosecutors from the three northern triangle countries have signed an agreement pledging to work together to prosecute gangs .

the three presidents have signed an agreement to create a regional task force to address the gangs that will facilitate intelligence sharing and extraditions among the three countries , among other aims .

in the mid - 2000s , u.s. officials and members of congress expressed serious concerns about gangs and violence in central america and their spillover effects on the united states .

for several years , however , concerns about gang - related violence were overshadowed by broader concerns about drug trafficking and organized crime in central america , particularly after mexico's aggressive anticrime efforts pushed mexican transnational criminal organizations ( tcos ) deeper into the sub - region .

the failed truce in el salvador and the escalating gang - related violence that has fueled illegal emigration from that country and parts of honduras since 2014 has refocused attention on gangs in central america .

congress has expressed concern about the problem of transnational gangs and interest in the effectiveness of u.s. international anti - gang efforts .

since the 110 th congress , interest in the topic of gangs and violence in central america has included concerns about the domestic and international criminal activities of the gangs , as well as the relationship between gangs and mexican tcos .

members of congress have also expressed interest in the effects of u.s. deportation policy and mano dura approaches in the region on central american gangs .

as congress has appropriated significant funding for anti - gang efforts , it has also conducted oversight of the efficacy of u.s. programs that affect central american gangs .

between fy2008 and fy2013 , congress appropriated roughly $38 million in global international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) funds for anti - gang efforts in central america .

a regional gang adviser based in el salvador has coordinated central american gang programs since that time .

the incle line item for central american gang programs ended in fy2013 .

since fy2013 , approximately $10 million in central american regional security initiative ( carsi ) funding has been assigned to continue specific anti - gang initiatives .

hundreds of millions more has supported broader law - enforcement and prevention efforts that have impacted the gang phenomenon .

u.s. agencies have been engaged on both the law - enforcement and the preventive side of dealing with central american gangs for more than a decade .

in 2004 , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) created an ms - 13 task force to improve information sharing and intelligence gathering among u.s. and central american law - enforcement officials .

in 2005 , the bureau of immigrations and customs enforcement ( ice ) within dhs created a national anti - gang initiative called "operation community shield" ; ice also has a national gang unit .

also in 2005 , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) undertook a comprehensive assessment of the gang problem in central america and mexico .

usaid found that although a few u.s. programs addressed some aspects of the gang phenomenon , several new initiatives would be needed in the areas of prevention , law enforcement , and rehabilitation and reintegration .

throughout 2005 and 2006 , an interagency committee worked to develop a u.s. strategy to combat criminal gangs from central america and mexico , which was announced at a july 2007 u.s. - central america integration system summit on security issues .

the strategy acknowledged that , based on previous u.s. and regional experiences , future anti - gang efforts should be holistic , comprehensive , and regional in scope .

it called for active engagement with governments and institutions in the region .

the strategy stated that the u.s. government would pursue coordinated anti - gang activities in five broad areas: diplomacy , repatriation , law enforcement , capacity enhancement , and prevention .

in january 2008 , the state department sent a regional gang adviser to el salvador to coordinate the state department's central american gang programs .

those programs have included training and technical assistance to law - enforcement and corrections officials , anti - gang workshops and training at the international law enforcement academy in san salvador , and regional coordination efforts .

in april 2010 , the government accountability office ( gao ) published a report concluding that the u.s. government had developed and implemented an interagency anti - gang strategy that outlines the threats posed by central american gangs and the activities each agency is doing to respond to those threats .

however , gao recommended that the strategy be revised to include better coordination mechanisms between the agencies and performance measures .

the u.s. government has expanded its citizen - security and law - enforcement programs in central america beyond anti - gang efforts and antidrug programs through carsi , a regional security initiative for which congress appropriated roughly $1.5 billion from fy2008 to fy2016 .

carsi has five primary goals: ( 1 ) create safe streets for the citizens in the region ; ( 2 ) disrupt the movement of criminals and contraband within and between the nations of central america ; ( 3 ) support the development of strong , capable , and accountable central american governments ; ( 4 ) reestablish effective state presence and security in communities at risk ; and ( 5 ) foster enhanced levels of security and rule - of - law coordination and cooperation between the nations .

in 2015 , the woodrow wilson center for international scholars published a comprehensive assessment of carsi that raised concerns about the organization's lack of a comprehensive strategy to improve citizen security in the region , tendency to focus on combating drug trafficking with vetted units rather than on broader law - enforcement reform and professionalization , and weak program evaluation ( aside from usaid's community - based prevention programs ) .

the state department's bureau of western hemisphere affairs ( wha ) manages carsi funding , with the bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) implementing most state department programs .

inl has sponsored trainings and technical exchanges for police , prison officers , and justice - sector operators from across the region .

inl has also provided training and equipment to vetted police units and intelligence analysts and established more than 50 community policing / model police precinct locations in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras .

inl has trained hundreds of police officers , who have provided training to more than 200,000 youth through the gang resistance education and training program .

inl has embedded u.s. law - enforcement advisers and prosecutors with investigative units that are conducting money - laundering investigations targeting the leadership of ms - 13 in el salvador .

inl is supporting gang - related research as well , including a study under way by florida international university to examine whether and how gang members in el salvador can leave a gang without putting their lives at risk .

additionally , wha has transferred resources to the department of justice ; the department of homeland security , particularly ice ; and usaid to enable those agencies to counter the impact of gangs in the region .

state department funding is also supporting a regional corrections adviser , who is assisting with prison - reform programs in the region .

usaid has implemented a variety of country and regional gang - prevention programs .

under carsi , usaid supports an approach to crime and violence prevention that directly targets at - risk individuals and communities while simultaneously helping municipalities to develop and implement crime - prevention plans .

in honduras , municipalities have received support in rehabilitating public spaces , installing street lighting , and procuring materials for schools and recreational facilities .

national - level security and justice - sector reform efforts are designed to strengthen the institutions charged with enforcing and administering justice , including programs aimed at improving victims assistance , juvenile justice , and respect for human rights .

usaid also produces and disseminates research on what works in crime and violence prevention .

usaid uses geographic and demographic risk factors to provide population - based interventions to individuals and communities at high risk of becoming victims or perpetrators of crime and violence .

the creation of more than 200 youth outreach centers in high - violence communities has provided youth with safe places where they can study , participate in recreational activities , and receive job training and job placement assistance .

usaid has built prominent public - private partnerships with local and multinational companies .

for example , mobile phone providers claro and tigo deliver free internet access to outreach centers in el salvador and honduras , and in el salvador , microsoft trains thousands of youth on software and information technology .

governments also support some programs .

the honduran government has provided $3 million from its security tax to support usaid's violence - prevention programming .

through vanderbilt university , usaid concluded a rigorous three - year impact evaluation of its carsi - funded community - based crime and violence - prevention programs in 120 high - crime urban treatment and control communities in el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and panama .

final results demonstrated that crime victimization is lower and public perception of security is higher in usaid's carsi treatment communities .

until recently , however , usaid and inl were working in separate municipalities and were not closely coordinating their efforts .

usaid and inl are now working to implement a "place - based" model in which prevention and policing programs are co - located and closely coordinated .

usaid is providing community - resiliency programs in communities where inl is training law enforcement in community - based policing .

the model is active in selected sites in guatemala , honduras , and el salvador and is based on evidence from los angeles , ciudad juárez , and medellin that integrated prevention and law - enforcement efforts can have significant impacts in even the most violent communities .

usaid and the state department are in the process of obtaining a waiver from the office of foreign asset control ( ofac ) to ensure that programming they have planned to support the rehabilitation of former gang members does not violate sanctions on ms - 13 members .

usaid and inl aim to expand the place - based model to more locations in the coming year .

within the department of justice ( doj ) , the fbi is implementing several programs to improve the capacity of law enforcement in central america to carry out investigations and share intelligence on gang suspects .

the fbi also focuses on developing and protecting witnesses who will testify in gang cases .

the office of overseas prosecutorial development , assistance , and training ( opdat ) has provided training on prosecuting gang - related cases to judicial officials in the region .

the deployment of a bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) regional adviser to san salvador is enabling atf to support transnational gang investigations involving u.s. - origin firearms .

fbi , opdat , and atf programs are supported by carsi or other state department funding and are carried out in collaboration with inl .

the programs include the following: central american fingerprinting ex change ( café ) : a criminal file and fingerprint retrieval initiative that has incorporated thousands of fingerprints of gang members from mexico , el salvador , belize , honduras , and guatemala into the fbi's integrated automated fingerprint identification system since 2006 .

the data are accessible to central american police officials .

transnational anti - gang ( tag ) units : a program that began in el salvador in october 2007 involving the creation of vetted police units that work with fbi agents stationed in san salvador to investigate gang - related cases that have a nexus with the united states .

tag activities have been expanded into guatemala and honduras and have contributed to successful indictments of ms - 13 members in major cities across the united states .

central american law enforcement exchange ( calee ) : a joint fbi - inl program that brings law - enforcement officials from central america together with their counterparts from several large u.s. cities to share information and intelligence .

since 2005 , ice's operation community shield has led to the arrest of more than 32,200 gang members in the united states , including thousands of ms - 13 and 18 th street gang members .

in addition to operation community shield , ice formed an anti - gang task force in honduras to gather intelligence to support gang investigations in honduras and the united states .

ice special agents are also based at other u.s. embassies in the region , including in guatemala and el salvador .

ice supports transnational criminal investigative units ( tcius ) in el salvador , honduras , guatemala , and panama .

the tcius focus on transnational investigations and border crimes , some of which have a nexus with gangs .

as previously mentioned , the state department and dhs signed an agreement in 2014 to expand the criminal history information sharing ( chis ) program , which has been used to share information on criminal deportees with mexican law - enforcement officials , to guatemala , honduras , and el salvador .

on october 11 , 2012 , the treasury department designated the ms - 13 as a significant tco whose assets will be targeted for economic sanctions pursuant to executive order ( e.o. ) .

13581 .

issued in july 2011 as part of the obama administration's national strategy to combat transnational organized crime , e.o .

13581 enables the treasury department to block the assets of members and associates of designated criminal organizations and prohibit u.s. citizens from engaging in transactions with these individuals .

the treasury department worked with ice to build evidence to support the designation of the ms - 13 based on the gang's involvement in "drug trafficking , kidnapping , human smuggling , sex trafficking , murder," and other serious criminal offenses that threaten u.s. and central american citizens .

as of july 2016 , eight individuals appear to have been designated as subject to u.s. sanctions .

although evidence suggests that some ms - 13 cliques collaborate with groups based in el salvador , some analysts maintain that transnational collaboration is not the norm for the ms - 13 .

salvadoran officials seemed surprised by the designation , with then - president funes asserting that u.s. officials may be "overestimating the economic risk or financial risk resulting from the criminal actions of the ms." ofac officials have confirmed that the amount of money transferred out of the united states from ms - 13 gang members or their families or affiliates is very limited .

nevertheless , u.s. law enforcement is working with special police and prosecutors to investigate some of the designated ms - 13 leadership for money - laundering offenses committed under salvadoran law .

evolving gang threat .

to what degree are the gangs in central america becoming more organized and sophisticated ? .

are their concerns primarily local or transnational ? .

what types of ties do these gangs have with other criminal organizations based in central america and with mexican tcos ? .

to what extent are cliques in the region communicating with groups in the united states ? .

u.s. strateg y .

nine years after the adoption of an interagency strategy to combat the gangs , what have been the results of u.s. efforts ? .

how is the success or failure of the strategy being measured ? .

how are domestic and international efforts in support of the strategy being coordinated ? .

carsi .

analysts have criticized carsi for lacking a comprehensive strategy and rigorous monitoring and evaluation .

to what extent , if at all , does carsi have a guiding strategy behind its programs ? .

how has that strategy evolved over time ? .

how are the successes or gaps in the implementation of that strategy being measured and adjusted ? .

leveraging u.s. a ssistance .

to what extent are u.s. anti - gang efforts being coordinated with those of other donors ? .

has the private sector stepped forward to complement any donor - led initiatives ? .

have any recipient countries been able to take over responsibility for programs that began with u.s. funding ? .

how effective are regional anti - gang efforts ? .

new tools .

to what extent are countries in the region using new tools — such as asset forfeiture and wiretapping — to go after the gangs ? .

how has the treasury designation of ms - 13 as a tco affected u.s. and salvadoran efforts against that gang ? .

gangs as terrorist groups .

what are the implications of the government of el salvador designating gangs as terrorists ? .

