the energy information administration ( eia ) , in its october 2008 short - term energy and winter fuels outlook ( stewfo ) , warned consumers that not only might they expect the prices of natural gas , heating oil , propane , and electricity to be higher in the winter of 2008-2009 compared to those of 2007-2008 , but that the national oceanic atmospheric administration's ( noaa's ) projections forecast a 2.4% colder winter compared to last year .

according to the october stewfo , the effect of these two factors will be that american consumers might expect to experience sharply higher home heating costs this winter .

the december 2008 revision of the stewfo , demonstrating the importance of the price of oil to american consumers , reduced forecasted winter heating expenditures .

for the united states as a whole , the revised stewfo projections are that natural gas customers might expect to see their expenditures rise by 0.2% , heating oil consumers might see their expenditures fall by 19.6% , propane expenditures might fall by 12.4% , and electricity expenditures might rise by 7.9% .

the projected increases in natural gas and electricity costs are likely to put pressure on consumer budgets , and their effects could be even greater in an environment of deteriorating national economic conditions .

even reduced home heating oil and propane expenditures might be a burden when combined with job losses and reduced incomes .

these conditions are likely to increase the importance of the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) .

reduced oil consumption , related to relatively high prices , as well as slowing economic conditions , are expected to keep the price of oil below peak levels .

the oil market demand and supply balance has become more favorable for consumers with relatively large amounts of excess capacity available .

over the coming months oil markets are likely to experience an increase in demand due to lower prices , as well as a reduction of demand due to declining economic growth and production .

the market price will respond to the balance between these offsetting factors .

this report analyzes the key factors affecting the various winter fuels markets , including consumption , production , reserves , and storage volumes .

 table 1 provides a summary profile of the winter heating picture for the winter of 2008-2009 based on u.s. averages .

within the u.s. averages , regional differences can be important .

in addition , the noaa heating degree day projections differ by region .

regionally , the eia expects natural gas expenditures to increase the most in the south , at 7.7% , and least in the west , at - 8.3% .

expenditures in the northeast are expected to increase by 5.7% and decline in the midwest by 3.5% .

heating oil expenditures are expected to decline by 19.4% in the northeast , where the largest proportion of heating oil consumers are located , and in the south by 11.6% .

expenditures on heating oil are forecasted to fall by 24.8% in the midwest , 31.7% and in the west , well above the national average .

propane expenditures are projected to fall by 9.8% in the northeast , and 7.7% in the south , 15.2% in the midwest , and 18.3% in the west .

electricity expenditures are projected to rise by 10.5% in the northeast , 4.1% in the midwest , 11.5% in the south , and decline by 0.5% in the west .

differences in regional expenditure projections are due to regional fuel price differentials , varying intensities of consumption during the winter season , and regional variability in the noaa forecast for heating degree days .

due to volatile market dynamics , the prices used in the stewfo may not yield the forecasted declines in expenditures .

for example , while the stewfo uses $2.53 as the u.s. average price per gallon in the home heating oil market , the price reported by the eia for the week of december 1 , 2008 was $2.68 , or 5.6% more .

if oil prices continue to fall , or stabilize at lower levels , the stewfo estimates could be high .

the u.s. natural gas market is a regional market , drawing supplies from domestic sources , 83% in 2007 , as well as imports , largely via pipeline from canada , which accounted for about 16% .

in addition , a small part of domestic supply is imported in the form of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) , which is part of a small world - wide market that is important to some countries , japan , for example , and is expected to grow in importance in others , including the united states .

consumers of natural gas include households and commercial customers that largely use natural gas for space heating .

electric power generators , especially those operating plants that satisfy peak demand loads , use natural gas to power generators .

industrial consumers use natural gas as a raw material , as for example in fertilizers , and as a heat source in industrial processes .

household , commercial , and electric power generators are those consumers most likely to be affected by winter conditions .

table 2 presents average household natural gas consumption and price data for the winter heating seasons , 2004-2005 through 2008-2009 .

on a per household basis , natural gas consumption has been relatively stable .

prices spiked in winter 2005-2006 , and are projected to exceed earlier peaks in 2008-2009 .

the price - consumption relationship suggests that natural gas demand is price inelastic , meaning that consumption does not vary sharply with variations in price .

an inelastic relationship is likely because home heating and cooking are typically considered to be necessities by households , and , in general , existing metering does not provide consumers easy access to quantities used and costs generated .

on the national level , natural gas consumption rose by about 6.5% in 2007 compared to 2006 .

this increased consumption was led by the electric power sector with a 10.5% increase , and households with a 8.2% increase .

the commercial sector increased consumption by 6.1% and industrial consumers increased consumption by 2.2% .

the increase in household consumption is largely related to the increasing proportion of households using natural gas .

about 52% of u.s. households use natural gas as their primary heating source .

u.s. natural gas production is projected to rise by 6.7% in 2008 and by 4.2% in 2009 .

these increases follow a 4.3% increase in production in 2007 .

physical supply from production is expected to be adequate for the winter of 2008-2009 .

while some hurricane damage did result from the storms of 2008 , resulting in a production shut - in of about 165 billion cubic feet of natural gas , total output is still expected to increase in 2008 and 2009 .

because natural gas consumption , especially by households , is cyclic and weather related , peaking during the winter heating season , and to a lesser extent during the summer , accumulation of stored gas takes place at other times .

stored natural gas is then released into the supply system during peak periods to augment production .

although the amount in storage at the beginning of the 2008-2009 winter heating season , 3.110 trillion cubic feet , was less than last year at the comparable time , it was still 50 billion cubic feet above the five - year average from 2003 through 2007 .

key factors in determining the accuracy of the stewfo projections are likely to be the weather , the effect of what appears to be a deteriorating economic condition , and the level of oil prices .

a colder winter than anticipated will drive up household consumption and costs , especially in the normally colder climate areas .

a warmer winter will drive consumption and costs down .

the level of economic activity factor is open to several interpretations .

loss of jobs and income would tend to depress consumption , but natural gas used for heating and cooking is a necessity for most consumers .

also , it is unknown how deep the current recession is likely to be .

oil prices are loosely linked to natural gas prices .

historically , the linkage was through fuel substitution ; however , fuel oil is now only a minor competitor to natural gas in terms of fuel substitution .

more recently , the price linkage is based on energy content .

oil prices have been volatile , reaching a high of over $147 per barrel in the summer of 2008 , but falling into the $80 per barrel range at the beginning of the winter 2008-2009 heating season .

home heating oil is a middle distillate , derived from the same part of the oil refining process as diesel fuel .

as a result , the price of home heating oil is closely related to the price of oil as well as the price of diesel fuel .

approximately 7% of u.s. households heat with oil , and most of these consumers are in the northeast , where 31% of total consumers use heating oil as their primary heating fuel .

eia expects average heating oil expenditures per household to fall by $383 , or 23.5% , during the winter of 2008-2009 .

projected declines in the northeast are 19.4% , and 11.6% in the south , 24.8% in the midwest , and 31.7% in the west .

diesel fuel , a product almost identical to home heating oil , has been more expensive than gasoline recently , and at the beginning of the 2008-2009 winter heating season averaged about $0.40 per gallon more than gasoline .

this price differential has resulted from u.s. refiners emphasis on gasoline production , and a high level of world demand for diesel fuel .

the costs of gasoline , diesel fuel , and heating oil are all directly related to the price of crude oil .

the energy information administration ( eia ) estimates that about 73% of the cost of gasoline is crude oil cost , and 64% of the cost of diesel fuel and heating oil is crude oil cost .

inventories of home heating oil were affected by hurricanes gustav and ike .

at the start of the winter heating season , inventories were at approximately 122 million barrels .

while this level is some 12 million barrels less than the available amount at the beginning of the 2007-2008 winter heating season , it is still near the five - year average .

as a result , price spikes are not expected to arise from inventory problems .

the key risk factor for consumers of home heating oil is the price of oil .

oil prices have been volatile in 2008 .

the stewfo uses a projected oil price of $100 per barrel in 2008 , and $51 in 2009 .

if the price stays below $50 per barrel , as observed early in december 2008 , heating oil expenditures could be even less than projected .

if the price of oil spikes to levels above projected values , the stewfo could underestimate expenditures .

with a deteriorating economic condition , lower oil and petroleum product prices , and an unstable , tight world oil market , the price level for oil is uncertain .

propane provides primary home heating for approximately 6.5 million households in the united states , or 6% of the total households supplied with fuels covered in this report .

propane consumers are projected to experience a 12.4% , or $209 , decrease in expenditures this winter heating season .

eia expects the number of propane consumers to decline by about 1.1% during 2008 and 2009 .

however , expenditure decreases for this heat source are less than those expected for home heating oil consumers .

consumption is expected to increase , but the price decreases expected for propane , about 14.3% , are less than those expected for heating oil , 23.5% .

propane supply is unique compared to the other fuels covered in this report , in the sense that it is a by - product , and not directly produced .

the production of gasoline as well as natural gas give rise to propane supplies .

as a result , when the availability of those fuels is high , so is the supply of propane .

propane production and inventories are expected to be adequate to meet demand during the winter 2008-2009 heating season .

many of the same factors influence expected propane prices that affect natural gas and home heating oil prices .

however , in this case , the relationship is somewhat indirect because of the by - product nature of propane .

propane prices are , unlike the other fuels covered in this report , affected by distance and dispersion of the consumer .

this is because the distribution process usually requires deliveries of relatively small quantities , by truck , to individual consumers .

electricity output is related to natural gas pricing and availability because it uses natural gas as a production input .

electricity also competes with natural gas as a final consumer heating source .

approximately 35% of u.s. households use electricity as their primary heating source .

regionally , only 12% of households in the northeast use electricity , while 59% use electricity in the south .

on average , electricity consumers can expect to pay 7.9% more for winter heating in 2008-2009 than in 2007-2008 .

this increase is as a result of 6.5% higher prices for electricity as well as higher usage rates due to the expected colder temperatures .

eia expects overall electricity demand growth in 2008 to be about 1% and flat during 2009 .

as a result , little in the way of new demand will stress the generation and distribution system .

electricity prices are directly affected by the cost of raw materials , notably natural gas prices , and coal prices , which are expected to continue to decrease from the peaks attained earlier in 2008 .

the primary risk factors concerning the stewfo are the weather and economic conditions .

total household expenditures on heating are equal to the price that must be paid times the quantity of fuel used .

the weather , measured by the number of heating degree days , largely determines quantity of fuel used .

conservation , in the form of reducing the temperature inside the house can also reduce the quantity of fuel consumed , but for a given desired temperature , heating degree days is the key factor .

the 2008-2009 winter heating season is expected to be colder than recent winter seasons .

if the noaa forecast estimates turn out to over or under state the number of heating degree days , the quantities demanded of heating fuels will fall , or rise .

the other component of total expenditures , price of fuel , is determined by a complex web of related prices and other economic variables .

in a period of deteriorating economic conditions , the key relationship may be that between the level of economic activity , measured by the gross domestic product growth rate , and the price of crude oil on world markets .

at the beginning of the 2008-2009 winter heating season the price of crude oil has been observed to be below $50 per barrel , a decline of almost 66% compared to the recent peak prices .

a lower price of crude oil directly reduces the price of home heating oil and propane .

natural gas prices that are linked to crude oil prices , historically and by energy content , also could be lower as a result of lower oil prices .

this result is especially likely in a market environment of adequate storage , domestic supply growth , and reduced need for lng imports .

because natural gas is a primary fuel in electricity generation , a link also exists between oil , natural gas , and electricity prices .

the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) is the primary federal government program to supplement home heating expenditures .

this program is composed of two parts: funding for block grants to states , and emergency contingency funds .

for fy2008 , the block grant portion of the program was funded at $1.98 billion and the emergency contingency funds at $590.3 million .

initial budget proposals for fy2009 had liheap funding falling by over 20% .

the fy2009 funding level for liheap , as set in p.l .

110-329 , signed on september 30 , 2008 more than doubles the fy2008 amounts .

the block grant portion of the program will receive $4.509 billion , with the emergency contingency component of the program receiving $590 million .

normally , the emergency contingency funds are released at the discretion of the president , however this year , the law required all liheap funds to be released within thirty days of enactment .

in addition , the legislation provides for the expansion of eligibility in the program to 150% of poverty , or 75% of the state median income .

previously , the standards had been 150% of poverty , or 60% of state median income .

citgo , the united states based subsidiary of the venezuelan national oil company pdvsa , has a separate , and non - u.s. governmental , low cost heating oil program .

this program is operated in conjunction with citizens energy corporation , a non - profit organization .

during the winter heating season 2007-2008 the program provided an estimated 112 million gallons of home heating oil to about 224,000 households in 23 states .

the fuel is discounted by 40% of the delivered price .

households can receive a maximum allocation of 100 gallons through the program , about one sixth of the estimated quantity needed for the 2008-2009 season .

the stewfo forecasts that americans will face increased need for home heating fuels during the winter 2008-2009 heating season due to colder temperatures offset by lower prices for some fuels .

if accurate , the result is likely to be decreased expenditures for what most households view as a necessity .

while decreased heating expenses are generally a gain to consumers , the winter 2008-2009 heating season might provide a budget challenge due to deteriorating economic conditions , possibly resulting in increasing unemployment , slow income growth , and higher prices for food and other goods .

on the other hand , the economic slowdown is likely to continue to moderate the cost of heating as projected in the stewfo .

a positive factor is the expanded funding available to liheap , which may be able to help those least able to pay the increased costs .

