agriculture is generally viewed as an inherently risky enterprise .

farm production levels can vary significantly from year to year and by location , primarily because farmers operate at the mercy of nature , and frequently are subjected to weather - related and other natural disasters .

since the great depression , policymakers have decided that the federal government should absorb some portion of the weather - related production losses that otherwise would depress farm income and could alter farmers' decisions about what to produce in some high - risk locations .

federal crop insurance is the primary ongoing crop loss assistance program .

it is permanently authorized by the federal crop insurance act , as amended ( 7 u.s.c .

1501 et seq .

 ) , and is administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's risk management agency ( rma ) .

this is complemented with the non - insured assistance program , administered by the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which is available to producers not offered insurance coverage .

lack of insurance availability occurs in locations where there is insufficient production history to determine actuarial risks of a crop or in regions where production of a specific commodity is relatively small .

following a widespread and severe drought in 1988 , congress approved a large ad hoc disaster assistance program to supplement the ongoing disaster programs .

such ad hoc assistance subsequently has became routine .

for more information on currently available agricultural disaster assistance , see crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance .

since the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized , it does not require periodic reauthorization in an omnibus farm bill .

however , during the 2007-2008 farm bill debate , some policymakers expressed interest in revising the crop insurance program in the context of the farm bill with two goals: to score cost savings and / or to supplement it with a permanent disaster payment program .

ultimately , the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) , enacted on june 18 , 2008 , contained provisions that accomplished both of those goals .

this report provides background on the crop insurance program and describes in detail changes made to it as part of the 2008 farm bill .

federal crop insurance policies are marketed and serviced by private insurance companies .

in purchasing a policy , a producer growing an insurable crop may select a level of crop yield and price coverage and pay a portion of the premium , which increases as the levels of yield and price coverage rise .

the remainder of the premium is covered by the federal government .

coverage is made available through various insurance products , including crop - specific revenue insurance , which allows a participating producer to insure a target level of crop revenue rather than just production levels .

according to the usda , the federal crop insurance program provided coverage in 2007 to over 100 crops covering more than three - fourths of planted acreage in the country .

although the list of covered commodities has grown in recent years , 80% of total policy premiums ( and federal subsidies ) are accounted for by just four commodities — corn , soybeans , wheat , and cotton .

because the program is not subject to periodic reauthorization , major changes to the crop insurance program usually are not addressed in the context of an omnibus farm bill .

over the past 25 years , the program has been subject to three major legislative enhancements ( in 1980 , 1994 , and 2000 ) , each of which has pumped additional federal dollars into the program in order to enhance farmer participation levels in anticipation of precluding the demand for ad hoc disaster payments .

since the last major modification in 2000 , the federal subsidy to the crop insurance program has averaged about $3.25 billion per year , up from an annual average of $1.1 billion in the 1990s and about $500 million in the 1980s .

nearly two - thirds of the current federal spending is used to subsidize insurance policy premiums , and the balance primarily covers the government share of program losses and reimburses participating private insurance companies for their administrative and operating expenses ( see table 1 ) .

although the scope of the program has widened significantly over the past 25 years , the anticipated goal of crop insurance replacing disaster payments has not been achieved .

in virtually every crop year since 1988 , congress has provided ad hoc disaster payments to farmers with significant weather - related crop losses .

these have been made available primarily through emergency supplemental appropriations , and , until recently , regardless of whether a producer had an active crop insurance policy .

the exception to the historical pattern is the fy2007 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-28 , as amended by the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ) , which is expected to provide an estimated $2.4 billion in crop disaster payments for 2005 , 2006 , or 2007 crop losses , but only to those producers who held an active crop insurance policy or enrolled in the noninsured assistance program in the year of the crop loss .

since fy1989 , total disaster payments have amounted to more than $20 billion , or just over $1 billion per year .

over the past six years ( fy2001-fy2006 ) , the federal cost of the crop insurance program combined with ad hoc supplemental disaster payments has averaged $4.5 billion per year ( see figure 1 ) .

for a summary of all agricultural disaster assistance provided by congress since 1988 , see crs report rl31095 , emergency funding for agriculture: a brief history of supplemental appropriations , fy1989-fy2009 .

the following sections review the major crop insurance and disaster assistance provisions of the enacted 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) and the major issues that shaped the debate .

see the appendix , below , for a comparison of the crop insurance and disaster assistance provisions in the enacted 2008 farm bill , with the house - and senate - passed versions of the farm bill and previous law .

because of the rising cost of the crop insurance program , many policymakers viewed the program as a potential target for spending reductions , whereby savings could be used to fund new initiatives in various other titles of the farm bill .

consequently , title xii of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , the 2008 farm bill ) contains several revisions to the crop insurance program , most of which are designed to reduce program costs .

for all crop insurance provisions in title xii , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates net budget outlay savings of $3.9 billion over 5 years ( fy2008-fy2012 ) , or $5.6 billion over 10 years ( fy2008-fy2017 ) , relative to the march 2007 baseline which was the official budget scoring benchmark for the bill .

in an attempt to protect and preserve virgin prairie , the 2008 farm bill added a provision ( sec .

12020 ) that declares that any parcel of native sod greater than 5 acres that is cultivated for production of an annual crop after may 22 , 2008 , is ineligible for federal crop insurance and noninsured crop disaster assistance during the first five crop years of planting .

however , the governors for states within the prairie pothole national priority area are given the discretion of electing whether this provision is effective for their state .

for many years , policymakers have been concerned about waste , fraud , and abuse within the federal crop insurance program .

the agricultural risk protection act ( arpa ) of 2000 ( p.l .

106-224 ) contained several provisions designed to enhance usda's recognition of and response to challenges to program compliance and integrity .

in response to the arpa requirements , usda used "data mining" techniques to compile an annual list of producers who either exhibit high loss ratios ( i.e. , high indemnity payments relative to total premiums ) , exhibit high frequency and severity of losses , or are suspected of poor farming practices that might contribute to production losses .

usda estimates that the use of the spot - check list has prevented between $70 million and $110 million each year in improper payments .

mandatory funding authorized by arpa for data mining and other arpa - related program integrity activities expired at the end of fy2005 .

a general provision in the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) allows usda to use up to $11.166 million in mandatory funds in fy2008 to strengthen its ability to reduce waste , fraud , and abuse within the crop insurance program .

however , future funding for this activity was uncertain .

the 2008 farm bill ( sec .

12021 ) authorizes up to $4 million annually for data mining activities beginning in fy2009 , and authorizes $15 million annually for four years ( fy2009-fy2013 ) to upgrade usda's computer technology for crop insurance .

during the 2007-2008 farm bill debate , some policymakers wanted to make permanent in the farm bill some level of disaster payments to supplement the crop insurance program .

supporters say that ongoing farm disaster programs do not adequately address emergency needs when a major disaster strikes and that usda should have at its disposal a permanent source of disaster funds in the same manner as the federal emergency management administration ( fema ) .

questions in the debate included how such a program would be funded given current budget constraints , and whether the permanent availability of disaster payments would adversely affect participation in the crop insurance program , and possibly encourage production on high - risk lands .

title xv ( sec .

15101 ) of the 2008 farm bill authorizes a series of new disaster programs through september 30 , 2011 , the largest of which is a supplemental revenue assistance payment program for crop producers .

the sure program is designed to compensate eligible producers for a portion of crop losses that are not eligible for an indemnity payment under the crop insurance program ( i.e. , the portion of losses that is part of the deductible on the policy. ) .

an eligible producer can receive a payment equal to 60% of the difference between a target level of revenue and the actual total farm revenue for the entire farm .

the target level of revenue would be based on the level of crop insurance coverage selected by the farmer , thus increasing if a farmer opts for higher levels of coverage .

 ( see the box in this report for a description of how the guarantee level and total farm revenue are defined by the statute. ) .

to be eligible for a payment , a producer must be either in or contiguous to a county that has been declared a disaster area by either the president or the secretary of agriculture .

payments are limited so that the disaster program guarantee level cannot exceed 90% of what income likely would have been in the absence of a natural disaster .

the producer also must have at least the minimum level of crop insurance ( cat ) coverage for insurable crops and participate in the nap program for non - insurable crops .

the statute made an exception for the 2008 crop year by allowing producers who did not purchase crop insurance or nap coverage in advance to be eligible for the program , as long as they pay the equivalent administrative fee for coverage within 90 days of enactment .

some farm groups have raised concerns about the delayed timing of payments under sure .

final payments for crop losses cannot be determined until after the marketing year since a portion of the disaster payment formula is based on the national average market price of the commodity for the year in which the loss was incurred .

for example , since the 2008 marketing year for corn and soybeans ends september 30 , 2009 , any eligible sure payments for 2008 losses cannot be made until late october 2009 at the earliest .

consequently , some farm groups have asked usda to make more timely payments under the new program by providing advance payments until the final payment levels can be determined .

to date , program regulations have not been released .

in addition to the supplemental crop revenue assistance payment program described above , the 2008 farm bill also authorizes and funds four smaller disaster programs: ( 1 ) livestock indemnity payments , which compensate ranchers at a rate of 75% of market value for livestock mortality caused by a disaster ; ( 2 ) livestock forage disaster program , to assist ranchers who graze livestock on drought - affected pastureland or grazing land ; ( 3 ) emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees and farm raised fish , which will provide up to $50 million to compensate these producers for disaster losses not covered under other disaster programs ; and ( 4 ) tree assistance program , for orchardists and nursery growers who can receive a payment to cover 70% of the cost of replanting trees or nursery stock following a disaster ( up to $100,000 per year per producer ) .

all five of these farm bill disaster programs will receive funding through a newly authorized agricultural disaster relief trust fund within the u.s. treasury .

the trust fund will receive the equivalent of 3.08% of the amount received each year ( fy2008-2011 ) in u.s. customs receipts collected on certain goods .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates the combined total costs to be $3.8 billion over the four - year life of the programs , relative to the march 2007 budget baseline .

of this total , cbo estimates that supplemental crop revenue assistance will cost $1.7 billion over the four years , or an average of $425 million per year .

another $1.6 billion would cover increased crop insurance and nap costs associated with the crop insurance and nap purchase requirement .

the balance of $500 million would cover the combined estimated cost of the other four disaster programs .

if the cost of the programs exceeds the level of funding provided through customs receipts , the 2008 farm bill gives the trust fund the authority to borrow from the treasury such sums as necessary to meet its obligations .

