nanotechnology is believed by many to be one of the most promising areas of technological development and among the most likely to deliver substantial economic and societal benefits to the united states in the 21 st century .

with so much potentially at stake , a global competition has emerged among nations and companies to develop and capture the value of nanotechnology products .

competitiveness generally refers to the comparative ability of a nation or company to bring products or services to markets .

assessments of competitive strength generally rely on indicators such as revenues , market share , and trade .

however , since nanotechnology is still largely in an early stage of development the u.s. government does not collect this type of data for nanotechnology products .

in addition , nanotechnology is not a discrete industry , but rather a technology applied across a wide range of products in disparate industries for which nanotechnology products generally account for a small fraction of total sales .

for these reasons , an assessment of u.s. industrial competitiveness in nanotechnology — in the same manner that analysts would assess the competitiveness of mature industries — is not possible at this time .

alternatively , this report reviews national nanotechnology research and development ( r&d ) investments , scientific papers , and patents as indicators of current u.s. scientific and technological competitiveness and potential indicators of future industrial competitiveness in nanotechnology products .

the federal government has played a central role in catalyzing u.s. r&d efforts .

in 2000 , president clinton launched the u.s. national nanotechnology initiative ( nni ) , the world's first integrated national effort focused on nanotechnology .

the nni has enjoyed strong , bipartisan support from the executive branch , the house of representatives , and the senate .

each year , the president has proposed increased funding for federal nanotechnology r&d , and each year congress has provided additional funding .

since the inception of the nni , congress has appropriated a total of $8.4 billion for nanotechnology r&d intended to foster continued u.s. technological leadership and to support the technology's development , with the long - term goals of: creating high - wage jobs , economic growth , and wealth creation ; addressing critical national needs ; renewing u.s. manufacturing leadership ; and improving health , the environment , and the overall quality of life .

the united states is not alone in seeking to tap the perceived potential of nanotechnology .

following the creation of the nni , more than 60 nations have established their own national nanotechnology initiatives , many based on the u.s. model .

estimated global annual public investments in nanotechnology , including those of the united states , reached $6.4 billion in 2006 , with another $6.0 billion invested by the private sector .

in addition , some countries have established strategic plans ; nanotechnology - focused science , technology , and innovation parks ; venture capital funds ; and other policies and programs to accelerate the translation of nanotechnology research into products to exploit its economic potential .

these investments and policies , coupled with generally optimistic expectations , have raised interest and concerns about the global competitive position of the united states in the development and commercialization of nanotechnology .

in 2003 , congress enacted the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act ( p.l .

108-153 ) assigning responsibilities and initiating research efforts to address key challenges .

in the act , congress explicitly established global technological leadership , commercialization , and national competitiveness as central goals of the nni: the activities of the program shall include — ...ensuring united states global leadership in the development and application of nanotechnology ; advancing the united states productivity and industrial competitiveness through stable , consistent , and coordinated investments in long - term scientific and engineering research in nanotechnology ; accelerating the deployment and application of nanotechnology research and development in the private sector , including start - up companies ; ...and encouraging research on nanotechnology advances that utilize existing processes and technologies .

congress has expressed interest in understanding whether the current level of appropriations and the portfolio of activities pursued by the nni is sufficient to achieve these goals .

there are a variety of perspectives on the sufficiency and balance of activities and resources devoted to nanotechnology r&d , regulation , and infrastructure .

this report provides an overview of nanotechnology , current and anticipated applications , indicators of u.s. scientific and technological strength , and issues and options congress may opt to consider for the federal role , if any , in promoting the nation's competitive position in nanotechnology .

nanotechnology — a term encompassing nanoscale science , technology , and engineering — involves the understanding and control of matter at scales between 1 and 100 nanometers .

a nanometer is one - billionth of a meter ; by way of comparison , the width of a human hair is approximately 80,000 nanometers .

at this size , the physical , chemical , and biological properties of materials can differ in fundamental and potentially useful ways from the properties of individual atoms and molecules , on the one hand , or bulk matter , on the other hand .

nanotechnology research and development is directed toward understanding and creating improved materials , devices , and systems that exploit these properties as they are discovered and characterized .

most nanotechnology products currently on the market — such as faster computer processors , higher density memory devices , better baseball bats , lighter - weight auto parts , stain - resistant clothing , cosmetics , and clear sunscreen — are evolutionary in nature , offering valuable , but generally modest , economic and societal benefits .

over the next five to ten years , proponents see nanotechnology offering the potential for additional evolutionary improvements in existing products .

beyond the next ten years , they believe that nanotechnology could deliver revolutionary advances that could transform or replace existing products and industries , and create entirely new ones .

some hoped - for applications discussed by the technology's proponents , involving various degrees of speculation and varying time - frames , include: new prevention , detection , and treatment technologies that reduce death and suffering from cancer and other deadly diseases ; new organs to replace damaged or diseased ones ; clothing that protects against toxins and pathogens ; clean , inexpensive , renewable power through energy creation , storage , and transmission technologies ; universal access to safe water through portable , inexpensive water purification systems ; energy efficient , low - emission "green" manufacturing systems ; high - density memory systems capable of storing the entire library of congress collection on a device the size of a sugar cube ; agricultural technologies that increase yield and improve nutrition , reducing global hunger and malnutrition ; self - healing materials ; powerful , small , inexpensive sensors that can warn of minute levels of toxins and pathogens in air , soil , or water , and alert us to changes in the environment ; and environmental remediation of contaminated industrial sites .

proponents in government , academia , and industry also maintain that nanotechnology could make substantial contributions to national defense , homeland security , and space exploration and commercialization .

many areas of public policy could affect the ability of the united states to capture the future economic and societal benefits associated with these investments .

congress established programs , assigned responsibilities , authorized funding levels , and initiated research to address key issues in the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act .

the agency budget authorizations provided for in this act extend through fy2008 ( see text box , " national nanotechnology initiative national nanotechnology initiative ," for discussion of authorizations and appropriations ) .

both the house and senate have held committee hearings related to amending and reauthorizing this act in 2008 .

a companion report , crs report rl34401 , the national nanotechnology initiative: overview , reauthorization , and appropriations issues , by [author name scrubbed] , provides an overview of nanotechnology ; the history , goals , structure , and federal funding of the national nanotechnology initiative ; and issues related to its management and reauthorization .

as the state of nanotechnology knowledge has advanced , new policy issues have emerged .

in addition to providing funding for nanotechnology r&d , congress has directed increased attention to issues affecting the u.s. competitive position in nanotechnology and related issues , including nanomanufacturing ; commercialization ; environmental , health , and safety concerns ; workforce development ; and international collaboration .

views and options related to these issues are presented later in this report .

nanotechnology is , by and large , still in its infancy .

accordingly , measures such as revenues , market share , and global trade statistics — indicators often used to assess and track u.s. competitiveness in other technologies and industries — are not available for assessing the u.s. position in nanotechnology .

to date , the federal government does not collect data on nanotechnology - related revenues , trade or employment , nor is comparable international government data available .

nevertheless , many experts believe that the united states is the global leader in nanotechnology .

for example , a survey of u.s. business leaders in the field of nanotechnology showed 63% believe that the united states is leading other countries in nanotechnology r&d and commercialization while only 7% identified the united states as lagging behind other countries .

however , some believe that in contrast to many previous emerging technologies — such as semiconductors , satellites , software , and biotechnology — the u.s. lead appears narrower and the investment level , scientific and industrial infrastructure , technical capabilities , and science and engineering workforces of other nations are more substantial than in the past .

charles vest , president of the national academies of engineering and a member of the president's council of advisors on science and technology ( pcast ) , asserted early in 2008 that nanotechnology was the first emerging technology "where we [the united states] don't have a huge lead. .

vest added that it was also the first emerging technology in which the federal government's efforts included "commercialization as a specific goal" and thus was "the first real test" of the united states' "loosely - coupled public - private partnership in the new competitive environment. .

evidence of commercialization of nanotechnology - based products is generally available .

for example , the woodrow wilson international center for scholars' project on emerging nanotechnologies counts more than 600 company - identified nanotechnology products on the market , more than half of which are produced by companies based in the united states .

some private organizations have attempted to estimate current nanotechnology - derived revenues and to estimate future revenues .

for example , lux research estimates that products incorporating nanotechnology produced $50 billion in global revenues in 2006 ( less than 0.1% of global manufacturing output ) , and that by 2014 revenues will reach $2.6 trillion or 15% of projected global manufacturing output .

in the absence of comprehensive and authoritative economic output data ( eg , revenues , market share , trade ) , indicators such as inputs ( eg , public and private research investments ) and non - financial outputs ( eg , scientific papers , patents ) are now used to gauge a nation's current and future competitive position in emerging technologies .

these indicators offer insights into nations' scientific and technological strength which may serve as a foundation for future product and process innovation .

however , research and development investments , scientific papers , and patents may not provide reliable indicators of the united states' current or future competitive position .

scientific and technological leadership may not necessarily result in commercial leadership and / or in national competitiveness for the following reasons: basic research in nanotechnology may not translate into viable commercial applications .

though no formal assessment of the composition of the nni budget has been made , there is general consensus that the nni investment since its inception has been focused on basic research .

the national science foundation defines the objective of basic research as seeking "to gain more comprehensive knowledge or understanding of the subject under study without applications in mind. .

therefore , while basic research may underpin applied research , development , and commercialization , that is not its primary focus or intent .

in general , basic research can take decades to result in commercial applications , and many advances in scientific understanding may not present commercial opportunities .

basic research is generally available to all competitors .

even when basic research presents the potential for commercial exploitation , it may not deliver national advantage .

open publication and free exchange of research results are guiding principles of federally funded fundamental research and research conducted by u.s. colleges and universities .

this approach may allow for the rapid expansion of global scientific and technical knowledge as new work is built on the scaffolding of previous work .

however , the information is available to all competitors , u.s. and foreign alike , and thus may not confer competitive advantage to the united states .

u.s. - based companies may conduct production and other work outside of the united states .

in today's economy , supply chains are global and the work required to develop , design , produce , market , sell , and service products is generally conducted where it can be done most efficiently .

even if u.s. - based companies successfully develop and bring nanotechnology materials and products to market , work may be conducted , and the economic value captured , outside of the united states .

federal policies and investments may offer tools that can make the united states the most attractive place for companies to conduct a greater share of value - adding activities , contributing to u.s. economic growth and job creation .

u.s. - educated foreign students may return home to conduct research and create new businesses .

in the era following world war ii , many of the most gifted and talented students from around the world were attracted to the science and engineering programs of u.s. colleges and universities .

for many years , many of those who graduated from these programs decided to stay in the united states and contributed to u.s. global scientific , engineering , and economic leadership .

today , many foreign students educated in the united states have economic opportunities in their home countries that did not exist for previous generations .

some nations are making strong appeals and offering significant incentives for their students to return home to conduct research and create enterprises .

thus , federal support for universities , in general , and scientific and engineering research activities , in particular , may contribute to the development of leading scientists and engineers who might return to their home countries to exploit the knowledge , capabilities , and networks developed in the united states .

small businesses may lack the resources needed to bring their nanotechnology innovations to market .

federal programs , such as the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program and the small business technology transfer ( sttr ) program , support leading - edge nanotechnology research by small innovative firms .

federally funded university research can produce small start - up ventures .

these small businesses may develop commercially valuable technology , and even successfully develop new nanotechnology materials , tools , processes , or products , but lack the capital , infrastructure , or sales and distribution channels to effectively bring such advances to market .

u.s. companies with leading - edge , nanotechnology capabilities and / or their intellectual property may be acquired by foreign competitors .

foreign companies may acquire leading - edge nanotechnology companies or their intellectual property .

this can take place , for example , as the result of an intentional business strategy to be acquired ( a common exit strategy for start - up companies ) , a hostile takeover if the enterprise is a public company , or when a business has failed or is failing .

in the latter case , the company or its intellectual property might be acquired at a fraction of its development cost or potential value .

u.s. policies or other factors may impede nanotechnology commercialization , make it unaffordable , or make it less attractive than foreign alternatives .

federal , state , and local policies ( eg , taxes , environmental and health regulations , ethical restrictions ) and other factors ( eg , availability , quality , and cost of labor ; proximity to markets ; customer requirements ; manufacturing infrastructure ; public attitudes ) may prevent or discourage commercialization of nanotechnology innovations in the united states .

companies may be prohibited from producing a commercially viable product in the united states , may be unable to do so affordably , or may find comparatively favorable conditions ( e.g .

lower taxes or tax holidays ; fewer regulatory restrictions ; qualified , available , and less costly workforce ) outside the united states .

comparisons of aggregate national data may be misleading .

for example , a small nation with limited resources may be unable to pursue leading - edge research across a broad spectrum of nanotechnology - related disciplines and applications , and instead opt to seek technological dominance in a discreet area by investing in a limited set of disciplines and applications ( or even a single one ) .

in such a case , that country may become the strongest competitor in a given area , while analysis of aggregate numbers might obscure this strength .

alternatively , a rapidly developing nation may invest substantial capital in nanotechnology research , but lack key elements — such as a strong scientific and technological infrastructure ; mature industry , service , and private capital infrastructure ; experienced scientists , engineers , managers , and entrepreneurs ; and / or a market - oriented business climate — needed to fully capitalize on such an investment .

in addition , the concept of a national competitive position may differ from the past as a result of increased globalization of research , technical talent , and production .

for example , the world's leading - edge research in a field of nanotechnology might be conducted at an american university , by chinese students , supported by research funds from a german - based corporation , with engineering underway in russia , plans to manufacture in taiwan , shipping by greek - flagged vessels , and technical support provided online and by telephone from india .

in such an example , the global distribution of knowledge workers , investors , and producers make the determination of national competitiveness more difficult .

just as other countries might benefit from u.s. nanotechnology r&d , so too might the united states benefit from nanotechnology r&d conducted in other nations through a variety of means including studying published research results , acquiring or licensing patents , conducting joint business ventures , and by fostering a business environment that attracts production and related activities .

some economists assert that international r&d collaboration can benefit the united states as well by improving the productivity of the r&d process .

with these caveats , the following section reviews input and non - economic output measures as indicators of the u.s. competitive position in nanotechnology .

congress has provided $8.4 billion in funding for nanotechnology r&d under the national nanotechnology initiative , and more than tripled annual funding since its inception .

at the same time , other nations have established and bolstered their nanotechnology investments , programs , and policies , stirring debate about how the federal government can best ensure u.s. competitiveness in this field .

while there is broad consensus that u.s. competitiveness in nanotechnology is important , there are a wide variety of views about the role the federal government could or should play in supporting this objective .

these perspectives are reflective of long - running policy debates over the appropriate role of government in promoting research , development , innovation , and industrial competitiveness .

some argue that the federal role should be limited to funding basic research , r&d needed to meet agency mission requirements , and development of the u.s. scientific and technical workforce .

some believe the federal government should also fund development efforts that move nanotechnology closer to commercial products , especially in light of its potential economic and societal benefits .

others assert that the federal government's role in competitiveness should be limited to establishing a healthy business environment and allowing market forces and the private sector to shape u.s. competitiveness .

among those concerned about nanotechnology's potential adverse implications for health , safety , and the environment are those who support a more active federal role in funding environmental , health , and safety ( ehs ) research to better understand , characterize , and regulate nanotechnology , and those who prefer the federal government act to slow the development and commercialization of nanotechnology pending further ehs research .

nanotechnology is expected by many to deliver significant economic and societal benefits .

the united states launched the first national nanotechnology initiative in 2000 , but has since been joined by more than 60 other nations .

tens of billions of dollars have been invested in nanotechnology research and development over the past eight years by governments , companies , and investors .

while it has been estimated that there are more than 600 nanotechnology products on the market today , most involve incremental improvements to existing products .

much of the investment has been focused on fundamental research to gain scientific understanding of nanoscale phenomena and processes , and to learn how to manipulate matter at the nanoscale .

these investments are expected by many to deliver revolutionary changes in products and industries with implications for global technological , economic , and military leadership .

the potential implications of nanotechnology , coupled with the substantial sustained investments , have raised concerns and interest in the u.s. competitive position in nanotechnology .

the data typically used to assess technological competitiveness in mature industries — eg , revenues , market share , trade — is not available to assess the u.s. position in nanotechnology because it is a new technology , commercial products are just beginning to enter the market in a significant manner , and it is incorporated in wide array of products across many industries .

accordingly , the federal government currently does not collect this data on nanotechnology , nor do other nations .

the number of nanotechnology products in the marketplace is increasing quickly though .

congress may elect to ask federal agencies to assess what data ( e.g .

economic , labor force , students ) would be useful in formulating federal policies and making resource allocation decisions and direct federal statistical agencies to collect , analyze , and make public such data .

the federal government may also seek to foster data collection efforts in other nations .

in the absence of such data , assessments of nanotechnology depend largely on alternative indicators , such as inputs ( eg , public and private investments ) and non - economic outputs ( eg , scientific papers , patents ) .

by these measures , the united states appears to lead all other nations in nanotechnology , though the u.s. lead in this field may not be as large as it has been in previous emerging technology areas .

this is due to increased investments and capabilities of many nations based on recognition that technological leadership and commercialization are primary paths to increased economic growth , improved standards of living , and job creation .

nevertheless , these alternative indicators may not present an accurate view of technological leadership and economic competitiveness for many reasons .

nor does national technological leadership alone guarantee that the economic value produced by nanotechnology innovations will be captured within a nation's borders .

in today's global economy , companies have the option of locating work — e.g .

research , development , design , engineering , manufacturing , product support — where it can be done most effectively .

a variety of federal policy issues may affect the development and commercialization of nanotechnology in the united states , including the magnitude and focus of research and development efforts , the regulatory environment , and science and engineering workforce development .

some support an active federal approach ; others believe that a more limited federal involvement is likely to be more successful and equitable .

in addition to these factors , u.s. competitiveness in nanotechnology will depend not just on the efforts of the united states , but also on the speed and efficacy of foreign nanotechnology development efforts .

congress established a legislative foundation for some of the activities of the national nanotechnology initiative and to address key issues associated with nanotechnology thorough enactment of the 21 st century nanotechnology research and development act , 2003 .

the act provided funding authorizations for five nni agencies through fy2008 .

action is being considered in both the house and senate on possible amendments to and reauthorization of the program .

congress may opt to address some or many of the issues identified in this paper in the course of deliberation on the reauthorization of this act or , alternatively , in separate legislation .

