renewable energy is derived from resources that are generally not depleted by human use , such as the sun , wind , and water movement .

these primary sources of energy can be converted into heat , electricity , and mechanical energy in several ways .

there are some mature technologies for conversion of renewable energy such as hydropower , biomass , and waste combustion .

other conversion technologies , such as wind turbines and photovoltaics , are already well developed , but they have not achieved the technological efficiency and market penetration that many expect they will ultimately reach .

although geothermal energy is produced from geological rather than solar sources , it is often included as a renewable energy resource ( and is treated as such in this report ) .

commercial nuclear power is not generally considered to be a renewable energy resource .

despite fluctuating government policies since the 1970s , a combination of incentives and high energy prices has enabled wind energy to gain a toe - hold in electric power markets and allowed ethanol to secure a modest , but growing , presence in motor fuels markets .

congress is now debating whether to provide additional subsidies , incentives , and mandates to further expand renewable energy use .

this report describes the background and primary policy issue areas affecting renewable energy , including budget and funding , tax incentives , electricity regulatory initiatives , renewable fuels , and climate change .

the energy crises of the 1970s spurred the federal government , and some state governments , to mount a variety of renewable energy policies .

these policies included support for research and development ( r&d ) , technology demonstration projects , and commercial deployment of equipment .

for renewable energy , these policies included a focus on the production of both liquid fuels and electricity .

on october 3 , 2008 , the proposed emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( h.r .

1424 ) was signed into law as p.l .

110-343 .

division b contains the energy improvement and extension act ( eiea ) , which extends and establishes several tax incentives for renewable energy .

p.l .

110-343 extends or re - establishes several tax incentives that support renewable electricity production , biofuels production , transportation efficiency and conservation , buildings efficiency , and equipment efficiency .

the law has four incentives for electricity production: the production tax credit , two solar investment tax credits , and new clean energy ( tax credit ) bonds .

also , the law has several incentives for biofuels .

p.l .

110-343 includes $9.1 billion in renewable energy production ( electricity and fuels ) tax incentives and $3.6 billion in energy efficiency ( transportation and buildings / equipment ) tax incentives .

the renewable energy incentives include $5.8 billion for the renewable energy electricity production tax credit ( ptc ) , $1.9 billion for business solar ( and fuel cell ) credits , $1.3 billion for residential solar tax credits , and $267 million for clean renewable energy ( tax credit ) bonds .

 ( for more about the background and debate on the renewable energy incentives , see the discussion below .

for more details about the energy efficiency incentives , see crs report rl33831 , energy efficiency and renewable energy legislation in the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . ) .

eiea offsets the cost of the incentives by reducing several existing subsidies , with the effect of generating nearly $17 billion in revenue over 10 years .

the largest offset , $6.67 billion , is provided by a modification of the requirements imposed on brokers for the reporting of their customers' basis in securities transactions .

a freeze on a deduction for certain types of oil and natural gas production will provide $4.91 billion .

additional revenue will be derived from changes in foreign income taxes under foreign oil and gas extraction income ( fogei ) and foreign oil related income ( fori ) rules for the production and sale of oil and gas products ( $2.23 billion ) , a modification of the excise tax for the oil spill liability trust fund ( $1.72 billion ) , and an extension of the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) surtax ( $1.47 billion ) .

this section discusses the potential for renewable energy to reduce carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions by displacing fossil fuel use .

doe's fy2008 budget request sought $1,236.2 million for doe's energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) programs .

in h.r .

2641 , the house approved $1,873.8 million for eere and the senate appropriations committee recommended $1,715.6 million for eere .

the consolidated appropriations act of 2007 ( h.r .

2764 ) subsumed h.r .

2641 , and the enacted law included $1,723.7 million for eere .

 ( details of the fy2008 appropriations are available in the "key policy issues — department of energy" section of crs report rl34009 , energy and water development: fy2008 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] et al. ) .

at the end of its first session , the 110 th congress enacted a major omnibus energy bill focused on improving energy efficiency and increasing the availability of renewable energy .

highlights of the major provisions enacted are: corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) .

title i sets a target of 35 miles per gallon for the combined fleet of cars and light trucks by model year 2020 .

renewable fuels standard ( rfs ) .

title ii sets a modified standard that starts at 8.5 billion gallons in 2008 and rises to 36 billion gallons by 2022 .

appliance and lighting standards .

title iii legislates new standards for broad categories of incandescent lamps ( light bulbs ) , incandescent reflector lamps , and fluorescent lamps .

further , a required target is set for lighting efficiency , and energy efficiency labeling is required for consumer electronic products .

efficiency standards are set by law for external power supplies , residential clothes washers , dishwashers , dehumidifiers , refrigerators , refrigerator freezers , freezers , electric motors , residential boilers , commercial walk - in coolers , and commercial walk - in freezers .

further , doe is directed to set standards by rulemaking for furnace fans and battery chargers .

 ( for more details about the provisions in p.l .

110-140 , see crs report rl34294 , energy independence and security act of 2007: a summary of major provisions , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

the enacted version of the farm bill ( h.r .

6124 ; "food , conservation , and energy act of 2008" ) became law on june 18 , 2008 .

the law contains provisions that extend and / or expand upon renewable energy ( and energy efficiency ) provisions of the farm security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 ) .

several programs for grants , loans , and tax incentives were put in place to support renewable energy ( and / or energy efficiency ) .

 ( for more details , see crs report rl34130 , renewable energy policy in the 2008 farm bill , by tom capehart. ) .

as table 4 shows , doe's fy2009 budget request sought $1.255 billion for doe's energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) programs .

p.l .

110-329 ( h.r .

2638 ) provides continuing appropriations through march 6 , 2009 , at the fy2008 level .

the law provides an additional $250 million to the doe weatherization assistance program and provides $7.5 billion for a $25 billion loan to help u.s. automakers retool facilities to produce advanced technology energy - efficient vehicles .

the law covers appropriations through march 6 , 2009 .

division b of the emergency economic stabilization act ( p.l .

110-343 ) contains the text of the senate - passed version of h.r .

6049 , which provides several tax incentives for efficiency and renewables .

the senate crafted its substitute to h.r .

6049 as a response to the house - passed version of the bill and to administration - expressed concerns about house provisions for renewable energy bonds and revenue offsets .

the highlights of key provisions enacted into law are as follows: renewable electricity production tax credit ( ptc ) .

the credit for wind farms is extended for one year , through the end of 2009 .

other equipment are eligible for two years , through 2010 .

newly eligible marine technologies are eligible for three years , through 2011 .

solar investment tax credits ( itc ) for residential and commercial sectors .

the law extends the existing 30% credit for each sector for eight years , through the end of 2016 .

clean renewable energy bonds ( crebs ) .

the law authorizes a new round of state and local bond issuances , with a total national value of $800 million .

energy conservation bonds .

the law authorizes a new state and local program , with a total national value of $800 million .

revenue offsets .

the cost of incentives are offset by a freeze in certain oil and natural gas deductions , a reduced foreign tax credit for certain foreign oil and gas income , reduced deductions for certain securities transactions , a change in the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) surtax , and an increase of the oil spill liability trust fund tax .

in the 110 th congress , more than 460 bills with provisions for energy efficiency or renewable energy were introduced .

a general description of the renewable energy provisions in those bills , including those enacted into law , is available in crs report rl33831 , energy efficiency and renewable energy legislation in the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

the report also groups the bills by policy and issue areas , provides a table that identifies recent action on the bills , and discusses recent action .

