insurance is one of three primary sectors of the financial services industry .

unlike the other two , banks and securities , insurance is primarily regulated at the state , rather than federal , level .

the primacy of state regulation dates back to 1868 when the supreme court found that insurance did not constitute interstate commerce , and thus did not fall under the powers granted the federal government in the constitution .

in 1944 , however , the court cast doubt on this finding .

preferring to leave the state regulatory system intact in the aftermath of this decision , congress passed the mccarran - ferguson act of 1945 , which reaffirmed the states as principal regulators of insurance .

over the years since 1945 , congressional interest in the possibility of repealing or amending mccarran - ferguson and reclaiming authority over insurance regulation has waxed and waned .

in 1974 , congress passed the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) preempting state laws governing many health benefit plans offered by employers , thus essentially federalizing much of the regulation of health insurance .

in 1980 , congress curtailed the authority of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to investigate the insurance industry , reducing a small avenue of federal oversight on insurance .

in the early 1990s , a bill to repeal the limited antitrust exemption granted insurers in mccarran - ferguson , and thus expand federal oversight of insurance , was reported out of committee in the house , but never reached the house floor .

in 1999 , congress passed the gramm - leach - bliley act ( glba ) , which specifically reaffirmed the states as the functional regulators of insurance .

glba may have statutorily reaffirmed the primacy of state regulation of insurance , but it also unleashed market forces that were already encouraging a greater federal role .

glba removed legal barriers between securities firms , banks , and insurers , which , along with improved technology , have been an important factor in creating more direct competition among the three groups .

many financial products have converged , so that products with similar economic outcomes may be available from different financial services firms with dramatically different regulators .

insurers face 50 different state regulators and state laws , many of which differ on some particulars of insurance regulation .

this has led to industry complaints of overlapping , and sometimes contradictory , regulatory edicts driving up the cost of compliance and increasing the time necessary to bring new products to market .

these complaints existed prior to glba , but the insurance industry generally resisted federalization of insurance regulation at the time .

facing a new world of competition , however , the industry split , with larger insurers tending to favor some form of federal regulation , and smaller insurers tending to favor a continuation of the state regulatory system .

life insurers tend to more directly compete with banks and securities firms , so they have tended to favor some form of federal charter more than property / casualty insurers .

some members of congress have responded to the changing environment in the financial services industry with a variety of legislation .

in the 108 th congress , senator ernest hollings introduced s. 1373 to create a mandatory federal charter for insurance .

in the 108 th and 109 th congresses , representative richard baker drafted , but never introduced , the smart act that would have left the states the primary regulators , but harmonized the system through various federal preemptions .

the most consistent response has been the introduction of legislation calling for an optional federal charter ( ofc ) for insurance .

ofc legislation was first introduced in the 107 th congress , with bills being introduced in the 109 th and 110 th congresses as well .

specifics of ofc legislation can vary widely , but the common thread is the creation of a dual regulatory system , inspired by the current banking regulatory system .

ofc bills generally would create a federal insurance regulator that would operate concurrently with the present state system .

insurers would be able to choose whether to take out a federal charter , which would exempt them from most state insurance regulations , or to continue under a state charter and the 50 state system of insurance regulation .

given the greater uniformity of life insurance products and the greater competition faced by life insurers , some have suggested the possibility of ofc legislation that would apply only to life insurers , but no such bills have been introduced .

the recent financial crisis affected the debate over federal chartering for insurers in a variety of ways .

some aspects of the crisis gave additional arguments for federal chartering , whereas other aspects have given additional arguments against federal chartering .

one specific concern that many have advanced in the crisis has been the negative aspects of allowing financial institutions to choose their regulators .

the broad federal charter bill in the 111 th congress , h.r .

1880 , addressed this by adding some mandatory aspects to a framework similar to the previous ofc bills .

during the december 2 , 2009 , house financial services committee markup of h.r .

2609 , a bill to create a federal office of insurance , two amendments were offered to create federal licenses and regulation of specific lines of insurance .

representative dennis moore offered an amendment ( no .

3 ) that would have created an optional federal license for reinsurers , while representatives ed royce and melissa bean offered an amendment ( no .

7 ) that would have created an optional federal license for financial guarantee insurers .

both were withdrawn before votes were taken on the amendments .

h.r .

2609 was incorporated into h.r .

4173 , which was ultimately enacted as the dodd - frank act and included some insurance provisions , but did not include a federal charter for insurance .

representative moore introduced his amendment creating a federal license for reinsurers as a standalone bill , h.r .

6529 , on december 16 , 2010 .

representatives melissa bean and edward royce introduced h.r .

1880 in the house on april 2 , 2009 .

the bill was referred to the house financial services committee , house judiciary committee , and house energy and commerce committee .

no hearings or markups were held on this bill .

h.r .

1880 would have created a federal chartering and regulatory apparatus for the insurance industry , including insurers , insurance agencies , and independent insurance producers .

the office of national insurance ( oni ) and a national insurance commissioner ( nic ) would have been established in the department of the treasury , but with significant independence ; the secretary of the treasury would have been forbidden from interfering in specific matters before the commissioner ; the oni's budget would have been funded by fees and assessments on insurers ; and the commissioner would have been appointed by the president , and confirmed by the senate for a five - year term .

these terms are similar to those of other financial regulators , such as the office of the comptroller of the currency .

the federal regulatory system in h.r .

1880 would have applied to property / casualty and life insurance and reinsurance , with the exception of title insurance .

federally licensed insurance producers were specifically allowed to sell surplus lines insurance .

holders of a national charter or license would have been exempt from most state insurance laws , including "any form of licensing , examination , reporting , regulation , or supervision by a state relating to the insurance operations of such insurer. .

thus , nationally licensed insurers , agencies , and producers would have been able to operate in the entire united states without fulfilling the requirements of the 50 states' insurance laws .

this exemption , however , did not extend to state premium tax laws , so national insurers would have continued to pay these taxes .

the bill would have affected state taxes with regard to surplus lines insurance , forbidding states that are not the home state of the insured from collecting these taxes .

in terms of the substance of regulation , the most significant specific change in h.r .

1880 compared with the way most states currently regulate insurance involves regulation of insurance rates and forms .

currently every state has some measure of rate and form regulation .

in some states , insurers must get specific prior approval for changes to rates and forms , whereas in others insurers may have some freedom to change rates and forms with the possibility that the state insurance commissioner could disallow the change after the fact .

this bill , however , would have specifically disallowed the nic from regulating insurance rates .

with regard to form regulation , the commissioner would have had the power to set general form requirements and insurers would have been required to file insurance forms with the commissioner along with a certification that the forms met the established requirements .

h.r .

1880 would have specifically addressed the issue of systemic risk brought to the fore in the recent financial crisis in two ways .

it would have required that a financial regulator other than the oni be designated a systemic risk regulator for insurance with power over both national insurers and state insurers .

this regulator would have had broad oversight powers , including the ability , in consultation with the nic , to require an insurer be federally chartered .

h.r .

1880 would also have created a "coordinating national council for financial regulators" made up of the heads of the various federal financial regulators along with the secretary of the treasury .

this council would have been responsible for monitoring the financial system for systemic risk with the specific power to determine when the systemic risk regulator could issue a rule or direct order covering an insurer that presented systemic risk .

h.r .

1880 shared many aspects with previous optional federal chartering bills , including legislation introduced by representatives bean and royce .

under h.r .

1880 , many insurers would have had the option to choose whether to operate under a federal or state system .

the system to be put in place by the bill , however , has two specific non - optional aspects: ( 1 ) the nic had the specific authority to deny an application from a national insurer to convert to a state charter ; and ( 2 ) the systemic risk regulator had the specific authority to require an insurer to become federally chartered .

representative dennis moore introduced h.r .

6529 on december 16 , 2010 .

it was referred to the house committee on financial services but no hearings or markups were held on the bill .

h.r .

6529 would have created a federal license for reinsurers .

the licensing and regulatory authority would rest with the federal insurance office , which was created under the dodd - frank act , which would have the authority to determine that state laws were inconsistent with federal law and thus preempted .

senators john sununu and tim johnson introduced s. 40 on may 24 , 2007 and representatives melissa bean and edward royce introduced h.r .

3200 on july 26 , 2007 .

the bills were referred to the relevant committees ( senate banking , housing , and urban affairs , house financial services , and house judiciary ) , but neither was the specific subject of hearings or markups .

two general hearings on insurance regulatory reform , however , were held by the house financial services subcommittee on capital markets , insurance , and government sponsored enterprises in october 2007 , and the possibility of an optional federal charter was a major topic of discussion in the subcommittee .

s. 40 and h.r .

3200 were very similar , but not identical bills .

both would have created the option of a federal charter for the insurance industry , including insurers , insurance agencies , and independent insurance producers .

the bills would have created a federal regulatory and supervisory apparatus , including an office of national insurance and a national insurance commissioner .

this federal regulator would generally have been overseen by the secretary of the treasury , but the secretary would have been forbidden from interfering in specific matters before the commissioner .

the budget for the office would have been paid for by fees and assessments on insurers .

the commissioner would have been appointed by the president , and confirmed by the senate for a five - year term .

holders of a national license would have been exempt from most state insurance laws .

thus , nationally licensed insurers , agencies , and producers would have been able to operate in the entire united states without fulfilling the requirements of the 50 states' insurance laws .

some significant aspects of the bills included the following: the federal system would have applied to property / casualty and life insurance , except for title insurance and including surplus lines insurance .

rate regulation would not have been applicable to national insurers .

form regulation , the ability of the regulator to control what will and will not be included in an insurance policy , would have been reduced substantially compared with most states .

fees covering the cost of the system would have been assessed on those operating under the federal system .

national insurers would have continued to pay state premium taxes , so there should be no loss of premium tax revenue to the states .

national insurers would have continued to be subject to state laws requiring participation in residual market entities , but only if rates charged by the residual market entity covers all costs incurred , and only if there were no rate and form requirements concurrent with participation .

reform of the state regulation of surplus lines insurance — only the state in which the insured resides or does business would be allowed to tax surplus lines insurance .

national insurance producers would have been allowed to sell surplus lines insurance .

would have applied federal antitrust laws to national insurers , except to the extent that state laws continue to apply to them .

differences between s. 40 and h.r .

3200 are relatively minor , including the following: h.r .

3200 would have specifically allowed non - u.s. reinsurers to file financial data in accordance with international financial reporting standards .

h.r .

3200 would have limited jurisdiction over non - u.s. reinsurers to federal courts , rather than including state and local courts .

h.r .

3200 would have broadened slightly and clarify antifraud language .

beyond the general aspects inherent in the ofc concept , such as the dual , competing regulatory structures and uniform regulation across the country , the most striking specific aspect of s. 40 and h.r .

3200 was the lessening of the rate and form regulation under these bills as compared to the current system .

currently every state has some measure of rate and form regulation .

in some states , insurers must get specific prior approval for changes to rates and forms , while in others insurers may have some freedom to change rates and forms with the possibility that the state insurance commissioner could disallow the change after the fact .

s. 40 and h.r .

3200 specifically disallowed rate and form regulation for national property / casualty insurers .

such insurers would have been required only to maintain copies of the policy forms that they use .

national life insurers would have been subject to general standards and a requirement to file forms with the commissioner before these forms would have been used .

senators john sununu and tim johnson introduced s. 2509 on april 5 , 2006 .

the house companion , h.r .

6225 was introduced on october 18 , 2006 .

neither bill saw direct committee action , although s. 2509 was repeatedly discussed at a hearing on "perspectives in insurance regulation," held by the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee on july 18 , 2006 .

these bills were very similar to the bills of the same name introduced in the 110 th congress and discussed above .

differences between the bills in the two congresses included the following: the 2006 bills did not address surplus lines insurance .

the 2007 bills added language requiring national insurer compliance with anti - money laundering laws .

the 2007 bills specifically exclude national insurers from offering title insurance .

the 2007 bills included new guaranty fund language , changing the focus from a qualified state , to a qualified association or fund .

if a state's guaranty fund is not qualified , then the national insurers operating in that state must join the national guaranty fund to be established by the nic .

on july 8 , 2003 , senator ernest hollings introduced s. 1373 , "a bill to authorize and direct the secretary of commerce , through an independent commission within the department of commerce , to protect consumers by regulating the interstate sale of insurance , and for other purposes. .

the bill was referred to the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee , where it was discussed in a general hearing on insurance regulation but was not acted upon further .

senator hollings retired following the 108 th congress .

s. 1373 would have created a mandatory federal charter for interstate property / casualty and life insurers , leaving only single state insurers to be regulated by the state where they were domiciled and operated .

it thus would have preempted most current state regulation of insurance .

significant aspects of the bill included the following: creation of a federal commission within the department of commerce to regulate the interstate business of property / casualty and life insurance .

grant of full regulatory powers to the commission , including licensure , rate and form approval , regulation of solvency , and regulation of market conduct .

repeal of the antitrust exemptions in the mccarran - ferguson act .

creation of a federal guaranty fund .

h.r .

3766 was introduced on february 14 , 2002 , by representative john lafalce .

it would have created an optional federal charter for "national insurers," but not for insurance agencies , brokers , or agents .

it would have created a new federal agency within the treasury department , known as the office of national insurers and headed by a director , rather than a commissioner .

other significant aspects of h.r .

3766 included the following: the federal charter would have provided for a national insurer to underwrite both life insurance and property / casualty insurance .

the director would have had general regulatory authority over national insurers , including solvency oversight and policy forms , but rate regulation would have been left with state insurance regulators .

even though the legislation had no provision for the licensing of insurance producers , the director would have had the authority to enforce unfair and deceptive practices rules against state - licensed producers with respect to the sale of insurance products issued by national insurers , and all states would have been subject to federal minimum standards .

national insurers would have been encouraged to invest in the communities in which they sell policies .

national insurers would have been required to file reports containing community sales data for use by federal regulators in combating insurance redlining .

further , national insurers would have been prohibited from refusing to insure , or limiting coverage on a property , based solely on its geographic location .

this proposal was reportedly introduced late in 2001 by senator charles schumer , but was never assigned a number , nor referred to either the senate commerce committee or the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee .

a draft of this proposal provided that the chartering , supervision , and regulation of national insurance companies and national insurance agencies be administered by the federal government in a newly created federal agency within the treasury department .

the proposed agency , the office of the national insurance commissioner , would have been headed by the nic , appointed for a five - year term by the president and subject to senate confirmation .

national insurers and agents would have been exempt from most state insurance law .

significant aspects of the bill included the following: application to all lines of insurance , including life , health , and property / casualty ; imposition of fees as necessary to cover the expenses of the federal apparatus ; and requirement that nics participate in "qualified" state insurance guaranty associations and establishment of a federal backup guaranty association to cover "non - qualifying" states .

the broad powers granted to the nic were not to include the authority to regulate rates or policy forms .

nor would the schumer proposal have exempted federally chartered nics from antitrust laws , except for purposes of preparing policy forms and participating in state residual market programs such as assigned risk pools in automobile insurance .

the federal license would have specified the line or lines of insurance a nic could underwrite , and no single nic could be licensed to underwrite both life / health insurance and property / casualty insurance , although an affiliated group of insurance companies ( state and / or federally chartered ) could have included separate companies writing those different lines of insurance .

