in the last 30 years , the united states has devoted resources and committed billions of dollars toward restoring large ecosystems such as the chesapeake bay , the great lakes , the florida everglades , and the san francisco bay and sacramento and san joaquin rivers delta ( california bay - delta ) .

these initiatives generally cover large areas in one or more states and affect millions of people .

ecosystem restoration in a policy context has gone beyond just restoring the natural environment , and encompasses other objectives such as improving water supply and conveyance , managing natural resources , and restoring endangered species .

because of these wide - ranging objectives , large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives involve many stakeholders , including federal , state , and local agencies , and private and nongovernmental organizations .

most of the large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives are ongoing , and many decision makers evaluate their progress ( or lack thereof ) to uncover lessons learned and implement changes .

congress plays a key role in large - scale ecosystem restoration efforts .

congress is generally responsible for authorizing federal agency involvement in restoration efforts and establishing guidelines for managing and implementing ecosystem restoration projects .

congress is also interested in the progress of ecosystem restoration initiatives because many restoration activities and projects are funded by federal appropriations .

congressional oversight of ecosystem restoration initiatives has generated questions on the status of restoration initiatives , such as what projects or activities are included in a restoration initiative , whether there is overlap among projects and activities , whether funds are being used efficiently , and the extent to which a restoration initiative is progressing towards its goals .

answers to these questions sometimes generate criticism from observers .

they contend that some restoration initiatives are loosely coordinated and organized , and lack comprehensive plans and tools for measuring progress .

to temper some of these criticisms and address congressional concerns , some agencies implementing ecosystem restoration initiatives have proposed and constructed what have been called crosscut budgets .

federal laws have authorized crosscut budgets for ecosystem restoration initiatives , including the california bay - delta restoration initiative ( calfed ; p.l .

108-361 , ยง 106 ) and the great lakes restoration initiative ( p.l .

111-117 , division c , title vii , ยง 739 , extended by p.l .

112-10 , division b , title i , ยง 1101 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) .

in the context of ecosystem restoration , a crosscut budget is typically a document that organizes and reports the activities and funding of several entities working within the same broad initiative in a way that "cuts across" organizational boundaries .

the primary purpose of a crosscut budget is to characterize and organize funding for an initiative in one document in a timely manner that is useful for decision makers .

for example , the crosscut budget for the florida everglades restoration initiative lists funding and provides a description of federal and state activities contributing toward restoration .

a crosscut budget can be developed and organized in several ways .

it could be a document that goes into considerable detail , or , alternatively , a crosscut budget could simply present budget and other information in a table or spreadsheet format .

characteristics of a more comprehensive crosscut budget might include , for example , how much has been spent ( and under what authority ) for projects , what has been accomplished with the funds , how much is left to be implemented and the cost of doing so , and proposed milestones for the next round of funding .

conceivably , a crosscut budget could also track a restoration initiative's overall progress , provide transparency about coordination of the initiative's activities , and function as a coordinating and oversight document for congress , relevant federal , state , and local agencies , and other stakeholders .

crosscut budgets do not answer all of the criticisms of how large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives are planned and implemented .

for example , although they are typically used to show budgetary allocations across organizational boundaries , crosscut budgets often do not present information about desired outcomes or programmatic impacts .

they may provide stakeholders , however , with a tool for organizing , planning , and working with funds and goals for these initiatives , albeit at a cost in terms of requiring additional analytical work and executive attention by participating agencies , which are typically scarce commodities .

this report discusses typical and potential elements of a crosscut budget , provides examples of enacted legislation that authorizes the use of crosscut budgets , and examines some crosscut budgeting issues that congress might consider .

the everglades and calfed ecosystem restoration initiatives submit crosscut budgets annually .

their crosscut budget documents share similarities , but differ with respect to the characteristics of their programs .

both crosscut budgets may provide congress with ideas on how to tailor a crosscut budget for a restoration initiative , and provide a precedent for authorizing the use of crosscut budgets .

this report concludes with a discussion of how crosscut budgets address selected issues related to large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives .

some who are critical of large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives contend that some initiatives are loosely coordinated , do not have comprehensive plans and tools for measuring progress , and do not have defined methods for assessing funding totals .

in response , some have suggested implementing crosscut budgets as part of the reporting requirements of ecosystem restoration initiatives .

crosscut budgets , such as those in use for restoring the everglades and the california bay - delta , address some concerns by reporting restoration activities , their funding , and federal and state agencies responsible for the restoration .

however , these crosscut budgets do not attempt to define ecosystem restoration activities or measure progress toward the goals of the restoration initiative as related to funding .

expanding the breadth of crosscut budgets by incorporating these functions , according to some , will temper some criticisms of large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives .

however , if crosscuts become too unwieldy and large , or are not designed to address the needs of specific audiences and stakeholders , some believe that they will not communicate information in an effective and timely manner and will result in a wasted investment of resources .

