on january 29 , 2010 , president obama spoke at a meeting of republican members of the house , in baltimore .

after speaking for approximately 20 minutes , president obama took eight questions , for a total of approximately 65 minutes .

the questions were asked by individual members of the conference , with conference chairman representative mike pence selecting those who posed questions .

on february 3 , 2010 , president obama spoke at a meeting of democratic senators , in washington , dc .

after speaking for approximately 15 minutes , the president took eight questions for a total of approximately 60 minutes .

the questions were asked by individual senators , with conference chairman senator reid selecting the questioners .

the two appearances by the president generated significant media attention , and a number of prominent observers called on both the president and congress to continue such interactions on a regular basis .

although the question and answer sessions were not conducted as formal house or senate actions , some proponents of a question period may view this as an advantage .

the unofficial nature of the interactions avoided the procedural issues associated with instituting a question period in the house or senate , and the apparent lack of strict rules or procedures regarding questions arguably improved the quality and candidness of the exchange .

on the other hand , if such interactions were to continue on a regular basis , the lack of formal procedures for selecting questioners or the lack of rules regarding the content of questions could potentially become problematic .

similarly , the unofficial nature of such interactions may not produce as much public interest as a formal question period on the floor of the house or senate .

in may 2008 , senator and presidential candidate john mccain stated that , as president , he would "ask congress to grant me the privilege of coming before both houses to take questions and address criticism , much the same as the prime minister of great britain appears regularly before the house of commons. .

such a "question period," in which the chief executive official appears before the legislature to answer questions , is a feature of most parliamentary systems .

prime minister's questions is a major component of british politics , receiving substantial press , radio , and television coverage .

in many national parliaments , including the british house of commons , questions are also directed to other cabinet ministers , serving as a major form of legislative oversight and constituency service .

proposals to permit , or require , executive branch officials to appear before congress to answer questions and to explain policy have been made periodically in the united states .

in 1991 , representative sam gejdenson introduced a proposal that provided for a two hour question period each month .

in the early 1970s , senator walter mondale proposed various forms of a "question period" for executive branch officials .

during world war ii , representative estes kefauver offered a series of similar proposals , but none was ever acted upon by the house .

similar inaction took place regarding proposals offered by president taft in 1912 , and by george pendleton , a representative and senator during the late 19 th century .

scholars and other observers have debated the merits of introducing a question system in congress .

advocates argue that a question period will improve the performance of executive departments , enhance congressional oversight capabilities , promote inter - branch dialogue , increase public knowledge and interest in government affairs , and strengthen the institutional position of congress within the government relative to the president .

opponents contend that a question period is ill - adapted for non - parliamentary system , provides poor oversight , will intensify partisanship , will undermine the committee system , will be generally filled with theatrics and manipulation , may be expensive , and will give the executive branch an unnecessary forum within congress .

this report surveys how question periods are conducted in britain and other parliamentary democracies , examines previous proposals for question periods in the united states , considers potential advantages and disadvantages of a question period , and outlines some legislative considerations for policy makers considering a question period for congress .

to analyze the possible options for structuring a question period in congress and the potential effects of a question period on legislative - executive relations , an initial examination of the question period practices in other countries , and into proposals for a similar procedure in the american congress , is necessary .

existing question periods in parliamentary democracies vary widely in their format and procedures .

likewise , historical proposals in the united states have involved a range of question period procedures .

the following sections of the report survey the use of question time in britain , question period in canada , question hour in germany , and oral and government questions in france .

afterward , a variety of historical proposals for a question period in the united states are discussed .

as previously discussed , existing question periods in parliamentary democracies vary widely in their format and procedures .

likewise , historical proposals in the united states have suggested a range of question period procedures .

an assessment of the potential merits and drawbacks of any particular proposal for a question period in congress will be influenced by the specific format selected .

similarly , the effects of a question period on the congressional policy process and congressional - executive relations might be somewhat dependent on the specific format .

two dimensions of particular importance that differentiate various question time formats are ( 1 ) which executive officials will answer questions , and ( 2 ) whether questions and answers will be written , oral , or both .

legislators seeking to structure a presidential question period that consists only of oral answers may need to consider different issues than legislators seeking a structure that includes both written and oral questions to cabinet officials .

in practice , a presidential question period with oral answers only might resemble the prime minister's questions portion of question time in britain .

this would perhaps limit the time and resources expended while also generating a high level of public interest and coverage of national issues .

a more extensive question period that included cabinet officials or written answers , however , might allow for greater oversight and scrutiny of the executive branch , and allow for member questions about more specific policy or oversight concerns .

the following sections of the report examine the potential advantages and disadvantages of a question period , and then discuss some of the legislative concerns for policy makers considering the adoption of a question period in congress .

given the variety and scope of different proposals , not all of the advantages or disadvantages are applicable to all question time formats ; in such cases , differences are noted in the text .

the question period is widely used in parliamentary systems as a means of informing mps about the effects of government policies .

parliaments vary widely in the frequency with which question periods are held and in the number of questions submitted by members .

the data suggest that establishing a question period is no guarantee that it will develop into an effective information tool of the legislature .

although executive branch officials periodically appeared on the floor during the first congresses , by the late 1790s the practice had largely ceased .

proposals for a question period for congress have been offered with relative regularity beginning in the mid - 19 th century .

initially , the proposals were endorsed by scholars who sought to increase executive branch influence in congress at a time when the legislative branch was preeminent .

in recent decades , the proposal has been offered as a means to assure greater executive branch accountability during periods of perceived executive dominance in the federal government .

whether the question period would be successful in a system of separated powers depends in large part on the attitude of its participants and on the format the question period ultimately assumes .

the question period has the potential of involving more rank - and - file members in the policy - making process , and improving the means of communication between executive departments and congress .

it also could harden relations between congress and the executive , and might increase the level of partisan controversy in congress .

in crafting a question period proposal for use in congress , attention would likely be given to balancing the interests of both parties and their leadership , the concerns of committees , the institutional interests of congress , and the wishes of the general membership of the chambers .

