federal campaign finance law emphasizes limits on contributions , restrictions on funding sources , and public disclosure of information about fundraising and spending .

these goals and others are embodied in the 1971 federal election campaign act ( feca ) , which remains the cornerstone of the nation's campaign finance law .

major feca amendments ( in 1974 , 1976 , and 1979 ) expanded the presidential public - financing system and placed limits on campaign contributions and expenditures .

after these post - watergate efforts to reduce the risk or appearance of corruption , campaign finance received relatively little legislative attention until the late 1990s .

the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 — also known as "bcra" or "mccain - feingold" for its principal senate sponsors — constituted the first major change to the nation's campaign finance laws since 1979 .

among other points , bcra banned large corporate and union donations to political parties ( soft money ) in federal elections and restricted certain political advertising preceding elections ( electioneering communications ) .

much of the policy activity since that time has emphasized implementing bcra , particularly at the fec and in the courts .

due to the loss of its quorum between january and june 2008 , the fec was unable to execute some of its core functions , including rulemaking to implement campaign finance law .

on june 24 , 2008 , the senate confirmed five nominations to the agency .

together with a sixth commissioner who continues to serve in holdover status , the fec is now back at full strength .

the new commission held its first open meeting on july 10 , 2008 .

at that meeting , donald mcgahn was unanimously elected chairman .

steven walther was unanimously elected vice chairman .

pending issues facing the commission include rulemaking to implement portions of the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga , discussed later in this report ) , pending enforcement cases and advisory opinion requests , and administering the presidential public campaign financing program .

the commission may also need to respond to ongoing litigation surrounding bcra .

legislative activity regarding campaign finance has occurred on two fronts during the 110 th congress .

first , and most notably , the honest leadership and open government act ( hloga ) contains some campaign finance provisions , but the law is primarily devoted to lobbying and ethics .

hloga and the afp extension were the only legislation changing campaign financing policy to become law during the 110 th congress .

second , various other bills that emphasize campaign finance have been the subject of committee or floor action , but none have become law .

overall , approximately 50 bills that would affect campaign finance policy have been introduced in the 110 th congress .

the following discussion provides additional details on campaign finance bills that have been the subject of committee action or floor votes during the 110 th congress .

hloga represents the most significant legislative development related to campaign finance during the 110 th congress .

more than 50 other campaign finance bills have been introduced in the 110 th congress , but few have received major legislative attention .

other significant campaign finance developments have occurred away from capitol hill , particularly at the fec and in the federal courts .

fec activity has focused on rulemakings in response to recent congressional activity , particularly regarding hloga .

the campaign travel rules are relatively straightforward and consistent with the new lobbying and ethics law .

those rules , however , could be clarified by an e&j statement that has yet to be considered .

the bundling and electioneering communications rulemakings ( the latter was undertaken in response to the supreme court's ruling in wrtl ii ) are more complicated and , in some cases , less clear .

although the proposed bundling rules are consistent with hloga's content , the many questions and regulatory alternatives posed in the nprm and at the september 2008 fec hearing suggest that the agency is still considering how to implement that section of the law .

similarly , although the commission has already adopted final electioneering communications rules , what those rules mean in practice will depend on how the fec decides to pursue future enforcement and advisory cases .

these issues could also be revisited now that additional commissioners are in office .

the long - term effect of the fec's inability to consider major policy questions between january and june 2008 remains to be seen .

it is clear , however , that the agency faces a substantial rulemaking and enforcement backlog in the short term .

the fact that four of six commissioners are new to the agency could also delay some activities .

the hloga rulemaking is perhaps the most prominent one now facing the fec .

the absence of bundling rules means that certain disclosure required under hloga is not occurring , nor can it occur until the agency tells political committees how to report their bundled contributions .

the schedule set forth in hloga would have facilitated partial reporting for the 2008 cycle .

it now appears , however , that bundling disclosure as envisioned in hloga will not take effect until the 2010 cycle .

even if bundling - disclosure rules were in place now , however , they would not necessarily alter fundraising practices .

indeed , as was discussed at the september 17 fec hearing , hloga requires more transparency about bundling , but does not restrict the practice .

in addition , and as noted previously , although the hloga travel rules also have yet to be finalized via publication in the federal register , implementation of those rules is perhaps a less pressing matter because the relevant portion of the law took effect upon enactment , whereas the fec bundling - disclosure provisions in hloga require commission action to take effect .

overall , recent changes in campaign finance policy have been incremental , as has been the case since feca became law in the 1970s .

congress generally did not focus on campaign finance legislation in the immediate aftermath of feca and bcra , perhaps because passing those laws had required substantial momentum that was difficult to replicate in the short term .

that pattern could also hold following hloga , although most of that bill was related to lobbying and ethics rather than campaign finance .

even if congress decides not to undertake major legislative activity on campaign finance in the near future , non - legislative activity is likely to keep campaign finance before the public and lawmakers .

this is particularly true given the high - profile 2008 elections and heavy spending that has and will accompany those contests .

litigation , and the fec's response , is also likely to continue shaping the policy environment .

these events demonstrate that the evolution of campaign finance policy occurs not only in congress , but also at the fec , in the courts , in other federal agencies , and , perhaps most of all , in campaigns themselves .

as long as those campaigns continue , congress will be faced with questions about how to regulate political money .

