aviation congestion and delay is an issue of long standing .

statistically , there was a significant increase in congestion and delay throughout the national aviation system in 2007 .

the situation has been especially noticeable at certain key airports , namely the new york region in general and john f. kennedy international airport ( jfk ) in particular .

the department of transportation ( dot ) and its operating agency , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , have promised to take actions aimed at reducing congestion and delay both in the short and long terms .

in the short term , dot is proposing to address the jfk situation through administrative and economic measures that would likely restrict or otherwise provide for the allocation of flights into the airport during specific periods of time .

more detail on dot's plans is expected to be available in the latter half of december 2007 .

in addition to the proposals likely to be made by dot , there are other potential near - term fixes that can be considered to add system - wide capacity to the aviation system .

these include , but are not limited to: airspace redesign , use of military airspace , and airspace flow control .

over the longer term the faa is primarily relying on modernization of the air traffic control system through the next generation air transportation system ( ngats or nextgen ) and the creation of new airport infrastructure to provide major reductions in aviation congestion and delay .

this report discusses the causes of congestion and delay in the current context .

it also discusses some technological and administrative mechanisms that might be employed to mitigate these problems .

this discussion is followed by an overview of demand management ( economic ) remedies to congestion as they might be applied in an airport / airspace environment , and discusses the rather limited historical experience with the use of these mechanisms .

finally , the report concludes with a legal overview of how specific congestion remedies , in particular those involving aviation system pricing , might be applied and administered .

over the past four years , system - wide airline passenger volumes have continued to grow , now surpassing pre - 9 / 11 levels .

along with this growth , flight delays and cancellations have also increased , and statistics indicate that the percentage of flights delayed 15 minutes or more in 2007 may surpass the prior record set in 2000 .

the percentage of cancelled flights is also up , although not quite as high as the percentage of cancellations experienced in 1999 , 2000 , and 2001 ( see figure 1 ) .

some also point out that delay statistics alone do not tell the whole story .

this is because airlines have , in many cases , opted to lengthen scheduled flight times , particularly along heavily congested and frequently delayed routes .

a comparison of present day airline schedules to 1997 schedules found that published trip times are about 10% higher than they were 10 years ago .

additional schedule adjustments could be forthcoming and may further increase typical travel times , particularly in response to recent administration announcements that it would consider operation of chronically delayed flights to constitute an "unfair and deceptive practice. .

despite airline schedule adjustments that have increased planned - for trip times , airline delays are still ticking upward .

as a consequence of this increase in delays , combined with airline schedule padding and passengers factoring additional wait times at security screening checkpoints into their travel plans , airline passenger trips are getting longer on average and travelers often face more hassles .

consumer complaints and media coverage of air carrier service deficiencies and cases of extensively delayed flights have put the specific issue of air carrier flight delays in the spotlight during the summer of 2007 .

in response , the dot has convened a task force consisting of senior management to assess persisting problems with airline delays and consumer service , and has convened a special aviation rulemaking committee ( arc ) , consisting of aviation stakeholders representing airlines , airports , general aviation users , and airline consumers , to specifically address delays and other airline service issues in the new york metropolitan area .

based on the findings and recommendations of these groups , which are expected before the end of calendar year 2007 , the dot intends to propose options to address and remedy airline delay and customer service problems .

congress has taken a particular interest in this issue as these growing concerns over airline service have paralleled ongoing legislative action to reauthorize the activities of the faa and the revenue mechanisms for funding the operations of the national airspace system .

while there are broad concerns over aviation congestion and delay at many of the nation's busy airports , there is particular concern regarding airline service and performance at major airports in the new york metropolitan area where delay problems are the most acute .

on - time arrival and departure statistics for the past two years compiled by the dot's , bureau of transportation statistics ( bts ) have consistently ranked the three new york metropolitan area commercial passenger airports — newark liberty ( ewr ) , john f. kennedy international ( jfk ) , and laguardia ( lga ) — at or near the bottom of the list among the busiest 32 airports in the united states .

from january 2007 through august 2007 , about one out of every three flights arrived or departed more than fifteen minutes late at these airports .

between january 2002 and september 2007 at these three airports , arrival and departure delays were typically around one hour in length .

at newark liberty airport , where delays have consistently been the worst among busy u.s. airports , departure delays averaged 67 minutes and arrivals delays averaged 73 minutes over the time frame from september 2006 through september 2007 .

according to the faa , over the summer of 2007 , 44% of all air delays experienced throughout the united states occurred in the new york , new jersey , and philadelphia region .

what's more , there was a dramatic increase in the percentage of flights cancelled at all three of these airports in 2007 compared to prior years .

from january through september 2007 , jfk saw 3.18% of its flights cancelled , lga had 4.81% of its flights cancelled , and at ewr , 3.65% of scheduled passenger flights were cancelled .

not only are these cancellation rates much higher than previous years , but they are also considerably higher than the system - wide averages presented in figure 1 .

while many travelers perceive that delays are frequently associated with weather , actual delays directly attributable to severe weather conditions account for only a relatively small portion of total system - wide delays ( about 6% of all air carrier delays from june 2003 through august 2007 ) .

rather , delays are most readily attributable to a combination of the current system's inability to cope with weather , congestion , and other factors affecting the efficient flow of traffic at major airports and along crowded airways .

these types of delays , referred to as national aviation system delays , account for about 31% of all air carrier delays and are the types of delays that the dot believes can be remedied through investment in new technologies and more efficient procedures for air traffic management .

other sources of delays include air carrier delays arising from maintenance difficulties and inefficiencies in air carrier operations which account for about one quarter ( 27% , to be exact ) of all delays .

also , the cascading effects resulting from aircraft arriving late that cannot be turned around in time to maintain outbound flight schedules account for 36% of all flight delays .

however , the root causes of initial schedule delays that produce these cascading delays throughout an operational day can be primarily traced back to system inefficiencies and air carrier scheduling inefficiencies and constraints .

despite heightened aviation security , security related delays have had a negligible impact ( less than 1% of flight delays ) on air carrier operations ( see figure 2 ) .

analysis of airline schedule delays and cancellations across the entire system , and more specifically at the three new york area airports , point to no one single cause , but rather a variety of potential contributing factors .

these factors can be grouped into three broad categories: airline scheduling and equipage constraints on airport and air traffic control system capacity ; and business jets and other high - performance general aviation aircraft operation .

a variety of options for reducing air traffic congestion and minimizing airline delays are under consideration .

while most aviation industry experts believe that the largest gains can be achieved in the long term through investment in next generation air transportation system ( ngats or nextgen ) technologies , the current situation is prompting many in government and the aviation industry to seek out near - term fixes to address congestion and delay , especially in the new york area .

a variety of near - term options are under consideration including phasing - in airspace redesign plans in the new york / new jersey / philadelphia region ; opening military airspace to civilian flights under certain conditions ; implementing ground delay programs , airspace flow control programs , and other congestion management tools to improve the flow of air traffic ; phasing - in technology and procedural changes to reduce aircraft separation and improve airspace utilization ; and possibly improving airline schedule optimization at high density airports by utilizing larger aircraft , a practice known in the industry as upgauging .

demand management is a somewhat broad term that suggests that capacity , hence congestion , can be controlled using administrative or economic mechanisms , or a combination of the two .

historically , aviation usage of the term demand management is associated with airport slot controls and the allocation of slots .

over the last 4 decades slot controls have been imposed using both administrative and economic measures at 4 airports in the united states .

during this period , as will be discussed below , there were attempts to create a market for slots , but these markets have never lived up to the expectations of their proponents .

congestion pricing , the focus of several policy statements by secretary of transportation mary peters , can be viewed as a form of demand management that tries to use pricing techniques to effect desired results in reducing congestion .

congestion pricing can be imposed at the airport level , for example , as part of , or as an adjunct to , landing fees .

as will be discussed , there is some limited experience with the use of these mechanisms in the united states and in the united kingdom ( uk ) .

congestion pricing could also be applied to air traffic control ( atc ) activities , though to date this mechanism has not been specifically applied in the united states or elsewhere .

the use of demand management techniques to ration finite amounts of transportation infrastructure has long been supported by economists .

americans , however , appear to have an aversion to tolls and the other transportation pricing mechanisms that are the stock and trade of demand management practice .

roads in this nation , for example , are provided largely as free goods , especially in the minds of drivers who believe they pay for roads sufficiently through taxes at the gas pump .

this same framework also exists in the aviation world , with the airline ticket tax and associated taxes serving as a proxy for the highway fuels tax .

broadly based taxes , such as fuel taxes , however , are viewed by economists as proxies for user fees rather than as true user fees .

as a result , taxes are generally seen as a relatively poor mechanism for pricing infrastructure .

nonetheless some observers , find it rather remarkable that a nation that differentiates access to many of its infrastructure systems on a price basis , e.g .

telecommunications peak period pricing , has no comparable mechanism that differentiates for use of the national aviation system .

congestion pricing is normally opposed by many groups in the aviation community .

historically , the groups most vociferous in their objections to this mechanism are regional airlines , business aircraft operators , and general aviation aircraft operators .

all of these groups believe that congestion pricing could be used to discriminate against them and will have the effect of reserving what are publicly supplied assets — airports and atc — for large airlines .

it should be pointed out that the airline industry has also objected to certain demand management proposals and is objecting to the imposition of congestion pricing at jfk .

residents of small and medium sized communities , primarily served by regional airlines , are also concerned that congestion pricing will price them out of major airports and further limit their access to the national aviation system .

the consideration and potential imposition of congestion pricing or other related mechanisms at airports raises numerous legal issues and highlights a long - standing tension in aviation law between federal uniformity and supremacy over airspace and air safety concerns on the one hand , and local control over airports and ground facilities on the other .

this tension , in addition to legal issues related to the ability of airports to use congestion pricing or similar mechanisms in conjunction with the federal financial support received through programs such as the airport improvement program ( aip ) , may have a significant impact on the type of mechanism suggested and considered .

as noted earlier , it appears that the legal issues related to congestion pricing mechanisms have been primarily identified by the two local airport authorities , who sought to impose such systems over the legal objections , generally on preemption grounds , of the faa and other adversely affected parties .

to date , the faa has not suggested the imposition of a federal congestion pricing mechanism on local airports .

as a result , it is unclear precisely what , if any , legal issues may arise should the situation reverse itself and congestion pricing become a federal mandate as opposed to a local solution seeking federal approval .

this section of the report will proceed as follows .

first , it will review and survey the current laws that govern airports , including the federal preemption statute as well as several other federal laws that constrain what local airports are permitted to do with fees charged and money granted by federal programs such as the aip .

second , the report will discuss current law as it relates to airport's proprietary powers .

in other words , given the federal statutory structure , what authority , if any , is left to the local governments and airport authorities with respect to implementing congestion pricing mechanisms ? .

third , the report will review the two previous examples of alternative pricing mechanisms proposed by local airport authorities , both of which resulted in federal litigation .

the first , in 1969 , at new york's laguardia airport , was approved by the federal court , while the second , at boston's logan airport , was rejected by the reviewing court .

finally , this section will discuss some of the legal issues that may arise should the faa attempt to offer congestion pricing as a federal mandate .

these may include such issues as whether the faa has the proper statutory authority and whether laws related to the financing and use of funds by airports may need to be adjusted or amended .

since the passage of the civil aeronautics act in 1938 ( caa ) , the federal government has worked to establish a coherent national aviation policy that places the primary responsibility for regulating the air transportation system with federal agencies , while at the same time attempting to retain local control over certain ground - related elements , including monitoring of noise , land - use , and zoning .

the caa set forth , inter alia , the encouragement and development of the air transportation system , the regulation of air transportation to assure a high degree of safety and sound economic conditions , and the promotion of efficient service by air carriers without unfair competitive practices or unjust discrimination .

although replaced in 1958 by the federal aviation act , the general policy language has largely been retained and the federal government has continued to assert primary control over much of the aviation sector , especially with respect to airspace , safety , and discrimination related issues .

in addition , the federal aviation act included a specific preemption provision that prohibits state and local authorities , including airport authorities , from enacting and enforcing laws related to airline "price , route , or service. .

moreover , the statutory language expressly preserves state and local authority with respect to an airport's "proprietary powers," which will be discussed in more detail below .

finally , it should be noted that most economic regulation of the aviation sector was eliminated by the adoption of the airline deregulation act of 1978 .

with respect to airspace , current law clearly establishes that it is the federal government that controls the sovereignty of u.s. airspace .

specifically , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is charged with "develop[ing] plans and policy for the use of the navigable airspace and assign[ing] by regulation or order the use of the airspace necessary to ensure the safety of aircraft and the efficient use of airspace. .

statutes such as these are generally considered "field preemption" statutes or instances where congress , by the nature of its action , can claim to have preempted or occupied an entire area of the law .

generally , the supreme court has found field preemption in two types of situations: ( 1 ) where "the scheme of federal regulation is sufficiently comprehensive to make reasonable the inference that congress 'left no room' for supplementary state regulation ; " or ( 2 ) "where the field is one in which 'the federal interest is so dominant that the federal system will be assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject.' .

as a result of these statutes , the states and other political subdivisions such as local governments and airport authorities have had limited ability to adopt measures and policies that interfere with the federal government's ability to control airspace and other aviation related issues .

in addition to the federal preemption statutes , local governments and airport authorities are also limited by federal law with respect to their ability to raise and spend specific fees and taxes .

for example , taxes and other charges imposed by local governments or airport authorities for use of the facility are generally prohibited by the anti - head tax act of 1973 .

moreover , the anti - head tax act prohibits state and / or local governments , and airport authorities from taking other actions that "unreasonably burden and discriminate against interstate commerce. .

the acceptance of federal funding , specifically those awarded out of the airport improvement fund ( aip ) , also restricts local authority with respect to aviation issues .

specifically , as a condition of receiving aip grant funds , an airport must provide access to its facilities on a reasonable basis and without discrimination , and must also charge airlines similar prices for similar use .

furthermore , the statute requires that airports accepting aip funds must undertake efforts to ensure that its rate structure makes the facility "as self - sustaining as possible. .

in city of burbank v. lockheed air terminal , inc. , the supreme court , in an opinion by justice douglas , established what has become known as the "proprietor exception" to the general federal preemption of local authority with respect to aviation law .

in creating this exception , which reserves some authority for local governments and airport authorities , justice douglas appeared to draw a distinction between municipalities exercising control as proprietors and municipalities exercising police powers in a way that conflicts with federal law .

since city of burbank , the lower federal courts have generally held that "an airport proprietor can issue only 'reasonable , nonarbitrary , and nondiscriminatory rules that advance the local interest.' .

while under this standard courts have upheld regulations aimed at monitoring noise levels , addressing environmental concerns , and managing ground congestion , there appears to be no justification for a broad grant of proprietary power .

in 2000 , the fifth circuit rejected an interpretation of the proprietor exception that would have permitted an airport owner to "allocate traffic between two airports so as to preserve the short - haul nature of one facility. .

it is worth noting , however , that in the same fifth circuit court of appeals decision , which involved the now - repealed "wright amendment," the court did note a willingness to review the exercise of proprietary powers with respect to advancing previously unrecognized local interests , but not in this particular case .

as none of these rulings appear to have addressed the issue of congestion pricing , it is at best unclear whether such authority is permissible or within the so - called "proprietor exemption. .

as previously mentioned , there have been two attempts at imposing fee mechanisms that might be considered "congestion pricing" broadly defined .

these attempts both emanated from the local airport authorities and were met with resistence from adversely affected interests and , in the case of boston's logan international , from the faa , primarily on federal preemption grounds .

we will discuss each attempt in turn .

in 1968 , the port authority of new york and new jersey , which operates four airports in and around new york city ( laguardia ( lga ) , john f. kennedy international ( jfk ) , newark liberty international ( ewr ) , and teterboro ( teb ) ) , sought — "for the purpose of relieving congestion and achieving the maximum efficient operation at the airports" — to impose a $25 minimum charge for landing during peak hours .

the fee applied to any aircraft that took off or landed during the peak hours and had a seating configuration of less than 25 passengers .

the fee applies at the three major port authority air - carrier airports , laguardia , jfk , and newark , but not at teterboro airport .

a lawsuit was brought on the grounds that the so - called "take - off"fees impermissibly discriminated in favor of commercial airlines and against general aviation interests .

plaintiffs argued , inter alia , that the faa is vested with the sole authority to regulate and control the national airspace and , therefore , the port authority violated federal law in imposing the $25 "take - off" fee .

in addition to the preemption argument , plaintiffs argued first that the faa is required by law to expressly approve of the port authority's regulations , or at a minimum is required to conform their compatibility with grant and other aid agreements .

second , according to the plaintiffs , "teterboro is not a reasonably convenient nor adequate facility as an alternate to the three major new york airports" and , therefore , the diversion of general aviation to teterboro would result in a practical exclusion from the new york area airports .

finally , the plaintiffs asserted a variety of non - legal or policy arguments against the proposal .

these arguments included that it would be ineffective to remedy the airport situation , which was due to over - scheduling by commercial airlines and not general aviation , that diversion would not resolve the disparity between airport capacity and demand , and that the record indicated that the commercial airlines were intimately involved in the proposal and even offered to subsidize ground transportation from teterboro to provide further incentive for moving general aviation away from the other airports .

in response to the preemption argument , the court first noted that there exists room "for the operation of port authority regulations which have the effect of curtailing activities not forbidden by federal regulation. .

as a result , according to the court , nothing in the proposed port authority regulations "runs counter to the faa regulation in the sense that it seeks to authorize conduct which the federal regulation prohibits or requires the cessation of a practice required by federal regulation. .

in response to the argument that the faa was required to approve the port authority regulations , the court held that there was enough evidence on the record to indicate that there was no "inherent incompatibility" with federal law .

next , the court addressed the argument that teterboro is not "reasonably convenient" to new york city .

the court held that teterboro is "not a nil facility or a purgatorial alternative" and , thus , does provide a valid basis for limiting the port authority's attempts to relieve the region's congestion .

with respect to the other arguments raised by the plaintiffs , the court found no facts relevant to the dispute and entered judgment in favor of the defendants , thereby allowing the fees to go into effect .

in 1989 , the first circuit court of appeals decided new england legal foundation v. massachusetts port authority , which addressed the validity of the landing fee scheme implemented by the massachusetts port authority ( massport ) as part of a multi - phased "program for airport capacity efficiency ( pace ) . .

the fees at issue were to be a combination of a flat - rate landing fee of $91.78 plus a weight - based fee of $0.5417 per 1000 pounds .

several groups that opposed the new landing fee structure filed an administrative complaint with the faa alleging that the fees were invalid because they were not "fair and reasonable" and they discriminated against smaller aircraft .

the secretary of the department of transportation ( dot ) agreed to review the complaint and commenced an investigation and requested that massport suspend implementation of pace .

massport declined and indicated that it would implement the new fees on july 1 , 1988 .

while the faa investigation was pending , a separate group filed suit in federal court seeking declaratory and injunctive relief preventing massport from implementing the pace landing fees .

in addition , the opposition groups who had sought administrative relief also filed suits in federal court .

all three lawsuits contained similar allegations and were consolidated .

the suits alleged that by shifting the cost burden of the landing fees from the larger aircraft to the smaller , the new method conflicts with various federal statutes that regulate the national airspace and were therefore preempted .

the fees were also alleged to be constitutionally invalid not only because by placing an undue burden on interstate commerce they violated the commerce clause , but also because they discriminated illegally against small aircraft in contravention of the equal protection and due process clauses of the fourteenth amendment .

the district court , ruling orally from the bench , found in favor of massport .

on the question of preemption , the court found that there was no preemption because congress , in passing the airline deregulation act of 1978 , intended the proprietor to set the landing fees .

with respect to allegations of unreasonableness , the court found that the fees were reasonable because they were fixed "according to [a] uniform , fair and practical standard ... [and were] non - excessive in comparison with the governmental benefit conferred" and were "relevant to the operation of the airport ... and fairly consonant with the cost incurred. .

finally , regarding the alleged discriminatory effect , the court held that "because the objectives of the airport to reduce congestion and delay are rationally related to legitimate governmental interest ...[the fees] enhance economic and operating efficiency" and , therefore , are not discriminatory .

as a result of the district court's ruling , the pace fee structure went into effect on july 1 , 1988 .

litigation then shifted to the dot , who appointed an administrative law judge ( alj ) to recommend a decision based on the evidence submitted .

the alj concluded that the pace fees were: ( 1 ) in violation of massport's grant assurances as they were not "fair and reasonable ; " ( 2 ) unjustly discriminatory , and were in violation of various federal statutes , and thereby invasive of the dot's authority and ; ( 3 ) preempted by federal law .

in addition , to these major findings , the alj also held that hanscom field cannot be considered an alternative to logan international because it "lacks the connecting opportunities that are otherwise available at logan. .

on appeal to the secretary of transportation , the secretary affirmed and adopted the alj's recommendations ; however , the secretary indicated that the alj "overstated the extent of the preemptive role of the federal government in the control of airport access and access to the national air transportation system. .

according to the secretary , "it is ... within an airport proprietor's authority to impose reasonable [nondiscriminatory,] landing fees or other user fees , even if such fees may result in a decline in usage by a class of user or other indirect effects on users. .

moreover , "[w]hile an airport sponsor has wide latitude in recovering costs and using fees to improve the efficient use of airport facilities , the faa is vested with the authority to control , regulate and manage air traffic. .

as a result of the secretary's decision , massport suspended the pace fee on december 27 , 1988 , pending the outcome of its appeal .

both the district court's decision and the secretary's affirmation of the alj's findings were appealed to the first circuit court of appeals .

the appeals court divided its analysis by statutory provision .

first , the court addressed the allegations that the fees were unreasonable and in violation of section 511 of the airport and airway improvement act of 1982 .

the court affirmed the secretary's determination that the fees were unreasonable on agency deference grounds , concluding that the record firmly supports the secretary's conclusions and that the issue is "definitely an area of expertise primarily reserved to the secretary's discretion , and not to be second - guessed by appellate courts...." next , the court reviewed the findings of both the district court and the secretary with respect to the federal anti - head tax act .

the district court had found the fees to be reasonable , thus not in violation , while the alj and ultimately the secretary had concluded that the fee was not a head - tax or its equivalent , thus the statute was not implicated .

the appeals court upheld both holdings , though it utilized the rationale provided by the secretary , concluding that massport's fee structure was "outside the scope of [the act] , as not being ... 'a charge ... on persons traveling in air commerce,' nor is it a levy 'on the carriage of persons' so traveling , 'on the sale of air transportation,' or 'on the gross receipts derived therefrom.' .

finally , the appeals court addressed the preemption issues raised by sections 105 and 307 of the federal aviation act of 1958 as amended .

on this issue the district court and the secretary had disagreed , with the court finding the fees reasonable and hence not preempted , while the secretary found them to be unreasonable and , therefore , preempted by federal law .

the appeals court ultimately concluded that the district court erred "not only in its decision , but also in not deferring to the secretary's primary jurisdiction over this controversy as was requested by the dot in its last minute amicus intercession. .

relying on the doctrine of "primary jurisdiction" the court held that in cases such as these "[w]hen there is a basis for judicial action , independent of agency proceedings , courts may route the threshold decisions as to certain issues to the agency charged with primary responsibility for governmental supervision or control of the particular industry or activity involved. .

in other words , the district court should have deferred its judgment until after the faa and the secretary had investigated and completed their administrative review .

turning to the merits of the secretary's decision , the court concluded that massport's fee structure was an impermissible interference with air navigation and , therefore , preempted by federal law .

having decided the case on statutory grounds , the court declined to address the constitutional issues raised by the commerce clause or the fourteenth amendment .

based on these two cases it is difficult to discern precisely where the courts are with respect to airport imposed pricing mechanisms intended to relieve congestion .

at one level it seems that perhaps the different results reached turned on the availability and feasibility of alternative landing sites for the smaller general aviation planes that were adversely affected by both pricing schemes .

in the case of new york and teterboro , the court found that to be a viable alternative , whereas with respect to boston and hanscom the alj was not persuaded that the alternative location was reasonable .

resting on this distinction , however , appears to oversimplify many of the complex issues that the court and the alj dealt with in the massport case .

the development of aviation law and addition of new statutes in the 20 years between the two cases appeared to play an integral role in the difference between the results .

currently , the law remains nearly identical to what it was in massport , thereby making it unlikely that another attempt by a local airport authority to impose a similar pricing scheme without the faa's express approval would succeed .

admittedly , this analysis appears to render the fees at laguardia sui generis ; however , such a conclusion appears to be a reasonable way to reconcile what on their face seem to be two irreconcilable judicial decisions .

that said , it does not appear to be per se impossible for local airport authorities to take action .

it may be that a fee structure could be developed that imposes fees — designed to reduce congestion — that are reasonable , non - discriminatory , and based on the airport's historical operating costs .

assuming such a fee structure could be developed , it appears possible that it may not be in violation of either federal law or faa regulations .

as the previous section indicated , all of the prior attempts at imposing congestion pricing mechanisms have been locally generated by the airport authorities .

neither the faa nor the dot have , to date , attempted to develop and impose a congestion pricing scheme on the local authorities .

in the event that faa should decide to make such an attempt , it appears that there are several legal issues that may arise .

first , there appears to be a question of legal authority .

does faa have the legal authority to impose such a system without a change in the current statutes ? .

based on a review of the statutes currently in place , it appears that the faa has a reasonable basis to proceed .

while it is true that there is no specific statute that directly provides faa with such authority , an argument can be made that , by virtue of the agency's statutory mandate with respect to the airspace of the united states , the legal authority exists .

phrased another way , if the faa characterizes the imposition of a congestion pricing scheme as an "airspace," "air traffic," or "air navigation" means of managing it may be argued that it would fall within the agency's existing authority provided by congress to "develop plans and policy for the use of the navigable airspace and assign by regulation or order the use of the airspace necessary to ensure the safety of aircraft and the efficient use of airspace. .

this argument would also appear to be consistent with the secretary's finding in massport that the "faa is vested with the authority to control , regulate and manage air traffic. .

yet another way of looking at this is potentially through a "negative preemption" type argument .

in other words , if , as the dot argued in massport , the local airport authorities are preempted by federal law from imposing unreasonable and / or discriminatory fees — even to reduce congestion — then it stands to reason that the federal government , through the faa , is the only place where such a regulation could originate .

in addition , it should be noted that there appears to be a generally - applicable federal statute that permits the heads of agencies to "prescribe regulations establishing the charge for a service or thing of value provided by the agency. .

the statute requires that each charge "shall be: ( 1 ) fair ; and ( 2 ) based on — ( a ) the costs to the government ; ( b ) the value of the service or thing to the recipient ; ( c ) public policy or interest served ; and ( d ) other relevant facts. .

the supreme court has held that this authority extends to "only specific charges for specific services to specific individuals or companies. .

based on the plain language of this statute , it appears possible for the faa to assert that the "thing of value" provided is access to the national airspace ; therefore , imposing fees and charges , provided they meet the requirements of the statute , is arguably permissible .

although it does not appear that this statute has ever been used with respect to fees relating to airspace use , during its existence the civil aeronautics board did use the statute to impose and modify various filing and licensing fees , so its use in the aviation context is not without precedent .

a second question that arises has to do with the idea of reasonableness and non - discrimination in setting airport fees .

if one accepts the authority argument that only the faa can impose a congestion pricing system , it appears to follow then that the restrictions currently in place that prohibit state and local authorities from discriminating and imposing unreasonable fees would not apply , as the pricing scheme would be federally imposed and not locally mandated .

similarly , none of the aip restrictions on local airport authorities appear to be implicated by an faa imposed congestion pricing scheme .

a more complicated set of questions arise should the faa decide not to impose congestion pricing directly , but rather to delegate the authority to impose congestion pricing to various local airport authorities .

in this situation , it would appear that either faa would have to waive the restrictions on reasonableness and non - discrimination or simply refuse to enforce the potential violations that may ensue from implementation of its mandate .

based on a plain reading of both the anti - head tax and the airport and airway improvement act of 1982 , neither statute appears to provide the secretary or the administrator of the faa with the authority to grant waivers for states to levy taxes , or from the non - discrimination and reasonableness requirements .

in fact , the airport and airway improvement act of 1982 seems to require that approval be granted " only if the secretary receives written assurances , satisfactory to the secretary , that ... the airport will be available for public use on reasonable conditions and without unjust discrimination. .

hence , it would appear that should the faa attempt to delegate its authority over a potential congestion pricing scheme to the local airport authorities , it will first have to seek a statutory change from congress .

a third question arises with respect to the use of any funds collected from the imposition of a federally mandated congestion pricing scheme .

even if it is accepted that faa has the legal authority to implement a congestion pricing scheme it does not automatically follow that the faa or the dot would be permitted to retain the fees collected .

it is a generally accepted principle of federal appropriations law that absent statutory authority to the contrary , the "miscellaneous receipts statute" requires agencies to deposit funds received for the government into the federal treasury , otherwise known as the "general fund. .

an agency may only retain such moneys it receives if it has statutory authority to do so .

according to decisions of the comptroller general , the "miscellaneous receipts statute" does not apply if there is specific statutory authority for the agency to retain the funds .

consequently , absent such specific authority , it would appear that even if the faa were to delegate congestion pricing authority to the local airport authorities , the money would still be required to go to the treasury's "general fund. .

this conclusion follows from principles of delegation ; namely , that government entities cannot delegate authority that they themselves do not possess .

hence , if faa does not possess the authority to keep the fees that it collects from a congestion pricing scheme , it cannot properly delegate the power to keep the fees to a local airport authority .

in sum , should it be desired that the funds collected from a congestion pricing mechanism go anywhere but the "general fund," congress will have to pass a statute authorizing the retention and expenditures of the funds .

similarly , it appears that any expenditures of funds collected will have to be specifically authorized and appropriated by congress .

