this report compares selected recommendations of the president's commission on care for america's returning wounded warriors ( pccww ) , often called the dole - shalala commission in reference to its co - chairs , and the veterans' disability benefits commission ( vdbc ) .

the recommendations presented are those that relate to the transition of injured servicemembers from military service to civilian life and / or veteran status .

this report does not examine certain other recommendations , such as those in the vdbc report regarding benefits for survivors of deceased servicemembers , or regarding evaluation of presumptive disability , i.e. , establishing service connection for certain long - term health effects of hazardous exposures .

congress , the two commissions , and others have determined that certain programs and systems that involve both the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) are particularly problematic in providing continuity and quality of care and services to injured servicemembers .

in january 2008 , congress passed the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) .

titles xvi and xvii of the act address matters related to the care and treatment of servicemembers and former servicemembers ( i.e. , veterans ) who were wounded , or who contracted an illness , while serving on active duty .

among the problems addressed in the act are the efficient maintenance and transfer of servicemembers' health and benefits records between the departments , and the separate evaluations of disability by each department .

efforts to address these and other transition problems were already under way in both departments , partly in response to the recommendations of the pccww , the vdbc , and several other commissions or task forces .

these legislative and administrative actions constitute the first wave of responses to the recommendations of these bodies .

further congressional and administrative actions are anticipated .

as this report is limited to a comparison of the final recommendations of the pccww and the vdbc , it will not be updated .

the commissions were given different charges .

the pccww was established by executive order 13426 in march 2007 , and was to focus on the needs of a specific population , namely , seriously injured servicemembers returning from combat theaters in support of operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom ( oef / oif ) .

the commission was asked to look broadly at services and benefits provided by all relevant cabinet departments — principally the departments of defense ( dod ) and veterans affairs ( va ) — as well as the private sector , and at a broad slate of services and benefits , including health care , disability , traumatic injury , education , employment , and other benefits .

the pccww was to study individuals' experiences as servicemembers and , for those who were retired or separated from military service , their transition from military to civilian and / or veteran status , problems in providing services and benefits across that transition , and subsequent experiences in civilian life .

though the pccww's recommendations were to apply narrowly to seriously injured oef / oif servicemembers , it could prove difficult , politically and administratively , to implement the recommendations in this fashion .

doing so could run counter to existing policies , such as compensating service - connected disabilities equally whether or not they are combat related , and prioritizing groups of veterans to receive va health care .

the vdbc was established in title xv of the national defense authorization act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-136 ) to study benefits provided to veterans and their survivors to compensate for service - connected disabilities and deaths .

the vdbc was to consider these benefits regardless of the time or manner in which a disability or death occurred , and whether it occurred during a conflict or during peace time .

while the vdbc examined certain transition issues for injured oef / oif servicemembers who were retired or separated from military service , this was not its principal focus .

the vdbc examined services and benefits for veterans across their life spans , making a more comprehensive assessment of the full complement of veterans' benefits than did the pccww , but a less comprehensive assessment of dod services , benefits , authorities and policies .

the pccww made six broad recommendations , each with several specific action steps directed to the congress , dod and / or va , and published a matrix of the 23 action steps in its main report .

the six broad recommendations are as follows: 1 .

implement comprehensive recovery plans for returning injured servicemembers .

2 .

restructure the military and veterans disability and compensation systems .

3 .

improve care for people with post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) and traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) .

4 .

strengthen support for families .

5 .

transfer patient information across the dod and va systems .

6 .

support walter reed army medical center ( wramc ) until its closure .

the vdbc made 113 recommendations , also directed to the congress , dod and / or va , designating 13 of them as priority recommendations .

recommendations were made in the following broad categories: disability evaluation and compensation ; determining eligibility for benefits ; appropriateness of the benefits ; appropriateness of the level of benefits ; survivors and dependents ; disability claims administration ; transition ; and establishing an executive oversight group to implement recommendations .

the attached table 1 compares selected action steps from the pccww and recommendations from the vdbc that relate to the transition of injured servicemembers from military service to civilian life and / or veteran status .

since the pccww focused on these individuals , all of its action steps are discussed , and the table is organized according to the pccww's six broad recommendations .

the table does not include all of the vdbc recommendations , but only those that relate to the transition of injured servicemembers or that are otherwise comparable to recommendations of the pccww .

each table entry notes the entity ( congress , dod and / or va ) to whom the recommendation is directed .

bracketed notations show the relevant numbered recommendation ( s ) from the pccww and vdbc respectively .

because the commissions had distinct charges and areas of emphasis , head - to - head comparison of their recommendations must be made with care .

for example , the commissions largely agreed on the proposed end point for a revised disability compensation system , namely , that dod would evaluate the fitness of injured servicemembers for continued duty , while va would evaluate for disability compensation .

but the commissions differed in their priorities for implementing this revised system , reflecting their focus on different populations .

when comparing pccww and vdbc recommendations , it must be borne in mind that unless otherwise stated , pccww recommendations would apply , at least initially , only to injured oef / oif servicemembers and veterans , while vdbc recommendations would apply to all servicemembers or veterans , including those from previous conflicts , who are otherwise eligible for the service or benefit being discussed .

the following crs reports discuss the variety of dod and va programs and benefits that are addressed by the commissions and referred to in this report: crs report rl33991 , disability evaluation of military servicemembers , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

 ; crs report rl33537 , military medical care: questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs22366 , military support to the severely disabled: overview of service programs , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33446 , military pay and benefits: key questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33449 , military retirement , concurrent receipt , and related major legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33985 , veterans' benefits: issues in the 110th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33993 , veterans' health care issues , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33113 , veterans affairs: basic eligibility for disability benefit programs , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33323 , veterans affairs: benefits for service - connected disabilities , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs22666 , veterans benefits: federal employment assistance , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs22804 , veterans' benefits: pension benefit programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34371 , "wounded warrior" and veterans provisions in the fy2008 national defense authorization act , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34169 , the fy2008 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

 ; crs report rl31760 , the family and medical leave act: legislative and regulatory activity , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl34055 , walter reed army medical center: realignment under brac 2005 and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

