china announced in march 2007 that it would create a sovereign wealth fund ( swf ) to invest its accumulated foreign exchange reserves more profitably .

in may 2007 , china jianyin investment company , a government agency that was designated to manage any asset purchases until the swf was set up , bought a nearly 10% non - voting stake in blackstone group , a u.s. private equity firm for $3 billion .

after a few delays , china's new sovereign wealth fund — the china investment corporation ( cic ) — officially started operations on september 29 , 2007 .

the cic has proven to be of interest to congress for several reasons .

first , some observers are concerned that its investment activities might have adverse effects on certain financial markets and possibly the u.s. economy .

second , its creation signals china's intention to diversify its foreign exchange holdings away from u.s. government securities into other forms of investment .

third , specific proposed investments by the cic may raise national security concerns .

fourth , some see the possibility that china could use the cic as a mechanism to pursue geopolitical objectives .

with an initial capital fund of $200 billion , the cic was a significant new addition to the existing pool of swfs ( see table 1 ) .

the cic augmented the $2 - $3 trillion under management by swfs worldwide .

in addition , the swf provides china with another avenue by which it can invest its growing foreign exchange reserves , which totaled $1.9 trillion as of december 2008 .

also , the conversion of the foreign exchange reserves into capital for the cic may help "sterilize" some of the excess financial liquidity in china that is reportedly contributing to china's recent inflationary pressures .

however , china's decision to create the cic reawakened some concerns about the impact of swfs on global financial markets and engendered new misgivings about china's involvement in international equity markets .

david r. francis , columnist for the christian science monitor , started his november 26 , 2007 article , "will sovereign wealth funds rule the world ? ," with the words , "sovereign wealth funds are huge , scarily big. .

during a november 30 , 2007 interview on national public radio's morning edition , brad setser of the council on foreign relations stated , "the rise of sovereign wealth funds represents a shift in power from the u.s. to a group of countries that aren't transparent , aren't democracies , and aren't necessarily u.s .

allies. .

in june 2007 , clay lowery , the u.s. treasury department's acting undersecretary for international affairs , indicated in an interview that the rise in government - owned investment funds could cause major changes in global markets and bring about "financial protectionism. .

there are also concerns about how china ( and other nations ) will invest the capital of their swfs .

before the creation of the cic , china had invested much of its foreign exchange reserves in u.s. government debt , such a u.s. treasury bills ( t - bills ) , that were relatively risk - free , but offered relatively low rates of return on the investment .

kenneth rogoff , former chief economist for the international monetary fund ( imf ) , indicated in a recent interview , "countries like china just don't need to hold any more t - bills .

there's just no point. .

for the first half of 2008 , most analysts expected the cic to invest in overseas equities and / or acquisitions in order to obtain higher rates of return on their investments .

one financial expert's analysis of china's foreign exchange reserve holdings from 2000 to 2007 shows a slight shift away from u.s. dollar denominated assets .

however , as the effects of the u.s. financial crisis spread across the u.s. economy and then around the world , the cic's interest in overseas investments seemingly waned .

with its current capital stock , the cic has the theoretical ability to purchase controlling interests in or acquire major corporations , raising potential national security concerns .

according to financial journalist james surowiecki , "were china so inclined , it could buy ford , g.m. , volkswagen , and honda , and still have a little money left over for ice cream. .

surowiecki's observation was echoed by well - known investor warren buffett , who added that the annual u.s. trade deficit of approximately $700 billion means the united states has to "give away a little part of the country" every year .

buffet continued by auguring that if these trade deficits continue the united states could wind up as a "sharecropper economy," in which u.s. citizens largely work for foreign - owned firms .

in the opinion of former securities and exchange commission chairman christopher cox , "the fundamental question presented by state - owned public companies and sovereign wealth funds does not so much concern the advisability of foreign ownership , but rather of government ownership. .

however , others are less apprehensive about the potential impact of swfs on the global economy .

rogoff thinks swfs will do "more good than bad. .

surowiecki maintains that "some of the worries about the dangers posed by sovereign wealth funds are overstated," and that the swfs "will act much like other investors , and focus primarily on the bottom line. .

preston keat of the global risk consulting firm eurasia group echoes surowiecki's assessment , pointing out , "it's a context of mutual dependence .

blowing somebody else up does you at least as much financial damage. .

the investment activities of several swfs — including the cic — following the outbreak of the subprime - mortgage crisis in august 2007 lent support the views of rogoff , surowiecki and keat .

some struggling financial firms received much needed injections of capital from swfs .

on december 19 , 2007 , cic invested $5 billion in morgan stanley not long after the financial firm announced it was writing off $9.4 billion of loss - making mortgage investments .

on january 15 , 2008 , swfs from abu dhabi , kuwait , singapore , and south korea provided a $21 billion infusion of capital to citigroup and merrill lynch .

during a period of global market uncertainty , swfs appeared to be providing a source of stability .

however , as the ripple effects of the financial crisis spread during the summer of 2008 , the cic and other swfs seemed reluctant to take on additional ailing financial houses , indicating a possible limit to the willingness of swfs to play the roles of financial rescuers and suppliers of market stability .

while news accounts in june 2008 reported that china's sovereign wealth fund was preparing to go on a "global spending spree," by december 2008 , cic was stating it was in "no hurry to invest overseas. .

at the end of 2008 , a senior cic official offered his view of china's role in solving the global financial crisis , "china can't save the world .

it can only save itself. .

the china investment corporation , ltd. ( cic ) is a semi - independent , quasi - governmental investment firm established by the chinese government to invest a portion of the nation's foreign exchange reserves .

the cic reports directly to china's state council , conferring it with the equivalent standing of a ministry , and the state council's leader , premier wen jiabao .

according to one source , the cic will have three major departments for its investment functions — 1 .

central huijin investment company ( chic ) , which will provide capital to domestic financial firms ; 2 .

china jianyin investments , which will manage domestic assets and the disposal of nonperforming loans ; and 3 .

a new department to manage overseas investments .

the investment objectives of the cic have been gradually revealed by the cic's leadership .

just prior to the creation of china's sovereign wealth fund , jesse wang jianxi , a member of the cic's preparatory group , stated , "the mission for this company [cic] is purely investment - return driven. .

however , the actual meaning of "purely investment - return driven" is open to interpretation .

in april 2008 , wang , in his new role as the cic's executive vice president and chief risk officer , provided a more specific statement of the cic's investment goals , indicating that the company was "quite conservative at this time," seeking a rate of return on its investments of "about mid - one - digit or slightly above one digit. .

since the onset of the global financial crisis , there are indications that the cic's expectations for the rate of return on its current and future investments may have been lowered .

starting in the summer of 2008 , there emerged indications that china was rethinking cic's role .

cic's poor overseas investment performance , plus internal and external administrative tensions , gave rise to discussions about reforming cic .

internally , there were problems reconciling cic's overall investment mission with the chic's domestic investment focus .

externally , the state administration of foreign exchange ( safe ) , which reports directly to the pboc , made an apparent bid to challenge cic's role as the chinese government's leading overseas investment fund .

while there have been no major changes to cic so far , there are clear indications that china's leaders are keeping an eye on cic's progress .

in july 2008 , sources in china reported that chinese officials were discussing the possible separation of cic and the chic .

the officials perceived a tension between cic's commercial orientation and the chic's role as investor in china's larger financial institutions .

in addition , the connection between cic and the chic apparently led the u.s. federal reserve to postpone granting licenses for ccb and icbc branches in new york city .

on october 22 , 2008 , china's state council announced that it was assigning new roles to the chic and china jianyin investment company , but keeping both firms under cic .

the chic was to serve as a investment institution holding majority stakes in china's larger state - owned banks .

as a result , china jianyin investment company will transfer some of its holdings over to the chic , so it can focus on its new function as an "investment platform for companies. .

in january 2009 , it was reported that the chic had taken control of five securities firms ( including cic securities and ubs securities ) from china jianyin investment company , but not china investment capital corporation ( cicc ) .

stories about possible competition between cic and safe also surfaced during the summer of 2008 .

as described below , safe made a number of overseas investments in 2008 in a variety of firms , including banks and oil companies .

in april 2008 , caijing magazine reported that the state council had authorized safe to invest up to 5% of china's foreign exchange reserves – the equivalent of nearly $90 billion – in non - fixed income investments .

financial analyst logan wright wrote in june 2008 that safe's "encroaching on the cic's turf is likely more reflective of these bureaucratic conflicts than a coordinated government strategy for investing china's foreign exchange reserves. .

in addition to the cic , china has other government entities that act as quasi - sovereign wealth funds .

the key entities are safe , the state development and investment corporation ( sdic ) , and the national social security fund ( nssf ) .

each of these entities has recently taken actions indicating a greater willingness to invest overseas .

besides offering a new vehicle for managing its foreign exchange reserves , the cic was supposed to help china sterilize some of its excess liquidity .

in 2007 and 2008 , china experienced a major inflow of foreign exchange due to its merchandise trade surplus and the continuing stream of foreign direct investment .

if the net inflow of foreign exchange was not "sterilized," the excess liquidity in china's money supply would have contributed to domestic inflation or a speculative bubble in china's domestic asset markets ( principally the real estate and stock markets ) .

prior to the creation of the cic , china had been absorbing some of the excess foreign exchange by issuing government bonds , and then purchasing foreign government debt — much of it u.s. treasury bills — with the accumulated foreign exchange .

however , this was generating two economic forces considered undesirable by the chinese government .

first , to attract the foreign exchange away from its citizens , china was offering a relatively high rate of return on the government bonds , raising the cost of "sterilization. .

second , because the rate of return was relatively high , overseas investors were attracted to the chinese bonds , fostering an additional influx of foreign exchange .

this influx of so - called "hot money" placed more pressure on china to appreciate its currency when there were already widespread claims that china's renminbi was undervalued .

ironically , the expectation that the renminbi would appreciate would tend to foster the inflow of even more "hot money," creating a potentially unstable speculative spiral .

in addition , china's accumulation of u.s. debt has not been very profitable given the appreciation of the renminbi ( rmb ) against the u.s. dollar .

for example , the yield on 10-year u.s. treasury bills fluctuated between 4.5% and 5.0% throughout 2007 .

however , the renminbi appreciated 6.0% relative to the u.s. dollar .

as a result , the effective rate of return on u.s. treasury bills valued in chinese currency was negative in 2007 .

when evaluated in its domestic currency , china lost money on its investments in u.s. government debt in 2007 .

in theory , the cic offered a new avenue for the government to utilize the accumulated foreign exchange and possibly earn a positive rate of return on its investments .

the sale of the "special treasury bonds" placed the foreign exchange in the hands of the cic's investors , who could then invest the capital in domestic assets other than real estate or stocks , as well as foreign assets .

in theory , this would reduce upward pressures on china's real estate and stock prices , lower china's investments in u.s. government debt , and generate positive yields on its investments in foreign assets .

the thinking behind the creation of the cic failed to anticipate the u.s. financial crisis and the ensuing global economic recession .

china's rising rate of inflation in early 2008 evaporated , to be replaced with a growing concern about the slowdown in overall economic growth .

as a result , the need to "sterilize" the inflow of foreign exchange disappeared .

at the same time , the inflow of "hot money" abated , partly because of the stabilization in the renminbi - u.s. dollar exchange rate , and partly due to a shift in international investor's attitudes towards risk .

the rise in risk adversity also struck chinese investors – including the cic – in 2008 .

cic chairman lou reported told a hong kong audience in late 2008 that the cic was "not brave enough" to invest in foreign firms .

instead , the cic shifted its focus to domestic investments , injecting capital into several of china's state banks ( see above ) , to stimulate economic growth .

premier wen jiabao reportedly pledged to "do whatever was necessary" to maintain economic growth at 8% in 2009 , including using china's foreign exchange reserves .

from a macroeconomic perspective , it is unclear how the arrival of the cic will affect global financial markets .

from a microeconomic perspective , the critical issue will be the types of investments the cic makes .

furthermore , the entrance of cic has invigorated discussion of how sovereign wealth funds are regulated , and what standards , or codes of procedure guide their operations .

implicit in the creation of the cic is a shift in china's overseas portfolio away from u.s. treasuries and other sovereign debt into other assets .

there has been some speculation that china may be considering shifting most of its $1.5 trillion in reserves to the cic — if it manages its investments well .

according to some analysts , a shift in china's portfolio away from u.s. debt could put upward pressure on u.s. interest rates at a time when the federal reserve is trying to lower interest rates to prevent a possible economic recession .

with a reported daily trade volume of existing u.s. treasuries of $600 billion , a large divestment of u.s. treasury holdings by china might also cause more severe market disruptions .

however , there would be little impact on the exchange rate between the renminbi and the u.s. dollar because of china's policy of keeping the exchange rate within a narrow band .

the arrival of a new investor with over $90 billion to invest initially attracted the interest of many major financial markets around the world .

on october 26 , 2007 , mayor of london ( england ) john stuttard met with cic chairman lou in china to lobby for the new swf to set up a branch office in the city of london .

on november 22 , 2007 , hong kong's chief executive donald tsang met with representatives of the cic in beijing for similar discussions .

in early december 2007 , lou traveled to london , paris , and singapore for additional talks about possible cic activity in those financial centers .

since the initial flurry of interest and talks , the cic has neither opened overseas branches nor ventured significantly into any of these overseas equity markets .

however , cic's blackstone group investment made some observers wary about the specific types of investments the new swf will make .

the observers were concerned that china might use the cic to secure energy resources or purchase strategic assets for geopolitical purposes .

there were also market apprehensions that the cic could seek to increase its market share in important industries via targeted acquisitions or takeovers .

others were concerned that cic might make investments in particular companies in order to obtain access to sensitive technology or information .

these various forms of possible strategic investments fueled calls for international guidelines for swfs , including china's cic .

in september 2008 , following four months of negotiations and several international meetings , members of the newly - formed international working group of sovereign wealth funds ( which included cic and the united states ) agreed to a voluntary code of conduct at meetings in santiago , chile .

initially , there were indications that the global financial markets were ill - prepared for the introduction of its $70 billion into the marketplace .

shares in the hong kong stock market rose in october 2007 in response to rumors that the cic had secretly invested in hong kong stocks .

there was a similar jump in the tokyo stock market following rumors that the cic was considering investing in undisclosed japanese companies .

plus , rumors in november 2007 that the cic was a party to a consortium of chinese companies planning to bid on australia's mining company , rio tinto , led to a one - day 7.5% rise in the share price of rio tinto and a 4.5% rise in the share price of its other alleged suitor , bhp billiton , despite repeated denials by cic representatives .

cic continued to be mentioned as a possible party in rumored investments throughout the summer and fall of 2008 , including stories linking cic with possible investments in australia's fortesque metals group , germany's dresdner bank , sweden's nordea , a major financial services group , and unknown japanese equities .

however , since the onset of the global economic recession , there have been signs that attitudes have shifted , and market analysts and equity markets would now welcome a major investment by the cic .

there are also apprehensions about the potential for abuse or corruption created by the greater proximity swfs create between governments and the private sector .

as the existing investments of the cic reveal , there is a growing network of interlinked investments between banks and other financial firms within china and overseas .

some u.s. financial analysts have expressed concern that cic's investment in morgan stanley will provide the u.s. financial firm unfair preferential access to china's domestic financial markets .

others are worried that china will place pressure on overseas financial firms in which it has invested to provide more positive and optimistic assessments of china's economic prospects and the financial status of major chinese companies courting international investors .

misgivings about the potential impact of the cic and other swfs on financial markets and local economies are fostering calls for multilateral organizations to develop greater monitoring procedures and regulations of swf investments .

in june 2007 , then - u.s. treasury's assistant secretary for international affairs , clay lowery , called on the imf and the world bank to develop guidelines for sovereign wealth funds .

following a meeting of their finance ministers in october 2007 , the g - 7 nations asked the imf , the world bank , and the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) to develop a set of "best practices" for swfs to follow .

the imf formed the international working group of sovereign wealth funds ( iwg ) to develop guidelines for swfs .

in addition , the oecd is working on a parallel project to provide recipient countries with suggested guidelines for handling swf investments as part of their ongoing "freedom of investment" project .

also , individual nations are considering implementing laws and regulations governing swfs .

for example , the indian government is examining the need for a special investment framework for swfs because "even a trickle from these funds could have huge ramifications for the indian stock markets and the economy on the whole. .

the 110 th congress took action regarding the monitoring and regulation of foreign investment in the united states .

the "foreign investment and national security act of 2007" ( p.l .

110-49 ) requires that the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) investigate any foreign investment transaction ( including mergers , acquisitions , or takeovers ) which results in "foreign control of any person engaged in interstate commerce in the united states" or if the transaction would result in foreign control of "critical infrastructure that could impair the national security. .

the new law also adds new criteria for cfius to use when determining if an investigation is warranted , including whether the transaction is a "foreign government - controlled transaction. .

in addition , p.l .

110-49 increases congressional oversight of cfius by requiring more detailed reports on its operations and the results of its investigations .

however , the authority to suspend or prohibit foreign investments in the united states remains with the president .

even with the passage of p.l .

110-49 , some members of the 110 th congress were concerned that the new law may not sufficiently protect the united states from the risks posed by the emerging swfs .

in a february 2008 letter to their fellow senate banking committee members , chairman christopher dodd and ranking member richard shelby indicated their willingness to consider appropriate legislation .

in an editorial opinion published in the wall street journal , senator evan bayh wrote , "... china's drive for economic advantage — including rampant intellectual property theft , currency manipulation , and subsidies for manufacture and export — raise serious concerns about how sovereign wealth funds might be used. .

senator bayh also suggests that the cfius 10% review threshold may not be a sufficient standard , and calls for the united states to implement a "passive investment" requirement on swf investments .

some commentators maintain that while p.l .

110-49 effectively dealt with the national security risks posed by foreign investments , it did not adequately mitigate against the economic security risks .

in his november 14 , 2007 testimony before senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , edwin m. truman mentioned that "some observers" are concerned about the stability implications for the u.s. economy and financial systems of swf investments in "private equity firms , hedge funds , and regulated financial institutions. .

there have been suggestions that the united states should prohibit a swf from investing in the united states unless its home nation meets certain criteria , such as those proposed by truman and garten .

on september 5 , 2007 , the house of representatives passed h.res .

552 ( 110 th congress ) by a vote of 401 to 4 , which included a reciprocity requirement that "united states financial service regulators , in assessing whether applications from chinese financial institutions meet comprehensive consolidated supervision standards , should consider whether the applications are for operations and activities in the united states that are currently prohibited for united states financial institutions in china ..." however , others warn that such restrictions could lead to a wave of financial protectionism that would cause undue damage to the u.s. economy .

since the creation of the cic , congressional committees have held several hearings the swfs in general .

these have included: senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs hearing , "sovereign wealth fund acquisitions and other foreign government investments in the u.s.: assessing the economic and national security implications," november 14 , 2007 ; joint economic committee hearing , "do sovereign wealth funds make the u.s. economy stronger or pose national security risks ? ," february 13 , 2008 ; house financial services subcommittee on domestic and international monetary policy , trade and technology , and the subcommittee on capital markets , insurance , and government sponsored enterprises hearing , "foreign government investment in the u.s. economy and financial sector," march 5 , 2008 ; and house financial services subcommittee on domestic and international monetary policy , trade , and technology hearing , sovereign wealth funds: new challenges from a changing landscape," september 10 , 2008 .

in addition , the u.s. - china economic and security review commission held a hearing , "the implications of sovereign wealth fund investments for national security," on february 7 , 2008 .

on february 27 , 2008 , representatives jim moran and tom davis announced the formation of a "new bipartisan task force to explore sovereign wealth funds ( swf ) . .

according to a press release from representative moran's office , the swf task force "will study issues surrounding swfs including their potential to affect geopolitics , and the u.s. and international economy. .

the swf task force includes designated members from the house ways and means committee and the house financial services committee .

the initial reaction of the bush administration to the cic's creation was generally favorable .

president bush reportedly said that he was "fine" with foreign investors buying shareholdings in u.s. banks and financial firms .

u.s. treasury undersecretary for international affairs david mccormick commented the investments of swfs have "largely been long - term , very commercially focused , and very stable," but also indicated that more transparency and governance was needed .

to that end , the bush administration pushed the imf to develop a system of best practices for swfs .

there have been no direct policy statements from the obama administration on sovereign wealth funds or the cic .

as a presidential candidate , president obama stated , "i am concerned if these … sovereign wealth funds are motivated by more than just market considerations , and that's obviously a possibility. .

as previously mentioned , p.l .

110-49 broadened the investigatory authority of cfius in cases of national security risk , and increased the committee's reporting requirements to congress .

however , there have been suggestions that the recent changes do not adequately protect the united states from economic risks posed by swfs .

these potential economic risks are seen as including financial market instability , undesirable foreign control or influence over key industries or companies , access to sensitive technology , and other forms of unfair competitive advantages .

among the regulatory changes being suggested are: requirements that any swf interested in investing in the united states publicly release audited financial statements that follow international accounting standards on a regular basis ; restrictions on the percentage of a u.s. company an swf may own — other nations have such limits ; for example , hong kong authorities have said they may withdraw the authority of standard chartered bank to issue hong kong currency if the share of its stock owned by a singaporean swf exceeds 20% ; restrictions on the type of investment swfs may make in u.s. companies — alternatives include restricting swfs to the purchase of nonvoting shares , banning swfs from negotiating a seat on the company's board of directors or representation in the company's senior management ; and changes in u.s. tax code — under current u.s. law , the profits of swfs are generally tax - exempt ; it has been suggested that the tax - exemption for swfs be eliminated or restricted .

in addition , there have been suggestions that access to u.s. financial markets should be contingent on the successful conclusion of a reciprocity agreement that would allow u.s. banks and financial institutions comparable access to the other nation's investment and financial markets .

however , some commentators are concerned that increasing the regulatory constraints on swfs will precipitate a period of global financial protectionism .

in addition , china might respond to additional restrictions on chinese investments in the united states by restricting u.s. companies' access to china's financial markets .

the issue is whether the value of protection obtained outweighs the forgone benefits of investments prevented in more restrictive global and / or chinese financial markets .

