in 1997 , a new strain of avian influenza ( "bird flu" ) — named h5n1 for its genetic makeup — emerged in hong kong and killed six people .

it has since spread to other countries in asia , europe and africa , where it has infected more than 300 people , killing more than half of them .

the situation has raised concern about the possibility of a global human pandemic .

a flu pandemic of modest severity would strain public health and healthcare systems worldwide .

and , although flu viruses do not directly harm physical infrastructure , a severe pandemic could nonetheless affect infrastructure and commerce through high absenteeism , supply chain disruptions , and other effects .

public health functions in the united states are decentralized , with states in the lead for most public health authorities , such as disease surveillance and quarantine .

in many states , local public health authority is also decentralized , not falling under the direct control of state health officials .

the federal government provides funding , guidance and technical assistance to state and local planners , and can require that certain activities be carried out as a condition of funding .

but the federal government has limited authority to precisely direct the planning efforts of states and localities .

because the states are the seat of most authority for public health and medical preparedness , national preparedness for public health threats depends , in part , on the preparedness of individual states .

pandemic planning at the federal , state and local levels is woven into broader "all - hazards" emergency planning , and the response to a pandemic would employ the same basic approaches to leadership , authority , coordination , assistance , and financing as with other incidents .

however , a flu pandemic would pose at least two challenges that may be unique to this threat , and that may merit specific attention in planning: the likelihood that all jurisdictions would be affected , at nearly the same time ; and the potentially prolonged period — many months — during which a response posture would have to be maintained .

the near - simultaneous nature of a pandemic would likely diminish the value of state - to - state mutual aid , an important tool in the response to localized incidents .

the prolonged effects of a pandemic , coupled with potentially high absenteeism , could pose exceptional challenges in maintaining continuity of operations ( coop ) for essential services , including , potentially , continuity of government .

since 2001 , all states have received annual federal funding to plan for emergencies , including public health threats .

certain planning activities were required as a condition of the federal funds .

these planning requirements have evolved from one year to the next .

 ( see the appendix for information regarding federal preparedness grants to states , and associated requirements. ) .

but efforts to evaluate states' compliance with planning requirements , or the effectiveness of states' preparedness efforts in general , have not evolved concurrently .

this crs report describes information that exists to date regarding evaluations of pandemic preparedness .

it also presents an approach to the analysis of state pandemic plans , and the findings of that analysis .

crs analyzed pandemic plans available as of july 2006 .

at that point , all states had been required to submit ( to the u.s. department of health and human services ) pandemic plans one year earlier , and all had done so .

however , the states were not given specific direction regarding the content of the plans that were required in july 2005 , and they were not required to update their plans during the subsequent grant funding cycle .

since july 2006 , states have received dedicated funding for pandemic preparedness through the federal public health and hospital preparedness grants , and additional guidance , emphasizing training and exercises , has been provided .

pandemic planning benchmarks have also been incorporated in a municipal homeland security grant program .

for additional background on the variety of pandemic planning activities discussed in this report , see the following crs reports: crs report rl33145 , pandemic influenza: domestic preparedness efforts , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs22576 , pandemic influenza: appropriations for public health preparedness and response , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs22219 , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) coverage of contagious diseases , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33381 , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) : allocation of scarce medical resources during a pandemic , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33201 , federal and state quarantine and isolation authority , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33609 , quarantine and isolation: selected legal issues relating to employment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rs22453 , avian flu pandemic: potential impact of trade disruptions , by [author name scrubbed] .

this analysis is not intended to grade or rank individual state pandemic plans or capabilities .

rather , its findings indicate that a number of challenges remain in assuring pandemic preparedness , and suggest areas that may merit added emphasis in future planning efforts .

this report will not be updated .

in 2005 , crs retained a contractor , the national opinion research center ( norc ) at the university of chicago , to create a database that could be used to analyze state pandemic preparedness and response plans .

norc delivered the database to crs , containing information abstracted from one publicly available pandemic planning document from each of the 50 states and the district of columbia ( dc ) , in august 2006 .

the most comprehensive publicly available document was used for analysis .

available documents varied , and included ( 1 ) comprehensive pandemic preparedness and response plans ; ( 2 ) annexes to broader public health or emergency management plans ; or ( 3 ) brief summaries of pandemic preparedness plans .

comprehensive pandemic plans were analyzed when available .

when not , annexes were analyzed when available .

brief summaries were analyzed only when the other two options were not available .

broader public health or emergency management plans were not analyzed in any case .

often , they were not publicly available .

of the 51 plans analyzed , 14 were referred to by the authoring state as draft pandemic plans , 14 as annexes to the state's all - hazards plan , and 13 as formally adopted influenza plans .

ten states did not specify .

the database was populated in july 2006 .

at that time , publication dates for the 51 plans ranged from 2002 through 2006 , as follows: 2006: 29 plans ; 2005: 16 plans , most pre - dating a key federal plan issued in november 2005 ; 2004: 2 plans ; 2003 and 2002: 1 plan each year ; and two plans were not dated .

a total of 66 variables were developed for analysis , to assess pandemic planning activities in the following eight topical areas: ( 1 ) leadership and coordination ; ( 2 ) surveillance and laboratory activities ; ( 3 ) vaccine management ; ( 4 ) antiviral drug management ; ( 5 ) other disease control activities ( eg , isolation and quarantine ) ; ( 6 ) communications activities ; ( 7 ) healthcare services ; and ( 8 ) other essential services ( eg , public utilities ) .

the 66 variables are dichotomous , that is , for each variable , plans were determined to contain substantive mention of a particular activity ( "yes" ) or not ( "no" ) .

variables were developed by crs and the contractor to span a spectrum of pandemic planning activities .

they were intended to reflect a variety of public health preparedness activities that were presented in federal pandemic planning guidance documents available at the time , as well as a number of planning challenges and potential planning gaps that were the subject of ongoing policy discussions .

while each individual variable was intended to reflect an essential element of pandemic preparedness , crs did not attempt to weigh the relative importance of each variable with respect to the others .

the findings of this analysis are subject to a number of limitations .

first , variables were developed intentionally to reveal planning gaps , rather than to document the universe of activities that may be described in the plans , or that may have been discussed in grant guidance .

 ( see the appendix. ) .

second , certain planning elements ( eg , reporting relationships between the health department and the governor , or plans for mass fatality management ) may not be fleshed out in the pandemic plan , but may be laid out in a state's public health preparedness or general emergency management plan .

these broader plans were not analyzed , and in many cases were ( and are ) not publicly available .

third , some states have published only brief summaries of extant pandemic plans that are not publicly available .

by their nature , these summaries did not typically make substantive mention of planning activities .

fourth , certain preparedness and response tasks may be delegated to local officials , and may not , therefore , be described in the state pandemic plan .

fifth , states may have developed detailed operational plans for certain aspects of pandemic planning ( such as ventilator triage ) , but may not have included them in the pandemic plan , or may not have updated the pandemic plan to reflect these narrowly tailored documents .

sixth , while analyses began with keyword searches , "yes" findings were applied only to substantive discussions of relevant topics in the plan , not merely the finding of a keyword in a list , or another entry that lacked meaningful context for planning .

while efforts were made to standardize analysis , these determinations were inherently subjective .

finally , this analysis reflects a snapshot in time , in what appears to be a dynamic national planning effort .

the database contains state pandemic plans available as of july 2006 .

since then , fy2006 supplemental funds for state pandemic preparedness were released , pandemic planning benchmarks were included in homeland security grant guidance , and at least 16 states have updated their pandemic plans .

most of these limitations would have the likely effect of underestimating a state ' s planning efforts .

therefore , finding that a planning element is absent from a state's pandemic plan does not necessarily mean that the state has not addressed that element .

this analysis is not intended to grade or rank individual state pandemic plans or capabilities .

there are not , at this time , the processes or standards to support such an evaluation .

rather , this analysis is premised on the idea that national preparedness for pandemic flu is , in part , dependent upon the preparedness of individual states .

variables in this analysis that yielded fewer "yes" responses overall may indicate areas that merit added emphasis in future planning efforts .

the following sections tabulate and discuss findings for the 66 dichotomous variables .

findings of "yes" mean that a state pandemic plan makes substantive mention of the relevant subject matter .

for each of the variables , 51 plans were analyzed .

tables are presented for each of eight topical areas studied .

for most of the topical areas , plans were searched for planning assumptions .

these are statements of generally accepted facts or circumstances that are used to achieve consistency and relevance in planning efforts , such as the assumption that a severe pandemic could result in absenteeism rates as high as 40% .

overarching planning assumptions for pandemic flu are provided in the hhs pandemic plan , and include the universal and near - simultaneous nature of a pandemic , and the expectation of shortages of vaccine and antiviral drugs .

in this analysis , state plans were searched for the presence of planning assumptions that were specific to the topical area being analyzed .

the variables reported in this analysis were developed to reflect common concerns in pandemic flu planning , and to highlight gaps .

findings of "no" ( not mentioned ) were frequent .

there are many possible explanations for this , other than "poor planning. .

as described in the section on methodology , the approach used for this analysis would have the likely effect of underestimating the robustness of state plans .

nonetheless , a plan is merely an essential first step in a competent response , and true weaknesses in planning could be magnified as responses unfold .

the state pandemic flu plans analyzed here reflected their authorship by public health officials .

many of them addressed core public health functions such as surveillance or vaccine management , though specific aspects of these functions were addressed in varying degrees of depth .

this suggests that challenges remain even in areas that are familiar to public health planners , such as: developing schemes to prioritize or ration limited medical assets ; coordinating surveillance to optimize early detection and ongoing disease monitoring ; and legal liability and civil rights issues associated with disease control measures .

fewer plans addressed leadership and coordination , or the continuity of non - health services , subjects which may be unfamiliar to public health planners , or which may exceed their authority .

these elements may require stronger engagement by emergency management officials and others in planning .

this analysis studied pandemic planning at the state level .

as with any emergency response , most of the responsibility rests with local authorities .

this analysis did not attempt to assess the status of local pandemic planning efforts , though such efforts are also likely to pose significant challenges .

just as public health authority is decentralized to state rather than federal authorities , it is also decentralized in some states , with local health departments having varying degrees of autonomy , further complicating planning efforts .

variability among states in pandemic planning has been noted in another analysis .

the decentralized nature of public health is often cited as an explanation .

the federal government cannot directly dictate to states what they must do to prepare , though it can establish certain requirements as a condition of federal preparedness funding .

some flexibility in those requirements is helpful in allowing states to prepare differently for those threats — such as hurricanes , earthquakes and wildfires — that are likely to affect states differently .

a pandemic , on the other hand , is more likely to affect states in similar ways that are , to some extent , predictable .

this threat may be more amenable to standardized planning approaches , and to more directive federal requirements tied to funding .

but the matter of what the states should do to be prepared for a pandemic is not always clear .

for example , uncertainties about the ways in which flu spreads , the lack of national consensus in matters of equity in rationing , and a long tradition of federal deference to states in matters of public health , all complicate efforts to set uniform planning requirements for states .

the crs database analyzed here contains state pandemic plans available as of july 2006 .

at that point , all states had been required to submit pandemic plans to hhs one year earlier , and all had done so .

however , the states were not given specific direction regarding the content of the plans that were required in july 2005 , and they were not required to update their plans during the subsequent fy2005 funding cycle .

the guidance that accompanied targeted pandemic funding for fy2006 , in accordance with congressional report language , emphasized exercises , assessments , assistance to local jurisdictions in their planning efforts , and other specific tasks , but did not explicitly require that states update their plans , if needed , to keep them current to a certain date .

this may reflect a broader trend in disaster preparedness , in which planning is seen as the first step toward a competent response , but the assurance of actual response capability is focused instead on the development and evaluation of exercises , rather than on evaluation of plans .

exercises and drills test the ability of jurisdictions to execute their plans , and they detect planning gaps .

consequently , assessments of response capability rest not only on assessments of planning , but also on assessments of exercise programs , and integration of findings into subsequent rounds of planning .

dhs has developed the all - hazards homeland security exercise and evaluation program ( hseep ) to provide standardized policy , methodology , and language for designing , developing , conducting , and evaluating exercises .

but it has not published information about the specific application of this approach to pandemic flu preparedness .

the rand corporation , under contract from hhs , developed the public health preparedness database , which incorporates evaluation criteria to be applied to exercises , and a searchable database of exercises ( including orientations , table - top exercises , and drills ) used to evaluate public health preparedness .

the database contains two local exercises specifically for pandemic flu , but none at the state level .

also , while pandemic influenza scenarios have been used to exercise specific elements of a public health response , such as distribution of stockpiled medications , there has been no national exercise to test a multi - sector , multi - jurisdictional response to a flu pandemic .

federal pandemic planning the united states has engaged in pandemic flu planning activities , with an emphasis on the public health sector , for several decades .

the threat posed by h5n1 avian flu has heightened multi - sector preparedness activities in recent years .

the federal government has been engaged in a coordinated , multi - sector , government - wide planning effort since 2005 .

prior to that , in 2004 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) developed planning scenarios for 15 types of incidents , to assist emergency managers , public health officials , and others in planning across sectors and jurisdictions .

a pandemic flu scenario was provided , along with scenarios for biological attacks , a major hurricane , a nuclear detonation , and other threats .

federal funding for state pandemic preparedness since the terrorist attacks in 2001 , congress has provided almost $8 billion in grants to states to strengthen public health and hospital preparedness for public health threats .

beginning in fy2002 , and each fiscal year subsequently , all states have received annual funding for these activities through two grant programs: one administered by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) to improve state and local public health capacity ; the other administered by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) to prepare hospitals , clinics and other healthcare facilities for bioterrorism and other mass - casualty events .

both agencies are in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

grants for both programs are administered at the state level by the state health official , the senior official in charge of the state's department of public health .

the grants include requirements for local consultation , and for some pass - through of funding to local authorities .

hhs does not have any grant programs that directly fund local or municipal authorities for preparedness activities .

as a common requirement of the cdc and hrsa grant programs , all states and the district of columbia ( dc ) were required to develop pandemic flu plans , beginning with their fy2004 awards , and to submit the plans to cdc by july 2005 .

the fy2004 guidance did not , however , stipulate any requirements for the content of the plans .

while earlier guidance had been developed by cdc and state health officials to guide state planning efforts , pandemic planning was voluntary at that time , and the fy2004 requirement did not refer to the earlier voluntary guidance .

all states and dc submitted plans by the july 2005 deadline .

many of the plans , some of which have been updated since the deadline , are publicly available on a pandemic flu information website created by hhs .

the july 2005 deadline corresponded with the deadline for state applications for fy2005 cooperative agreement funds .

the fy2005 cooperative agreement guidance reiterated that all states must have a pandemic flu plan , and cited the earlier voluntary pandemic guidance .

the fy2005 guidance did not , however , require that states that had already submitted a plan for the july 2005 deadline ( all of them had ) revise the plan during the fy2005 funding cycle .

in november 2005 , after the july 2005 deadline , hhs published the hhs pandemic influenza plan ( the hhs pandemic plan ) .

part 2 of the plan , "public health guidance for state and local partners," lays out , in a series of supplements , detailed activities to help state and local jurisdictions and healthcare facilities mount an effective response to a pandemic .

activities were provided in the following topical areas: surveillance ; laboratory testing ; healthcare planning ; infection control ; clinical guidelines ; vaccine distribution and use ; antiviral drug distribution and use ; community disease control and prevention ; managing travel - related risk of disease transmission ; public health communications ; and workforce support: psychosocial considerations and information needs .

subsequently , in may 2006 , the white house homeland security council published the national strategy for pandemic influenza , implementation plan ( the pandemic implementation plan ) , which assigned more than 300 preparedness and response tasks to departments and agencies across the federal government , and provided planning guidance for state , local , and tribal entities , businesses , schools and universities , communities , and non - governmental organizations .

in fy2006 , congress provided $6.1 billion in emergency supplemental funding exclusively for pandemic preparedness .

these funds built upon earlier efforts to plan for public health emergencies in general , and pandemic flu in particular .

the supplemental funding included $600 million for state and local pandemic preparedness , to be administered by the cdc through the public health preparedness grant program .

all states and territories received portions of the pandemic funding according to a formula , and were required by cdc to conduct a variety of activities involving community - wide ( versus health - sector specific ) planning , exercises and drills , preparedness of sub - state jurisdictions , and others .

supplemental funding was made available to states in phases , from the spring through the fall of 2006 .

an additional $175 million in fy2007 funds was made available in july 2007 .

targeted state funding for pandemic preparedness was provided to states after the july 2005 deadline for them to submit their pandemic plans .

prior to the availability of this funding , states were expected to use unspecified amounts of their public health and hospital preparedness funds to carry out pandemic planning .

as with emergency preparedness in general , pandemic planning efforts are expected to be ongoing , and supporting documents are to be continually updated ( "evergreen" ) to reflect current developments .

the crs database contains state pandemic plans available as of july 2006 .

at that point , all states had been required to submit pandemic plans to hhs one year earlier , and all had done so .

however , the states were not given specific direction regarding the required content of the plans that were required in july 2005 , and they were not required to update their plans during the fy2005 funding cycle .

the guidance that accompanied targeted pandemic funding for fy2006 , in accordance with congressional report language , emphasized exercises , assessments , assistance to local jurisdictions in their planning efforts , and other specific tasks , but did not explicitly require that states update their plans , if needed , to keep them current to a certain date .

this is consistent with a broader trend in disaster preparedness , in which planning is seen as merely the first step toward a competent response , while the assurance of actual response capability may be better achieved through the development and evaluation of exercises , rather than through evaluation of plans .

mass casualty planning grants to municipalities the department of homeland security ( dhs ) administers a number of state , local and municipal grant programs intended to enhance homeland security .

one of them , the metropolitan medical response system ( mmrs ) program , first incorporated pandemic planning in guidance to accompany fy2006 funds , and expanded the requirements in guidance for fy2007 .

other homeland security grant programs may mention pandemic preparedness , but do not require specific activities or include specific benchmarks for this purpose .

the mmrs program began by awarding contracts to municipalities , requiring the submission of disaster response plans as the contract deliverable .

the program's scope now includes planning as well as exercising , training , and equipment purchasing .

currently , mmrs awards are provided annually to 124 of the nation's most populous cities to develop plans and conduct related activities for mass casualty incidents by coordinating efforts among first responders , healthcare providers , public health officials , emergency managers , volunteer organizations , and other local entities .

in fy2007 , each mmrs jurisdiction received $258,145 to establish or sustain local mass casualty preparedness capabilities .

each fiscal year , mmrs guidance explicitly requires grantees to update or revise their plans as needed to address new benchmarks .

mmrs guidance for fy2006 funds included an "overarching requirement" that mmrs jurisdictions address a number of pandemic preparedness matters in their planning and operations documents .

these matters included reviewing mutual aid agreements to clarify protocols for facility sharing or closure ; planning for priority dispensing of flu vaccines and antiviral drugs to first responders ; providing enhanced public safety services at mass casualty response facilities ;  and establishing the legal authorities necessary to allow alterations in standards of medical practice .

mmrs guidance for fy2007 reiterated the fy2006 requirements , and added the additional requirement that funded jurisdictions update their continuity of operations ( coop ) and continuity of government ( cog ) plans to: define clear lines of succession for key positions ; assure the protection of key records , facilities , equipment and personnel ; address the operation of alternate facilities ; and assure the functioning of emergency communications .

the fy2007 guidance also said that jurisdictions should attempt to use cdc funds for the purchase of antiviral drugs and ventilators , before using mmrs funds for that purpose .

grantees' mmrs plans are not generally publicly available , and were not analyzed by crs .

