foreign policy observers often attribute china's growing influence in southeast asia , and other parts of the world , to its use of "soft power" — diplomacy , foreign assistance , trade , and investment , and the view of china as a vast , potential market .

as part of its "charm offensive" in the region , the people's republic of china ( prc ) has projected a "benign national image" through adopting a more accommodating foreign policy , actively participating in regional organizations , providing significant amounts of foreign assistance , and boosting its economic ties , with considerable benefits accruing to southeast asian states .

according to some analysts , china's rising soft power has become all the more striking in relation to tepid or inconsistent u.s. attention to the region .

the term "soft power," as originally conceived by harvard professor joseph nye , jr. , referred to the ability to affect the behaviors of other countries by attracting and persuading others to adopt one's goals .

by contrast , "hard power" was described primarily as military might .

the united states has exerted both hard and soft power in southeast asia .

in terms of soft power , many southeast asian peoples historically have been attracted to u.s. popular culture , democratic values and institutions , human rights policies , free market system , high living standards , technological advances , and internationally renowned institutions of higher learning .

the united states also remains influential as a large market for southeast asian exports .

however , according to some indicators , in the past decade , many of these forms of u.s. soft power have declined in both absolute and relative terms .

for many analysts , china's growing influence or soft power in southeast asia and elsewhere is mostly economic rather than military ( hard power ) , cultural , or political .

china's growing ability to affect the actions of state actors largely stems from its role as a major source of foreign aid , trade , and investment .

the prc has also wielded power in the region through diplomacy and , to a lesser extent , admiration of china as a model for development and ancient culture , and an emphasis on "shared asian values. .

in addition , overseas chinese communities have long played important parts in the economies , societies , and cultures of southeast asian states .

along with offering economic inducements , china has allayed concerns that it poses a military or economic threat , assured its neighbors that it strives to be a responsible member of the international community , and produced real benefits to the region through aid , trade , and investment .

china may be gaining on the united states in the areas of cultural and political soft power as well , at least in some countries in the region .

a 2007 pew research poll found that only 29% of indonesians and 27% of malaysians polled had a favorable view of the united states as opposed to 83% of malaysians and 65% of indonesians who had favorable views of china .

americans themselves are more popular than their country , with 42% of indonesians having a favorable view towards americans in 2007 .

the figure for indonesia is up slightly from a favorable view of only 15% in 2003 but remains well below the 2000 rate of 75% .

one striking exception to this trend is the philippines , which ranks first in the world in trusting the united states to act responsibly in global affairs , according to a 2007 survey .

such trends in polls led joseph nye to state that "... although china is far from america's equal in soft power , it would be foolish to ignore the gains it is making... .

it is time for the u.s. to pay more attention to the balance of soft power in asia. .

china's diplomacy in southeast asia china's posture in southeast asia has undergone a transformation in the past decade .

the prc's support for various communist insurgencies in the region during the cold war , its military response to vietnam's incursion into cambodia in 1979 , and its forceful claims to disputed islands in the south china sea during the 1990s , created strains with its neighbors in the region .

however , since the asian financial crisis of 1997 , china increasingly has emphasized mutual benefits , or soft power over hard power , or the threat of hard power , in its relations with southeast asian states .

in 1997 , during the asian financial crisis , china won praise in the region when it refrained from devaluing its currency , which helped to stabilize the region's economy .

in 2002 , china and other claimants to disputed islands signed an agreement and a declaration on the conduct of parties in the south china sea , which greatly reduced tensions on this issue .

while there is a general agreement that china's tactics have changed to a more accommodating posture with an emphasis on soft power , there is less certainty regarding its implications and whether china's goals have changed accordingly .

bilateral and sub - regional relations an analysis of china's bilateral relations with southeast asia leads to a sub - regional division between its relatively more influential position with mainland southeast asian states , particularly burma , cambodia , and laos , and its relatively less influential position with maritime southeast asian states ( indonesia , the philippines , and singapore ) .

thailand , while more independent than burma , laos , and cambodia , and along with the philippines a major non - nato ally of the united states , appears to be relatively more comfortable with close relations with china than other regional states .

muslims in the region ( indonesia , malaysia ) look not so much to china as they do to the rest of the muslim world for models outside their national settings .

given that muslims represent approximately half the population of southeast asia , and are concentrated in maritime southeast asia , this should place limits on the extent of chinese soft power influence there .

vietnam's unique historical relationship with china , which includes past domination by china and a more recent border war , will also place limits on the extent to which those two nations will likely come together .

singapore , the most strategic thinking and trade dependent state in the region , has promoted a balanced approach to the involvement of great powers in its region .

a core difference between china's and america's soft power in southeast asia is the organizing principle of their respective approaches .

both countries' foreign policy approaches to the region contain elements of an array of priorities including geopolitical , security , and trade interests .

that said , the u.s. approach places an emphasis on democracy and related objectives along with its main theme of promoting u.s. security interests .

by contrast , china's "non - interference" policy is less intrusive in the domestic affairs of regional states .

while this approach may not garner widespread admiration , it is more palatable to relatively authoritarian regimes in the region , and sometimes earns public appreciation because it appears respectful of national sovereignty .

china's changed bilateral relations with australia are an interesting parallel to recent dynamics in southeast asia and demonstrate how the economic aspect of soft power can transform a bilateral relationship with a state that is a close treaty ally of the united states .

australia's strong economic growth in recent years has been to a large extent based on exports of raw materials to china .

this has produced a reticence to adopt policies that could anger china .

it has even led to some discussion of whether the australia - new zealand - united states alliance pertains to potential future conflict over taiwan .

australia clearly does not want to be forced to choose between its robust and important security alliance with the united states and its rapidly growing and lucrative trade with china .

regional organizations china has been an increasingly active player in multilateral organizations that include southeast asian states such as asean plus three — asean , china , japan , and south korea — and the east asia summit ( eas ) , which includes china , japan , south korea , india , australia , and new zealand , as well as the asean states .

the diplomacy surrounding the formation of the eas in 2005 is particularly noteworthy .

the lack of u.s. involvement with the eas contrasts sharply with the central role that the united states has played in the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) group .

the formation of the eas also demonstrated the differing levels of comfort that asean member states have with china .

some asean states preferred bringing in india , australia , and new zealand as a non - american balance to chinese influence .

one factor that appears to be in china's favor is increased regional support for a "more asia - oriented grouping. .

this reflects the desire on the part of some regional states for a more asia - centered focus rather than a trans - pacific group that would include the united states .

movement in this direction can be traced back to former prime minister mahathir mohammad of malaysia who advocated an asian state - only grouping through the east asia economic caucus .

china's foreign aid has had a growing , tangible impact in many countries in southeast asia , although it is difficult to quantify , due to a lack of data and to the unique characteristics of chinese assistance .

in comparison to major bilateral donors in the region , china provides relatively little development assistance and lacks a formal system for determining development goals and allocating aid .

the prc administers a wider range of economic assistance that includes non - development aid and low - interest loans , as well as trade and investment agreements .

according to some analysts , when these kinds of assistance are added , china becomes one of the largest bilateral aid donors in southeast asia .

furthermore , because china offers assistance without the conditions that other donors frequently place on aid ( i.e .

democratic reform , market opening , and environmental protections ) , it often garners appreciation disproportionate to the size of its aid , and thus has a large impact on recipient governments .

china's policy of "non - interference in domestic affairs" often wins friends not only among southeast asian governments but also by many peoples in the region because it is regarded as respectful of their countries' sovereignty .

although prc assistance reportedly is often not carried out as pledged , such aid , announced at lavish receptions with toasts to the recipient countries , often carries great symbolic value .

many prc aid projects , such as government buildings , infrastructure , and energy facilities , often funded by loans from the china import - export bank and built by chinese companies , are high profile efforts that primarily benefit capital cities or the governments in power .

many foreign aid experts , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and local groups have criticized chinese aid for failing to promote democracy , widespread , sustainable development , and environmental conservation .

over the past decade , china's trade with the 10 countries that comprise the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) has expanded sharply in terms of trade volume , percentage increase , and size relative to u.s. trade levels .

according to chinese data , from 1997-2006 , its exports to , and imports from , asean countries grew by 450% and 625% respectively .

the importance of china to the economies of asean in terms of trade , investment , and tourism has also increased sharply .

these trends are expected to continue in the years ahead as economic ties continue to deepen as a result of the implementation of the china - asean free trade agreement ( fta ) and other cooperative initiatives .

china's soft power in the region is expected to grow as southeast asian economies become more dependant upon or integrated with the prc .

although the united states remains an important partner for asean in terms of trade , the relative importance of that trade to asean has declined .

according to some analysts , china's rising influence has coincided with a period of episodic and inconsistent u.s. attention toward southeast asia , or even a developing power vacuum , during the past decade .

since september 11 , 2001 , the u.s. government has become somewhat more diplomatically engaged in the region and increased foreign aid funding , but with a focus largely limited to counterterrorism .

the perception of u.s. inattentiveness to the region has continued to be reinforced .

in 2007 , secretary of state condoleezza rice bypassed the annual asean regional forum ( arf ) gathering , and instead traveled to the middle east , while president bush postponed the u.s. - asean summit , set for singapore in september , and left the apec summit a day early reportedly because of commitments related to the iraq war , renewing "concerns about the u.s. commitment to the region. .

despite a possible decrease in relative influence , however , the united states continues to exert both hard and soft power in southeast asia .

in terms of soft power , for example , the united states maintains multi - faceted foreign aid programs with clear objectives and large development and humanitarian components .

the united states was also a major contributor to countries hit by the 2004 indian ocean tsunami , which affected several southeast asian countries .

the united states remains asean's 2 nd largest trading partner ( china ranks 5 th ) and its 4 th largest source of foreign direct investment ( china ranks 10 th ) , and has sought free trade agreements with several countries in the region .

while there is a general agreement that china's tactics have changed to a more accommodating posture with an emphasis on soft power , there is less certainty regarding its implications and whether china's goals have changed accordingly .

according to one view , china is pursuing a zero sum game where expansion of its influence is , or will be , at the expense of the united states .

joshua kurlantzick writes that "china may want to shift influence away from the united states to create its own sphere of influence , a kind of chinese monroe doctrine for southeast asia [where] countries would subordinate their interests to china's , and would think twice about supporting the united states. .

by contrast , some analysts argue that , on balance , china's growing economic influence of the past decade has been beneficial to the region and not detrimental to u.s. interests .

regarding china's goals , some observers contend that china's most pressing concerns , at least in the medium term , are likely to be domestic ( focusing on economic growth and social stability ) and that beijing favors a stable periphery and appreciates the dominant u.s. role in helping to maintain regional security .

regional stability serves as a foundation for southeast asian and chinese economic development .

china may seek to isolate taiwan and to increase its influence in the region , but only to forestall the possible "containment" of china rather than to replace the united states .

another view suggests that regardless of china's intentions in southeast asia , its capabilities often are exaggerated , its soft power is limited , and its friendships in the region are transient .

in 2007 , for example , as concerns rose throughout many parts of the world regarding the safety of chinese products , officials in indonesia , malaysia , and the philippines reportedly complained that the prc government was pressuring them not to raise the issue , even when such imported goods were found to be dangerous .

when they banned the sale of unsafe items from china , the prc government reportedly threatened and / or imposed retaliatory actions , causing consternation among many southeast asian leaders .

even some of the main beneficiaries of china's largesse in southeast asia remain wary of the prc or seek to dampen its growing influence in the region .

for example , many cambodians , mindful of the prc's former support of the khmer rouge , reportedly feel antagonistic towards china .

the lao government maintains close ties with both china and vietnam , while the vietnamese government reportedly has quietly encouraged lao leaders to cultivate better ties with the united states as a means to counteract chinese power .

vietnamese citizens held anti - china demonstrations , likely with the encouragement of the vietnamese government , in hanoi and ho chi minh city in december 2007 , to protest chinese military exercises simulating invasions of the disputed spratly islands in the south china sea and the creation of a new prc administrative unit that would include the islands .

discussion of how to address china's expanding soft power in southeast asia soon leads to a broader discussion of chinese strategic objectives .

as noted above , there is general agreement among analysts and observers that china has moved away from hard power to soft power over the past decade as it has sought to promote its interests in the region .

it remains unclear if this shift in tactics also connotes a shift at the strategic level to more positive sum approaches relative to the united states and its interests in the region .

concern over china's rising influence in southeast asia , and beyond is leading some in the united states to be increasingly wary of china and its motives out of a fear that if china's power and influence continue to increase , beijing will eventually seek to constrain and / or undermine america's ability to promote and protect its interests in the region .

however , there also appears to be a real danger that american responses could lead to a self - fulfilling prophesy as hedging strategies evolve into what could be perceived by beijing as efforts to contain or constrain china .

there are a range of options that could be employed to address china's growing soft power in southeast asia .

on one side are policy - makers who tend to not see china's rise in zero sum or threatening terms and who would favor policies that are basically status quo oriented .

they advocate minor changes to refine existing u.s. policy positions .

furthermore , according to these analysts , u.s. moves to contain china could be counterproductive if they push regional states away from the united states .

on the other side are those who are more concerned about china's increasing regional influence .

they can be grouped roughly into two schools of thought .

one school favors enhanced engagement with regional states as a means of maintaining u.s. power while accepting china's rise .

another school favors strategies that would offset , or balance , chinese power in the region and / or hedge against the possibility that china's rise may be more aggressive in the future .

the following are possible policy options .

place renewed emphasis on reinvigorating america's alliance relationships in the region while not emphasizing a policy of containing china .

while some of america's alliance relationships in asia , such as with australia and japan , as well as our strategic framework agreement with singapore , are relatively robust , others in southeast asia , such as with thailand and the philippines , are not as close as they once were .

new initiatives to reinvigorate these relationships could not only take into account american interests but also genuinely seek to accommodate our strategic partners' concerns .

reach out to other regional states and seek to develop closer relationships on a bilateral basis through trade agreements and other means of engagement .

increase foreign assistance funding and / or develop a foreign aid approach that addresses the attractiveness of china's policy of "non - interference in domestic affairs. .

develop new programs to assist emerging democracies in the region , particularly indonesia .

use american soft power as a champion of democracy to gain influence with emerging democracies in the region .

the united states could sign the treaty of amity and cooperation ( tac ) and seek to join the east asia summit process .

the tac binds signatories to peaceful coexistence and respect for the principles of sovereignty , territorial integrity , and non - interference .

the united states reportedly has been reluctant to sign the tac for fear that it could constrain u.s. military freedom of action .

raise the priority given to regional and multilateral engagement .

the lack of high level diplomatic attention sends the wrong signal to regional states and increases attention paid by regional states to china .

the united states would have to consistently participate in regional fora to continue to be taken seriously by regional states .

the united states would also likely achieve more of its regional goals by engaging asean states not only on american priorities but on asean ones as well .

establish a new dialogue process with china with the goal of reassuring china that the united states does not seek to counter china in southeast asia or to contain china more broadly .

such an approach could have the effect of diverting china from strategies aimed at neutralizing american regional influence .

although hedging strategies may be prudent to deter what could possibly be a less than peaceful rise by china , reinvigorating and expanding confidence building measures and other forms of engagement that seek to reassure china that the united states and its allies are not trying to contain china may be equally important to prevent china from adopting a strategic posture that would lead to strategic rivalry between the united states and china in the region and beyond .

initiate a new program aimed at engaging regional muslim states and populations in a way that both supports moderate islam in its struggle against radical islam and brings the united states closer to regional muslim states .

welcome indian , japanese , and australian involvement in the region , where regional states desire such involvement , as a means of multilateralizing external power engagement and preventing it from being perceived in bi - polar terms between the united states and china .

pursue fta negotiations with asean and / or provide greater effort to obtain a broad trade agreement within apec .

pursue more robust hedge strategies through enhanced cooperation among allies and friends .

some have advocated the use of the trilateral group of australia , japan , and the united states as a starting point for such cooperation .

others have also suggested the inclusion of india into such a group .

recent political change in australia , japan , and india make such an approach less likely to gain approval by these states if it appears to be aimed at containing china .

