this report provides an overview of the process for filling positions to which the president makes appointments with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas positions ) .

it also identifies , for the 109 th congress , all nominations to executive - level full - time positions in the 15 departments .

profiles of the departments provide basic information regarding their full - time pas positions and related appointment activity during the 109 th congress .

the appointment process for advice and consent positions the president and the senate share the power to appoint the principal officers of the united states .

the constitution ( article ii , section 2 , clause 2 ) empowers the president to nominate and , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , to appoint the principal officers of the united states .

three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection , clearance , and nomination by the president ; consideration by the senate ; and appointment by the president .

selection , clearance , and nomination in the first stage , the white house selects and clears a prospective appointee before sending a formal nomination to the senate .

there are a number of steps in this stage of the process for most senate - confirmed positions .

first , with the assistance of , and preliminary vetting by , the white house office of presidential personnel , the president selects a candidate for the position .

interested parties , including members of congress , have sometimes had input during this process .

it has been argued that senators are constitutionally entitled , by virtue of the advice and consent clause noted above , to provide advice to the president regarding his selection ; the extent of this entitlement is a matter of some debate .

as a practical matter , in instances where senators perceive insufficient pre - nomination consultation has occurred , they have sometimes used holds to block senate confirmation for those nominations .

during the clearance process , the candidate prepares and submits several forms: the "public financial disclosure report" ( standard form ( sf ) 278 ) , the "questionnaire for national security positions" ( sf 86 ) , and the white house "personal data statement questionnaire. .

the office of the counsel to the president oversees the clearance process , which often includes the collection and review of background information by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , internal revenue service ( irs ) , office of government ethics ( oge ) , and an ethics official for the agency to which the candidate is to be appointed .

if conflicts are found during the background check , oge and the agency ethics officer may work with the candidate to mitigate the conflicts .

once the office of the counsel to the president has cleared the candidate , the nomination is ready to be submitted to the senate .

the selection and clearance stage has often been the longest part of the appointment process .

there have been , at times , lengthy delays , particularly when many candidates have been processed simultaneously , such as at the beginning of an administration , or where conflicts needed to be resolved .

candidates for higher - level positions have often been accorded priority in this process .

in an effort to reduce the elapsed time between a new president's inauguration and the appointment of his or her national security team , amendments to the presidential transitions act of 1963 , enacted at the end of 2004 , encourage a president - elect to submit , for security clearance , potential nominees to high - level national security positions as soon as possible after the election .

a separate provision of law , enacted as part of the federal vacancies reform act of 1998 , lengthens , during presidential transitions , the potential duration of a temporary appointment by at least 90 days .

although this provision might give some additional flexibility to an incoming president , it might also lengthen the appointment process for some positions by , in effect , extending the deadline by which a permanent appointment must be completed .

for a position located within a state ( eg , u.s. attorney , u.s. marshal , and u.s. district judge ) , the president , by custom , normally has nominated an individual recommended by the senator or senators ( if they are from the same party as the president ) from that state .

in instances where neither senator is from the president's party , he usually has deferred to the recommendations of party leaders from the state .

occasionally , the president has solicited recommendations from senators of the opposition party because of their positions in the senate .

a nominee has no legal authority to assume the duties and responsibilities of the position ; the authority comes with senate confirmation and presidential appointment .

a nominee who is hired by the agency as a consultant while awaiting confirmation may serve only in an advisory capacity .

if circumstances permit and conditions are met , the president could give the nominee a recess appointment to the position ( see below ) .

recess appointments have sometimes had political consequences , however , particularly where senators perceived that such an appointment was an effort to circumvent their constitutional role .

some senate - confirmed positions , such as many of those in the executive departments , may also be temporarily filled under the vacancies act .

senate consideration in the second stage , the senate alone determines whether or not to confirm a nomination .

the way the senate has acted on a nomination has depended largely on the importance of the position involved , existing political circumstances , and policy implications .

generally , the senate has shown particular interest in the nominee's views and how they are likely to affect public policy .

two other factors have sometimes affected the scrutiny with which a nominee's personal and professional qualities have been examined: whether or not the president's party controlled the senate and the degree to which the president became involved in supporting the nomination .

the senate confirmation process has been centered at the committee level .

committee nomination activity has generally included investigation , hearing , and reporting stages .

as part of investigatory work , committees have drawn on information provided by the white house , as well as information they themselves have collected .

some committees have held hearings on nearly all nominations ; others have held hearings for only some .

hearings provide a public forum to discuss a nomination and any issues related to the program or agency for which the nominee would be responsible .

even where confirmation has been thought to be a virtual certainty , hearings have provided senators and the nominee with opportunities to go on the record with particular views or commitments .

senators have used hearings to explore nominees' qualifications , articulate policy perspectives , or raise related oversight issues .

a committee may discontinue acting on a nomination at any point — upon referral , after investigation , or after a hearing .

if the committee votes to report the nomination back to the full senate , it has three options: it may report the nomination to the senate favorably , unfavorably , or without recommendation .

if the committee elects not to report a nomination , the senate may , under certain circumstances , discharge the committee from further consideration of the nomination in order to bring it to the floor .

the senate historically has confirmed most , but not all , executive nominations .

rarely , however , has a rejection occurred on the senate floor .

nearly all rejections have occurred in committee , either by committee vote or by committee inaction .

rejections in committee have occurred for a variety of reasons , including opposition to the nomination , inadequate amount of time for consideration of the nomination , or factors that may have nothing to do with the merits of the nomination .

if a nomination is not acted upon by the senate by the end of a congress , it is returned to the president .

pending nominations also may be returned automatically to the president at the beginning of a recess of 30 days or longer , but the senate rule providing for this return is often waived .

appointment in the final stage , the confirmed nominee is given a commission signed by the president , with the seal of the united states affixed thereto , and is sworn into office .

the president may sign the commission at any time after confirmation or not at all .

once the appointee is given the commission and sworn in , he or she has full authority to carry out the responsibilities of the office .

recess appointments the constitution also empowers the president to make limited - term appointments without senate confirmation when the senate is in recess .

such recess appointments expire at the end of the next session of the senate .

appendix c provides a table showing the dates of the senate recesses for the 109 th congress and the number of recess appointments to full - time departmental positions during each recess .

presidents have occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process .

in response , congress has enacted provisions that restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances .

because most potential appointees to full - time positions cannot serve without a salary , the president has an incentive to use his recess appointment authority in ways that allow them to be paid .

under the provisions , if the position falls vacant while the senate is in session and the president fills it by recess appointment , the appointee may not be paid from the treasury until he or she is confirmed by the senate .

however , the salary prohibition does not apply ( 1 ) if the vacancy arose within 30 days before the end of the session ; ( 2 ) if a nomination for the office ( other than the nomination of someone given a recess appointment during the preceding recess ) was pending when the senate recessed ; or ( 3 ) if a nomination was rejected within 30 days before the end of the session and another individual was given the recess appointment .

a recess appointment falling under any one of these three exceptions must be followed by a nomination to the position not later than 40 days after the beginning of the next session of the senate .

for this reason , when a recess appointment is made , the president generally submits a new nomination for the nominee even when an old nomination is pending .

these provisions have been interpreted by the department of justice to preclude payment of an appointee who is given successive recess appointments to the same position .

although recess appointees whose nominations to a full term are subsequently rejected by the senate may continue to serve until the end of their recess appointment , a recurring provision of the funding bill for the department of the treasury and other agencies may prevent them from being paid after their rejection .

temporary appointments congress has provided limited statutory authority for the temporary filling of vacant positions requiring senate confirmation .

it is expected that , in general , officials holding pas positions who have been designated as "acting" are holding their offices under this authority or other statutory authority specific to their agencies .

under the federal vacancies reform act of 1998 , when an executive agency position requiring confirmation becomes vacant , it may be filled temporarily in one of three ways: ( 1 ) the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office ; ( 2 ) the president may direct an officer in any agency who is occupying a position requiring senate confirmation to perform those tasks ; or ( 3 ) the president may select any officer or employee of the subject agency who is occupying a position for which the rate of pay is equal to or greater than the minimum rate of pay at the gs - 15 level , and who has been with the agency for at least 90 of the preceding 365 days .

the temporary appointment is for 210 days , but the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending .

in addition , during a presidential transition , the 210-day restriction period does not begin to run until either 90 days after the president assumes office , or 90 days after the vacancy occurs , if it is within the 90-day inauguration period .

the act does not apply to positions on multi - headed regulatory boards and commissions and to certain other specific positions that may be filled temporarily under other statutory provisions .

appointments during the 109 th congress table 1 summarizes appointment activity , during the 109 th congress , related to full - time positions in the 15 departments .

president george w. bush submitted to the senate 283 nominations to executive department full - time positions .

of these 283 nominations , 233 were confirmed ; nine were withdrawn ; and 41 were returned to the president under the provisions of senate rules .

president bush made a total of 13 recess appointments to the departments during this period .

all 13 were made during recesses within the first or second session of the 109 th congress ( intrasession recess appointments ) .

none were made during the recess between the first and second sessions of the 109 th congress ( intersession recess appointments ) .

length of time to confirm a nomination the length of time a given nomination may be pending in the senate has varied widely .

some nominations have been confirmed within a few days ; others have been confirmed within several months ; and some have never been confirmed .

this report provides , for each executive department nomination that was confirmed in the 109 th congress , the number of days between nomination and confirmation ( "days to confirm" ) .

for those nominations that were confirmed , an average of 75 days elapsed between nomination and confirmation .

the median number of days elapsed was 57 .

these statistics exclude days during summer recesses and between sessions of congress .

this cutoff point is suggested by the senate rules , which provide that "if the senate shall adjourn or take recess for more than thirty days , all nominations pending and not finally acted upon" shall be returned to the president , although this rule is often waived .

the 33 days during the summer 2005 recess , the 11 days between the first and second sessions of the 109 th congress , and the 31 days during the summer 2006 recess were subtracted from the "days to confirm" for those nominations that spanned one or more of these recesses .

the sole exception was a 39-day recess during october and november 2004 .

in order to maintain consistency with similar reports for previous congresses , no days were subtracted for this recess .

organization of this report executive department profiles each of the 15 executive department profiles provided in this report is organized into two parts: a table providing information , as of the end of the 109 th congress , regarding the organization's full - time pas positions , and a table listing nominations and appointments to these positions during the 109 th congress .

data for these tables were collected from several authoritative sources .

the first of these two tables identifies , as of the end of the 109 th congress , each full - time pas position in the department , its incumbent , and its pay level .

an incumbent's name followed by " ( a ) " indicates an official who was , at that time , serving in an acting capacity .

a blank space indicates either that the position was vacant or that information about the position - holder was not available .

for most presidentially appointed positions requiring senate confirmation , the pay levels fall under the executive schedule , which , as of january 2007 , ranged from level i ( $186,600 ) for cabinet level offices to level v ( $136,200 ) for the lowest - ranked positions .

the appointment action table provides , in chronological order , information concerning each nomination and recess appointment .

it shows the name of the nominee , position involved , date of nomination or appointment , date of confirmation , and number of days between receipt of a nomination and confirmation .

actions other than confirmation ( i.e. , nominations returned to or withdrawn by the president ) are also noted .

some individuals were nominated more than once for the same position , either because the first nomination was returned to the president or because of a recess appointment .

when a nominee is awaiting senate action and he or she is given a recess appointment , a second , follow - up , nomination is usually submitted to comply with the requirements of 5 u.s.c .

§ 5503 ( b ) , as discussed above , under "recess appointments. .

each appointment action table provides the average "days to confirm" in two ways: mean and median .

the mean is determined by calculating , for each confirmed nomination , the number of days between the nomination and confirmation dates , determining the cumulative total of these days , and dividing the result by the number of nominations confirmed .

the median is the middle number when the "days to confirm" data for all the confirmed nominations are arranged in numerical order .

additional appointment information appendix a presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in executive departments , alphabetically organized , by last name , and following a similar format to that of the department appointment action tables .

it identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination and confirmation .

the table also indicates if a nomination was confirmed , withdrawn , or returned .

the mean and median numbers of days taken to confirm a nomination are also provided , calculated as described above .

appendix b provides a table with summary information on appointments and nominations , by department .

for each of the 15 executive departments discussed in this report , the table provides the number of positions , nominations , individual nominees , confirmations , nominations returned , nominations withdrawn , and recess appointments .

the table also provides the mean and median numbers of days to confirm a nomination .

appendix c provides a table showing the dates of the senate recesses for the 109 th congress and the number of recess appointments during each recess .

a list of department abbreviations can be found in appendix d .

appendix a .

nominations and recess appointments , 109 th congress appendix b .

appointment action , 109 th congress appendix c. senate intersession recesses , intrasession recesses of four or more days , and numbers of recess appointments to departmental positions , 109 th congress appendix d. abbreviations of department .

