haiti's economic , political , and social development has been on a slow track since the transition from dictatorship to democracy began in the mid - 1980s .

the devastating earthquake of january 12 , 2010 , was a major setback to what little progress had already been made .

haiti struggled with providing basic needs even prior to the catastrophe , but currently is without the physical , political , and economic infrastructure to provide adequately for its citizens .

as the massive humanitarian relief effort continues , planning for haiti's economic reconstruction and development is also underway .

the transition from disaster relief to a national redevelopment strategy is essential , and by all accounts , must be comprehensive , directed at all sectors of the economy , and guided by the haitian government in cooperation with the united nations and other international assistance organizations .

the u.s. congress has long taken a comprehensive view of aid to haiti , annually appropriating funds in support of security , humanitarian relief , and development assistance .

yet , the haitian economy even before the earthquake had experienced extremely slow growth in output , employment , and productivity .

one important step that reflects the nexus of congressional interest and haitian need is the hope act .

in december 2006 , the 109 th congress passed the haitian hemispheric opportunity through partnership encouragement act of 2006 ( hope i ) to assist haiti with expanding its apparel trade as a way to help stimulate economic growth and employment .

the act included special rules for the duty - free treatment of select u.s. apparel imports from haiti , particularly those made from less expensive third - country inputs , provided haiti met rules of origin and eligibility criteria that require making progress on worker rights , poverty reduction , and anti - corruption measures .

early assessments of the effectiveness of hope i , however , were disappointing and the 110 th congress responded in 2008 by amending it with hope ii .

hope ii extended the preferences for 10 years , expanded coverage of duty - free treatment to more apparel products , and simplified the rules of origin to make them easier to use .

the act also included a new requirement to ensure that participating apparel firms comply with internationally recognized core labor standards and submit to regular inspection by the united nations international labor organization ( ilo ) .

in the aftermath of the earthquake , congressional interest again turned to amending the hope act to increase incentives for investors .

the haiti economic lift program ( help ) act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-171 ) was introduced in the house and senate on april 28 , 2010 .

it passed in the house on may 5 , 2010 and in the senate the following day with strong bipartisan support .

the help act extended the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) and the hope act through september 30 , 2020 .

it further enhanced those hope act trade preferences that appeared to have demonstrated the greatest effect in promoting haitian apparel exports , particularly the least restrictive of those that allow use of lower - cost apparel inputs sourced from anywhere in the world .

these provisions give haitian firms a competitive advantage in the u.s. market , which is intended to attract long - term investment to haiti's primary export industry .

this report analyzes the evolution of the hope act as it relates to u.s. trade policy , the haitian economy , and post - earthquake reconstruction efforts .

a discussion of haiti's current social and political situation is now clouded by the massive destruction caused by the january 2010 earthquake .

by all accounts haiti struggles to provide basic services and is in need of massive amounts of international aid .

president préval continues to govern , meeting with his cabinet ministers and helping to coordinate international relief efforts , but the extension of emergency presidential powers and delays in holding local and national elections have emboldened political opposition .

this situation exacerbates haiti's social and political problems deeply rooted in the country's historical development patterns .

haiti occupies the western third of hispaniola , a caribbean island it shares with the dominican republic ( see figure 1 ) .

haiti has endured a long post - colonial history of poverty , political repression , and underdevelopment , a trend that continues to challenge the sustainability of haiti's fragile political stability .

since the end of the duvalier dictatorship in 1986 , haiti has struggled to institutionalize democracy , and so far has been unable to overcome a legacy of weak governance , economic inequality , and social unrest .

the presidency has alternated largely between jean - bertrand aristide and rené préval , both of whom struggled to establish a broadly accepted government , in part for the lack of progress in changing the legacy of inequality in haitian society .

president préval's second administration , begun in 2006 , initially sparked a ray of hope among the masses , but his government has since been marred by decisions that have weakened his support and raised doubts about fledgling institutional democracy .

the earthquake has worsened an already difficult political situation .

the post - dictatorial political system is new , fragile , and in many ways , susceptible to criticism that it has failed to establish a fully functioning government .

after four years into his second non - consecutive term , préval's leadership , vision , and strategy to address long - standing poverty and unemployment have come under question .

the transitory terms of his prime ministers , along with delays in holding senate elections , and in initiating widely supported constitutional reform ( particularly to amend a repetitive , expensive , and so far unworkable electoral system ) have compromised the government's legitimacy .

the multiparty system , rather than consolidating politics , may be slipping further into factional partisanship , leading to low voter turnout , evidence for some of the failure to promote a "political culture of participation. .

multiple observers note that the government bureaucracy suffers from a historic endemic corruption , acting to enrich itself while failing to delivery basic services to the haitian people .

political tensions emerged once again during the senate runoff elections that took place on june 21 , 2009 .

the dominant party of president préval gained 5 of the 11 seats , but the numbers mask a broader discontent within haitian society .

turnout was exceedingly poor , estimated at 10% or less of registered voters , and scattered violence marred any overall sense of a society exercising its democratic privileges , not to mention the cancellation of voting in one province .

the elections took place amid serious protests by medical students after classes failed to resume , and by society as a whole over an emotional debate on raising the minimum wage , which congress eventually passed and president préval signed into law .

some constituents have questioned préval's commitment to the populist platform that helped bring him to power as he pursues a pragmatic middle path to governance .

in the wake of the current disaster , préval's leadership is being fully tested , in part by electoral politics .

elections have been interrupted by the earthquake and as of may 8 , 2010 , terms for the national assembly and one - third of the senate have expired , but not before parliament extended préval's mandate until may 11 , 2011 .

it also appears as though the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for november 2010 may be delayed , in part from lack of presidential action .

taken together , these actions have caused additional friction in an already highly stressed society and have also led to congressional calls for president préval to expedite efforts to set a firm election date .

haiti's uneven social structure lies at the heart of its state of recurring crisis .

haitian society has small middle and working classes , and is dominated by the chasm between a tiny minority of wealthy elite and the impoverished masses , the latter of which have little power or participation in governing .

politics since the transition to democracy in 1986 has not altered this precarious relationship .

the highly skewed distribution of power and resources , and the underlying fear it generates , have made the transition to democracy difficult .

haiti's political future appears tenuous as long as entrenched economic and social patterns remain unchanged .

research on the sustainability of young democracies suggests that haiti occupies the category of highly vulnerable countries .

initial conditions that correlate with a reversal of democracy include poor economic performance overall , low per capita income , highly skewed income and asset distribution , and weak political institutions that have difficulty enforcing checks and balances on executive power .

the préval government is feeling the pressures that poor economic performance places on governments , compounded by the effects of the earthquake .

strong support from the international community will need to be effective in alleviating suffering and providing hope to help rebuild political as well as economic momentum .

prior to the earthquake , security was reportedly improving , although it remained a persistent problem , rooted in the history of violence stemming from political and economic inequality .

it manifested in the often random violence of gangs and paramilitary groups .

security is currently being enforced by the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) , but relief efforts also include the addition of u.s. and u.n. troops .

despite some concerns with sovereignty issues , there is no doubt that the current situation requires a strong foreign military presence for the foreseeable future .

the ability of minustah to handle a possible escalation of social upheaval is an important question given the country's desperate situation , although the temporary deployment of u.s. forces has helped maintain stability .

even prior to the earthquake , economic growth and development was hindered within this often marginally functional political and social landscape .

internally , many doubted that the haitian government could deliver on changing the day - to - day conditions of a population immersed in poverty .

externally , vast amounts of foreign aid expose the challenge of development in a country devoid of the basic cornerstones of growth .

the restoration of growth remains the primary economic goal and is a necessary condition for development .

the post - earthquake challenge involves nearly the wholesale reconstruction of an economy .

even if haiti can emerge from the earthquake's devastation and policies can be designed and resources brought to bear , igniting a sustainable growth trend will not provide the foundation for long - term political and social stability if it cannot begin to address the underlying extreme social inequality .

although agriculture is the single most important sector of the haitian economy for both jobs and output , apparel assembly is the core export industry and one promising source of employment growth in the formal sector .

apparel production is a globally competitive industry that often relies on a multi - country chain of production .

fiber , yarn , and fabric production is capital intensive and provides the opportunity for the greatest value added .

garment assembly , by contrast , is highly labor intensive , offering thinner profit margins .

assembly factories are far less expensive to build than textile mills and location of production is often a secondary consideration to levels of vertical integration and global networks , use of technology , ability to demonstrate socially responsible production , and overall cost containment .

the attraction of apparel assembly is the relatively low levels of investment and skills required to operate this entry - level segment of the industry .

it not only provides opportunity for quick job growth , but also for advancement into the higher value - added work as investment , experience , contacts , and labor skills progress .

haiti is a prime candidate for redeveloping the apparel exporting industry because assembly requires an abundance of low - skill labor , but relies on relatively simple technology and small capital investment .

therefore , production naturally gravitates toward locations with low labor costs .

although haiti's labor costs are not as low as those in some asian countries , they are the lowest in the region , allowing haiti to niche into apparel assembly .

as shall be discussed , at the margin , u.s. trade preferences and relatively relaxed rules of origin can provide a critical benefit .

the fortunes of the apparel sector to date , however , have paralleled the broader trends of the economy , which have been subject to tremendous social and political turbulence .

historically , the apparel heyday in haiti lasted from the 1960s through the end of the duvalier dictatorship in 1986 .

the troubled transition to democracy , including the 1991 military coup and trade embargo that followed , caused a massive downturn in production for years .

since 1994 , the haiti apparel industry has entered into a slow and tentative period of rebuilding .

at its peak in the 1980s , haitian apparel industry sources estimate that the number of jobs ranged upward of 100,000 .

the 1991-1994 trade embargo effectively closed apparel operations , causing employment to fall to near zero for a short time , as many apparel manufacturers apparently left haiti for honduras and other sites in the region .

in its rebuilding , haitian apparel firms estimate that employment more than doubled to 27,000 since the original hope legislation passed in 2006 .

firm - level apparel output data are not readily available , but because over 90% of apparel production is exported to the united states , u.s. import data can serve as a reasonable proxy for production trends .

figure 4 shows the trend of u.s. imports of haitian apparel by volume .

note that imports were falling in the tumultuous aftermath of the duvalier dictatorship , hitting bottom during the 1991-1994 trade embargo .

with a temporary return to relative political calm , u.s. imports ( again as a reflection of output ) rose , but declined again after 2000 as production was lost to competition and continuing political uncertainty kept investors at bay .

growth renewed after 2002 with industry restructuring .

by 2006 , a new downturn is noticeable , likely related to two events that occurred at that time: the end of global textile quotas put in place under the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on textiles and clothing ( atc ) , and implementation of the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , which shifted regional u.s. tariff preferences for apparel in favor of central america .

the downturn continued into 2008 , likely reflecting the effects of the global financial crisis , but returned to growth in 2009 .

haiti's apparel industry faces many challenges .

domestically , the lack of industrial space , the high cost of capital and utilities , and poor infrastructure top the list .

externally , highly efficient competitors both in the region and in asia will continue to challenge haiti's low - cost export strategy .

the required use of higher - cost u.s. inputs ( eg , yarns , fabrics , components ) for duty - tree entry into the united states has also been a problem , much of it addressed in the hope ii and help acts ( see " hope ii " and " the help act " ) .

to improve its competitiveness , the industry underwent major restructuring after 2000 .

where it once had been a relatively diversified producer , the industry as a whole adopted a leaner , low - cost business model based on high - volume production that could take advantage of haiti's low - skill labor pool .

haiti was able to rebuild the industry based on this strategy and can compete at the low end of the u.s. apparel market based on its low wages , quality products , and proximity to the united states , consistent with haiti's stage of development .

for the most part , haiti's production is still limited mostly to simple knits and some woven products .

the mix is shifting , however , toward greater production of more complicated woven goods ( eg , khaki pants ) , which rose from 12.6% of apparel exports to the united states in 2007 to 18.6% in 2009 .

knits ( eg , t - shirts and sweatshirts ) fell from 87.4% of apparel exports to the united states , to 74.4% over the same two years .

haiti's top five apparel products account for 90% of u.s. apparel imports from the country .

as may be seen in table 1 , for these articles , haiti's primary competition is central america , the dominican republic , and southeast asia ( asean ) , even more so than china , with the exception of articles produced from man - made fibers .

mexico , bangladesh , and other countries are also important competitors for some items .

rejuvenating haiti's apparel assembly industry has been criticized as a growth strategy for its lack of development potential and vulnerability to rapidly changing market conditions .

nonetheless , it has survived as a niche production strategy in a highly competitive industry , even diversifying its product line .

supporters of the sector argue that given haiti's limited options for rebuilding its economy in the short term , the apparel sector offers one relatively quick response to chronically high unemployment .

apparel assembly has also allowed manufacturing to remain in haiti that might otherwise have migrated to asia or central america , and the industry has recently begun to diversity production .

haiti's apparel industry relies entirely on foreign producers for yarns and fabrics .

fabric is sourced primarily from the united states , the dominican republic , and asia , in approximately equal proportions .

apparel factories produce for a wide variety of firms including hanes ( u.s. ) , gildan ( canadian ) , wilbes ( south korean ) , and grupo m ( dominican ) , who contract for many well - known u.s. brand names .

haitian apparel production is concentrated in port - au - prince , where it is located largely in two free trade zones situated near airport and port facilities .

in addition , in 2003 , grupo m began a mutually beneficial apparel co - production arrangement in ouanaminthe , on the northern border with the dominican republic ( see figure 1 , map of haiti , p. 2 ) .

the plant is located in a relatively new foreign trade zone ( compagnie development industriel — codevi ) .

grupo m , the only dominican company operating a co - production plant , provides management training and guidance , and plans to turn operation of the facility over fully to haitian managers .

it has also worked with the haitian government in providing the necessary infrastructure investment , including water and electricity , the excess of which is made available to the surrounding community .

selection and training of haitian workers is rigorous and the jobs are highly coveted .

production was unaffected by the january 2010 earthquake .

congress first provided trade preferences to the caribbean region in the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( cbera ) of 1983 — often referred to as the caribbean basin initiative .

the preferences did not , however , cover textile or apparel goods .

in 2000 , congress passed the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) , which provided additional incentives on a temporary basis to select u.s. imports of textile and apparel articles assembled or knit - to - shape by firms in designated beneficiary countries .

in general , to qualify for the tariff preferences , the articles had to be made from inputs produced in the united states or the region .

the hope act , as amended , builds on this precedent , providing additional benefits exclusively for haitian apparel exports as a way to support growth and development in haiti .

the hope act , as amended , offers duty - free treatment for u.s. apparel imports from haiti under rules of origin that allow for more flexible sourcing of materials than those offered to caribbean countries under the cbtpa .

the critical difference is that under the cbtpa , select apparel goods receive duty - free treatment if assembled or knit - to - shape from inputs that use u.s. and in some cases regional fabrics , provided they are made from u.s. yarn .

under provisions in the hope act , as amended , duty - free treatment is extended to apparel articles if wholly assembled or knit - to - shape in haiti from materials ( yarns , fabric , and components ) sourced from any country .

in some cases there are few restrictions ; in others , a minimum portion of the garment's materials must be produced by u.s. firms or those in a country that is party to a u.s. unilateral preferential trade arrangement or a free trade agreement ( fta ) .

because the hope act allows for the use of non - u.s. fabric and other apparel inputs , congress sought detailed input from the u.s. textile and apparel industries .

the united states is the dominant market for haitian apparel and therefore the economic benefit of the preferences is potentially significant for enhancing investment , output , and employment in that sector .

the legislative development of the hope act follows .

as part of u.s. support for haiti's post - earthquake economic recovery , congress passed the haiti economic lift program ( help ) act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-171 ) in may 2010 .

in the help act , congress crafted amendments to the hope act , targeting those preferences that had so far appeared to demonstrate the greatest promise of promoting haitian apparel exports to the united states .

an analysis of the apparel trade data from haiti , as seen in table 2 , indicates that haitian apparel producers were increasing their use of the tariff preferences , particularly after hope ii was passed in 2008 .

from 2007 to 2009 , the proportion of apparel entering under hope ii grew from 3.3% to 26.9% of total apparel entering duty free under all preference programs ( cbtpa and hope act ) .

although there may have been some switching of exports entering the u.s. market from cbtpa to hope ii , data reveal that in 2009 there was a 137% jump in the use of the woven tpl and a 41% increase in the use of the value - added rule , likely in response to hope ii .

by 2009 , a small portion of apparel began to enter under the knit tpl as well , but there has been little use of other special import rules provided to haitian apparel exports .

in addition , data not shown reflect that the statutory caps on the amount of apparel allowed to enter duty free are still far from being exceeded .

for example , in 2009 haiti filled 5.2% of its overall apparel quota , 2.1% of the knit apparel cap , and 22.8% of the woven cap .

haitian apparel producers lobbied for specific changes including extending the program to 2028 , increasing the tpls for knits and fabrics , reducing the value - added rule to 50% for five years , reducing the earned income allowance from 3-to - 1 to 1-for - 1 , and expanding the apparel and non - apparel items that would be eligible for duty - free treatment .

the haitian apparel industry benefits from a comparative advantage that rests on low - wage production and proximity to the u.s. market , augmented by flexible trade preferences created by the u.s. congress in the hope act , as amended .

because the united states is the primary market for haitian apparel exports , these "uniquely" generous trade preferences based largely on duty - free treatment for apparel articles made with third - country inputs , especially fabric , are expected to lead to increased foreign investment in apparel manufacturing .

job growth and production increases in the apparel industry since hope i was passed in 2006 are early indicators that the strategy may have been taking hold before the earthquake occurred .

in the aftermath of the january 12 , 2010 earthquake , the apparel industry faces a number of problems in returning to full production , including damaged factories , a devastated work force , and interrupted finance and logistical capabilities .

congress has chosen to respond to haiti's needs by amending the hope act to enhance even further market access for haitian apparel and other exports .

two important considerations guided congressional action in addition to a broad - based concern over haiti's economic and social problems .

first , legislation appeared to focus on enhancing those preference rules that have so far shown the most promise for promoting investment , production , and apparel exports .

second , congress , in amending the preference rules , openly considered the possible negative effects on u.s. producers and workers .

in so doing , congress sought to achieve a policy coherence that attempts to balance domestic and foreign policy considerations .

