climate change is a global issue , but proposed responses generally would require action at the national level .

in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , which called on industrialized countries to take the lead in reducing the six primary greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000 .

for more than a decade , a variety of voluntary and regulatory actions have been proposed or undertaken in the united states , including monitoring of power plant carbon dioxide emissions , improved appliance efficiency , and incentives for developing renewable energy sources .

however , greenhouse gas emissions have continued to increase .

in 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the kyoto protocol , which called for legally binding commitments by developed countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions .

he has also rejected the concept of mandatory emissions reductions .

since then , the administration has focused u.s. climate change policy on voluntary initiatives to reduce the growth in greenhouse gas emissions .

in contrast , in 2005 , the senate passed a sense of the senate resolution on climate change declaring that congress should enact legislation establishing a mandatory , market - based program to slow , stop , and reverse the growth of greenhouse gases at a rate and in a manner that "will not significantly harm the united states economy" and "will encourage comparable action" by other nations .

a number of congressional proposals to advance programs designed to reduce greenhouse gases have been introduced in the 110 th congress .

these have generally followed one of three tracks .

the first is to improve the monitoring of greenhouse gas emissions to provide a basis for research and development and for any potential future reduction scheme .

the second is to enact a market - oriented greenhouse gas reduction program along the lines of the trading provisions of the current acid rain reduction program established by the 1990 clean air act amendments .

the third is to enact energy and related programs that would have the added effect of reducing greenhouse gases: an example would be a requirement that electricity producers generate a portion of their electricity from renewable resources ( a renewable portfolio standard ) .

this report focuses on the second category of bills , and on two bills in particular: s. 1766 and s. 2191 ( as reported ) .

note that crs has a more comprehensive discussion of the costs and benefits of s. 2191 available .

many of the caveats and limitations about modeling and forecasting in that report are applicable to this one .

readers are urged to consult that report in addition to reading this one .

s. 1766 .

introduced july 11 , 2007 , by senators bingaman and specter , s. 1766 would set emissions targets on most of the country's greenhouse gas emissions .

beginning in 2012 , covered entities would face emissions limits , with emissions targets set at their 2006 levels in 2020 .

the emissions targets would decline steadily until 2030 , when the emission target would be set at the entities' 1990 levels .

for each ton of carbon dioxide equivalent , covered entities can comply with the bill by submitting an allowance through a trading program or by paying a safety valve price ( called a technology accelerator payment or tap ) .

under the trading program , allowances are allocated to various entities , including covered entities ; eligible facilities ( non - covered facilities that may be in covered sectors ) , such as coal mines and carbon - intensive industries ; states ; and parties conducting sequestration activities .

initially , 24% of all allowances are auctioned , a percentage that increases over time .

the tap is set at $12 per metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent in 2012 , increasing 5% annually above the rate of inflation .

the bill also requires countries that do not take comparable action to control emissions to submit special allowances ( or their foreign equivalent ) to accompany imports into the united states of covered greenhouse gas intensive goods and / or primary products .

s. 2191 .

senators lieberman and warner introduced s. 2191 on october 18 , 2007 .

as reported by the senate committee on environment and public works the bill would cover emissions from petroleum producers and importers , facilities that produce or import more than 10,000 tons ( of carbon dioxide equivalent ) of fluorinated chemicals annually , any facility that uses more than 5,000 tons of coal annually , any natural gas processing plant or importer ( including lng ) , and any facility that emits more than 10,000 tons ( of carbon dioxide equivalent ) of hfcs annually as a byproduct of hydrochloro - fluorocarbon production .

s. 2191 is estimated by its sponsors to reduce total u.s. greenhouse gas emissions 19% below 2005 levels by 2020 ( up from 15% as introduced ) and 63% below 2005 levels by 2050 .

the bill would establish a carbon market efficiency board to observe the allowance market and implement cost - relief measures if necessary .

like s. 1766 , s. 2191 also requires countries that do not take comparable action to control emissions to submit special allowances ( or their foreign equivalent ) to accompany exports to the united states of any covered greenhouse gas intensive goods and primary products .

on april 10 , 2008 , a proposed amendment to s. 2191 was submitted to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) to be included in the scoring of the bill .

the amendment would provide for some of the auctioned revenues to be put aside for deficit reduction purposes .

on may 20 , senator boxer introduced s. 3036 , which is identical to the reported version of s. 2191 except that it contains the above deficit reduction amendment .

on june 2 , 2008 , the senate invoked cloture on a motion to proceed on s. 3036 .

table 1 summarizes the major provisions of each bill .

two studies have been completed that compare s. 1766 and s. 2191 under the same baseline conditions .

the most comprehensive analysis has been conducted by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

the reports are entitled epa analysis of the low carbon economy act of 2007: s. 1766 in the 110 th congress ( january 15 , 2008 ) , and epa analysis of the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2008: s. 2191 in 110 th congress ( march 14 , 2008 ) .

the analyses employ a suite of models and basecases , along with some useful sensitivity analysis .

this report will focus on three of the models and two basecases .

the first model is adage: a computable general equilibrium ( cge ) model developed by rti international .

the s. 1766 and s. 2191 cases employing the reference basecase are designated epa / adage - ref in this report , while the cases employing the high technology basecase are designated epa / adage - tech .

the second model is igem: a cge model developed by dale jorgenson associates .

the cases employing the reference basecase are designated epa / igem - ref in this report , while the cases employing the high technology basecase are designated epa / igem - tech .

the third model is ipm: a dynamic , deterministic linear programming model of the u.s. electric power sector developed by icf resources .

the cases employing the ipm model are designated epa / ipm in this report .

a second analysis has been conducted by the energy information administration ( eia ) .

the report is entitled energy market and economic impacts of s. 2191 , the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2007 ( april 2008 ) and included an updated analysis of s. 1766 .

the analysis employs eia's nems model: a macroeconomic forecasting model with extensive energy technology detail .

in addition to conducting a "core" analysis of s. 2191 using its preliminary 2008 annual energy outlook ( aeo ) baseline , eia also conducts some useful sensitivity analysis that focuses on the upside risk of increased energy prices under s. 2191 .

however , eia did not update the sensitivity analysis it had previously conducted on s. 1766 .

the core s. 2191 analysis and the updated s. 1766 analysis are designated eia / nems in this report .

s. 1766 and s. 2191 represent different answers to the choice between controlling the price and the quantity of emissions under a market - based control strategy .

in general , market - based mechanisms to reduce greenhouse gas emissions focus on specifying either the acceptable emissions level ( quantity ) or compliance costs ( price ) , allowing the marketplace to determine the economically efficient solution for the other variable .

if one is more concerned about the possible economic cost ( price ) of the program , then use of a safety valve to limit costs could appear to some more appropriate , even through it introduces some uncertainty about the amount of reduction achieved ( quantity ) .

in contrast , if one is more concerned about achieving a specific emission reduction level ( quantity ) , with costs handled efficiently , but not capped , a tradeable permit program without a safety valve may be viewed as more appropriate .

in the case of these alternatives , s. 2191 leans toward the quantity ( total emissions ) side of the equation ; s. 1766 leans toward the price side of the equation .

the two proposals — s. 1766 and s. 2191 — would establish market - based systems to limit emissions of greenhouse gases .

however , the proposals differ in how those systems would work .

s. 2191 would establish an absolute cap on emissions from covered entities , and would allow entities to trade emissions under that cap .

s. 1766 would establish emissions targets on covered entities and allow those entities to meet those targets , either through trading program or by making a safety valve payment in lieu of reducing emissions .

under both proposals , short - term u.s. emissions would likely be below a business - as - usual scenario , although reductions under s. 2191 are guaranteed and projected to be larger , particularly over the long - term .

in contrast , the cost of s. 1766 is likely to be less and more predictable than s. 2191 .

hence , a major policy question is whether one is more concerned about the possible economic cost of the program and therefore willing to accept some uncertainty about the amount of reduction received ( i.e. , a safety valve ) ; or one is more concerned about achieving a specific emission reduction level with costs handled efficiently , but not capped ( i.e. , pure tradeable permits ) .

s. 2191 leans toward the quantity ( total emissions ) side of the equation ; s. 1766 leans toward the price side of the equation .

