it has been said that "conflict is endemic to budgeting. .

if conflict within congress or between congress and the president impedes the timely enactment of annual appropriations acts or continuing resolutions , a government shutdown may occur .

along these lines , several options may present themselves to congress and the president during high - stakes negotiations over appropriations measures .

the options include coming to agreement on regular appropriations acts by october 1 , the beginning of a new fiscal year ; using one or more interim continuing resolutions ( crs ) to extend temporary funding beyond the beginning of a fiscal year , until a point in time when negotiators make final decisions about full - year funding levels ; or not agreeing on full - year or interim appropriations acts , resulting in a temporary funding gap and a corresponding shutdown of affected federal government activities .

if congress and the president pursue the second or third options , they may agree on full - year appropriations after the beginning of the fiscal year .

these agreements may provide funding through regular appropriations acts — either in stand - alone or omnibus legislation — or , less commonly , through a full - year cr .

congress and the president frequently agree on full - year or interim funding without coming to an impasse .

on other occasions , however , congress and the president may not come to an accommodation in time to prevent a temporary funding gap .

if a funding gap begins and funding does not appear likely to resume during the first calendar day of the gap , the federal government generally begins a "shutdown" of affected activities .

the criteria for determining which activities are affected are complex , as discussed later in this report .

this report discusses the causes of funding gaps and shutdowns of the federal government , processes that are associated with shutdowns , and how agency operations may be affected by shutdowns .

the report concludes with a discussion of potential issues for congress .

the federal fiscal year begins on october 1 .

for agencies and programs that rely on discretionary funding through annual appropriations acts , congress and the president must enact interim or full - year appropriations by this date if many governmental activities are to continue operating .

if interim or full - year appropriations are not enacted into law , the interval in which agency appropriations are not enacted is called a "funding gap. .

in addition , a funding gap may occur if a cr's interim funding expires and another cr or regular appropriations bill is not enacted immediately thereafter .

when a funding gap begins and appears likely to continue a full calendar day or longer , the federal government generally begins a "shutdown" of the affected activities .

a funding gap and shutdown are distinct events , however ( see box 1 ) .

in general , a shutdown implies the furlough of certain personnel and curtailment of agency activities and services .

there are multiple exceptions to this general process , however , as this report explains later .

programs that are funded by laws other than annual appropriations acts — such as entitlements like social security and other mandatory spending — also may be affected by a funding gap , if program execution relies on activities that receive annually appropriated funding .

effects of a shutdown may occur at various times , including in anticipation of a potential funding gap ( eg , planning ) , during an actual gap ( eg , furlough and curtailed operations ) , and afterwards ( eg , addressing backlogs of work ) .

the following sections discuss potential effects of a shutdown from three perspectives: effects on federal officials and employees ; examples of excepted activities and personnel ; and effects on government operations and services to the public .

in december 1995 , representative john l. mica , chairman of the subcommittee on civil service of the house committee on government reform and oversight , convened a hearing that focused on the first fy1996 shutdown and potential implications for the future .

among other things , then - chairman mica raised concerns about the shutdown's planning and execution by agencies and omb , saying "the execution of the shutdown was , in many instances , disorganized and illogical , at best , and oftentimes chaotic experience. .

as an example , he cited the "recall of more than 50,000 social security personnel [three days into the furlough] , raising questions about whether they should have been furloughed in the first place. .

in addition , then - ranking member james p. moran expressed interest in clarifying the distinction between excepted and non - excepted activities and employees .

if similar issues were of current concern , congress might consider lawmaking and oversight options related to the quality and specificity of agency shutdown planning , including the rationales for excepting employees from furlough .

the shutdown plans that agencies publicly released in the wake of negotiations on fy2011 and fy2012 appropriations , in connection with the fy2014 and fy2018 shutdowns , and subsequently might provide a starting point for such attention .

if insight were desired into agency decision making processes , congress might weigh whether to seek access to any omb guidance documents that were provided to agencies but not posted on the publicly available internet .

omb's circular no .

a - 11 requires executive agencies to submit to omb "plans for an orderly shutdown in the event of a lapse in appropriations. .

omb has required the development and maintenance of these shutdown plans since 1980 .

prior to the circular's 2011 revision , the circular broadly indicated that the plans were to be submitted to omb when initially prepared and also when revised .

with the august 2011 revision of the circular , however , omb newly required that these plans be updated whenever there is a change in the source of funding for an agency program , or "any significant modification , expansion , or reduction in agency program activities. .

in any case , plans are required to be updated and submitted to omb with a minimum frequency of once every two years , starting august 1 , 2015 .

the april and december 2011 releases of agency shutdown plans on the internet — on omb's website and on agency websites — brought a new level of transparency to agency shutdown planning .

however , each release occurred on the final day of funding availability before an interim cr was scheduled to expire , and in the context of negotiations where an impasse seemed to many observers to be a possibility .

before the april 2011 release , it was not clear the extent to which agency shutdown plans ever had been made publicly available or systematically shared with congress and agency stakeholders for review and feedback .

in the context of fy2014 funding , omb began to post agencies' shutdown plans on its website on september 27 , 2013 , three days prior to the end of fy2013 .

for fy2018 funding , omb began to post links to several updated shutdown plans in december 2017 , january 2018 , and intermittently thereafter .

it remains to be seen over time whether these shutdown plans will remain a permanent fixture of federal agency and omb websites .

similarly , it is not clear if any updated plans will be made available to congress and the public , except at a time determined by omb or a sitting president .

if these possibilities were of interest to congress , congress could consider the advantages and disadvantages of the status quo versus establishing a statutory structure for how updated plans are posted and updated .

on one hand , scrutiny over agency shutdown plans may provide incentives for agencies to improve the quality of the plans , should it become necessary at some point for agencies to execute the plans .

oversight may also inform budget policy debates about the potential impacts of shutdowns .

on the other hand , such inquiries may distract agency personnel from other duties and raise sensitive issues regarding what activities and employees should be considered to be excepted from antideficiency act restrictions .

several issues and options arise in the context of a federal government shutdown in the administration of federal grants to state and local governments .

the scale of these activities is considerable .

federal outlays for grants to state and local governments were $510 billion in fy2013 , leading into the early - fy2014 shutdown .

a federal government shutdown may cause disruption to , or may result in the cessation of , grant administration activities depending on the following factors: the timing and length of the federal government shutdown ; choices made by federal , state , and local officials in anticipation of , or during , a shutdown regarding grant program administration ; and statutory changes since the last federal government shutdown that change how a grant program is administered .

in anticipation of , or during , a shutdown , congress and federal , state , and local stakeholders make choices in administering programs .

for some programs , these choices may include whether to cover gaps in federal grant funding with state or local funds with uncertainty of reimbursement ; furlough grants administration personnel at all levels of government ; and involve grants administration personnel in contingency planning .

for example , when there is a gap in federal funding for state - administered programs during a federal government shutdown , states must decide whether to fill the gap with state funding to continue program operations or to cease program activities until the federal funding is restored .

this decision may be influenced by the level of uncertainty the states face regarding the reimbursement of state funds by the federal government once funding is restored .

congress might consider options for enacting legislation in advance of a shutdown to address whether states would be reimbursed for expenses that would have normally been covered by federal grant outlays but that were delayed due to a government shutdown .

in addition , grant administration personnel may play a critical role in evaluating the choices that contribute to the impact of a federal government shutdown .

if grant administration personnel are furloughed due to a federal government shutdown , grant program administration activities such as grant agreement execution , payment processing , and investigation of waste , fraud , and abuse , may be interrupted .

for example , gao reported that during the fy2014 shutdown , "[a]ll [national institutes of health] and [federal transit administration] grants management officials were furloughed and were generally unavailable to assist grantees. .

if grant administration personnel are furloughed or not involved in the contingency planning , these activities may not be sufficiently addressed .

congress might consider the role of grant administration personnel when contemplating statutory changes that would affect grant program administration during a shutdown .

one previous congressional response to shutdowns has been the enactment of "narrow" continuing resolutions that provide temporary budget authority for only specified programs or activities , as opposed to all of the programs and activities in one or more regular appropriations bills .

for example , during the second fy1996 shutdown , a narrow cr was enacted that funded benefits for veterans and certain children and families programs , and that allowed the district of columbia government to operate .

more recently , the pay our military act was enacted the day before the fy2014 shutdown commenced , to provide funds for certain dod and dhs activities .

narrow crs have a number of potential implications in the context of a government shutdown .

proponents of such crs have argued that they are an important tool to mitigate the effects of a government shutdown by eliminating funding gaps for certain vital government activities .

however , others have posited that such crs unfairly prioritize some programs over others , and that they may reduce the pressure on broader negotiations to end the shutdown .

a federal government shutdown could have possible negative security implications , as some entities wishing to take actions harmful to u.s. interests may see the nation as physically , technologically , and politically vulnerable .

the antideficiency act is silent regarding which specific organizations would be excepted in whole or part from a government shutdown .

the act's provisions and historical guidance from omb , however , suggest that entities that perform a national security function may be allowed to continue many of their operations .

historically , individuals responsible for supporting the nation's global security activities , public safety efforts , and foreign relations pursuits have been excepted from furloughs that accompany a government shutdown .

in fy2018 , the trump administration issued specific guidance that states , "cybersecurity functions are excepted functions as these functions are necessary to avoid imminent threat to federal property. .

the actions that are taken in anticipation of a government shutdown may lessen the negative effects of an incident of national security significance occurring during this period .

how agencies and omb prepare for a government shutdown may have short - and long - term consequences if an incident occurs during a period of reduction in government services or soon after a resumption of all government activities .

should federal government organizations traditionally not viewed as an excepted part of the security apparatus be shut down , and subsequently become needed during a crisis or emerging situation , the nation's ability to respond to an incident could be delayed .

such a situation could result in increased risk to the nation and a longer recovery time as services and support activities normally provided to nonfederal entities may not be available when needed .

some security observers may offer concerns that the longer the duration of a government shutdown , the more at - risk the nation becomes as enemies of the united states may seek to exploit perceived vulnerabilities .

