the federal communications commission ( fcc or commission ) has released for public comment 10 economic research studies on media ownership that it had commissioned to provide data and analysis to support the policy debate on what ownership limitations are in the public interest .

these studies also provide data and analysis useful to the on - going policy debates on how best to foster minority ownership of broadcast stations and on tiered vs. à la carte pricing of multichannel video program distribution ( mvpd ) services , such as cable and satellite television .

the fcc's media ownership rules are intended to foster the three long - standing u.s. media policy goals of diversity of voices , localism , and competition .

the current rules place certain limits on the number of media outlets that a single entity can own nationally and the number and type of media outlets that a single entity can own locally .

in section 202 of the 1996 telecommunications act , congress instructed the fcc to eliminate several of its media ownership rules and to modify others , in some cases setting explicit numerical limits itself , in other cases instructing the fcc to conduct a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether to retain , modify , or eliminate existing limitations .

congress also instructed the fcc to perform periodic reviews of its media ownership rules to determine if they are "necessary in the public interest as the result of competition," and to modify or repeal any regulation it determines to be no longer in the public interest .

the loosening of the media ownership restrictions has led to significant consolidation of ownership in the media sector .

as part of its periodic review and in response to rulings by the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit , the fcc adopted an order on june 2 , 2003 that modified five of its media ownership rules and retained two others .

the new rules , most of which would have further loosened ownership restrictions , proved to be controversial , were challenged in court , and have never gone into effect .

on june 24 , 2004 , the united states court of appeals for the third circuit ( third circuit ) , in prometheus radio project vs. federal communications commission , upheld the fcc's findings that it would be in the public interest to further loosen many of the media ownership restrictions , but found: the commission's derivation of new cross - media limits , and its modification of the numerical limits on both television and radio station ownership in local markets , all have the same essential flaw: an unjustified assumption that media outlets of the same type make an equal contribution to diversity and competition in local markets .

we thus remand for the commission to justify or modify its approach to setting numerical limits... .

the stay currently in effect will continue pending our review of the commission's action on remand , over which this panel retains jurisdiction .

the third circuit also found: in repealing the fssr [failed station solicitation rule] without any discussion of the effect of its decision on minority station ownership ( and without ever acknowledging the decline in minority ownership notwithstanding the fssr ) , the commission "entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the problem," and this amounts to arbitrary and capricious rulemaking.... for correction of this omission , we remand .

the fcc adopted on june 21 , 2006 , and released on july 24 , 2006 , a further notice of proposed rulemaking that sought "comment on how to address the issues raised by the opinion of the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit in prometheus v. fcc and on whether the media ownership rules are necessary in the public interest as the result of competition. .

the further notice also initiated a comprehensive quadrennial review of all of its media ownership rules , as required by statute .

the further notice did not present specific new rules for public comment .

rather , it discussed each rule that was remanded ( the local television ownership limit , the local radio ownership limit , the newspaper - broadcast cross - ownership ban , and the radio - television cross - ownership limit ) plus two additional rules ( the dual network ban and the uhf discount on the national television ownership limit ) , and then invited comment on how to address the issues remanded by the court .

it also asked commenters to address "whether our goals would be better addressed by employing an alternative regulatory scheme or set of rules. .

in addition , the further notice sought comment on , but did not discuss , the proposals to foster minority ownership that had been submitted by the minority media and telecommunications council ( mmtc ) in the 2002 biennial review proceeding that the third circuit had taken the commission to task for failing to address in its june 2 , 2003 order .

two of the commissioners dissented in part from the order adopting the further notice , criticizing the lack of discussion of proposals to foster minority ownership , and the absence of specific proposed rules .

on november 22 , 2006 , the fcc announced that it had commissioned ( or had begun conducting internally ) 10 economic studies as part of its review of the media ownership rules .

the two commissioners who had dissented in part from the order adopting the further notice each issued statements raising questions about the transparency of the process by which the contractors were selected and the peer review process that would be used .

on july 31 , 2007 , the fcc released the 10 studies , making them available on its website , and giving the public 60 days to submit comments ( and then 15 additional days to submit reply comments ) .

these studies consist of hundreds of pages of text and very large data sets .

concurrent with the public comment period , the studies underwent a peer review process that is required by the office of management and budget ( omb ) of all "influential scientific information" on which a federal agency relies in a rulemaking proceeding .

the two dissenting commissioners issued a joint statement criticizing the shortness of the public comment period and raising questions about the peer review process .

on september 5 , 2007 , the fcc released the peer reviews of these studies .

on august 1 , 2007 , the fcc adopted a second further notice of proposed rule making that briefly described , and sought comment on , the proposals of the mmtc submitted in the 2002 biennial review proceedings , several additional informal mmtc suggestions , and the proposals by the advisory committee on diversity for communications in the digital age to foster minority and female ownership .

on october 22 , 2007 , consumers union , consumer federation of america , and free press ( consumer commenters ) submitted to the fcc very detailed comments on the 10 fcc - commissioned media ownership studies .

the consumer commenters identify a number of alleged specification errors — some raised by the peer reviewers , some by the consumer commenters themselves — in the major statistical studies commissioned by the fcc , and then present statistical results from re - running the models in those studies , applying the same empirical data to models revised to correct for the alleged specification errors .

these revised models yield very different statistical results that , according to the consumer commenters , demonstrate that loosening the media ownership rules would not be in the public interest .

in aggregate , the ten economic studies relating to media ownership commissioned by the fcc perform two functions — data collection and data analysis .

systematic data collection is needed because the third circuit decision requires "the commission to justify or modify its approach to setting numerical limits" but there has been a dearth of systematic data available on which to base a justification of any specific proposed rule .

the 10 fcc - commissioned studies , their peer reviews , and the critiques and revised models submitted by the consumer commenters , in aggregate provide a significant body of data and analysis on ownership characteristics and programming needed to perform the analysis required by the third circuit .

unfortunately , the databases on minority ownership and programming remain far less complete and clean , despite a heroic effort by an fcc staffer to construct a time series database for 2001-2005 from existing sources .

the data analyses performed in the ten studies tend not to reach strong policy conclusions .

typically , the analyses attempt to determine whether there is a statistical relationship between particular aspects of media ownership in a market ( such as newspaper - broadcast cross - ownership ) and particular market outcomes ( such as the quantity of local news or local public affairs programming ) , holding other variables that might affect the market outcomes constant .

often , a statistically significant relationship between two variables is found with one particular model specification , but if a small change is made in the way the model is specified the relationship is no longer found to be statistically significant .

this led many of the researchers and peer reviewers to emphasize that the statistical findings were not robust .

where relationships are identified , the researchers tend to emphasize that these demonstrate correlation , not causality .

a few of the studies seek to test for such statistical relationships without holding other variables constant , thus overstating the magnitude of any relationships they find .

three of the studies had findings suggesting that non - ownership variables , such as the demographics or commute time in a market , were better predictors of the amount or type of programming aired than were ownership characteristics .

this led some researchers to suggest that media ownership characteristics may not be significant determinants of programming .

none of the studies presents statistical analysis of the relationship between ownership characteristics and minority programming .

although study 2 collected data on many types of programming , including minority programming , and those data were used in study 3 to analyze the relationships between various ownership characteristics and different types of programming , no results are shown for minority programming — though results are shown for spanish language programming .

the two studies directly addressing minority ownership — study 7 and study 8 — do not address minority programming at all .

perhaps what is most noteworthy about these 10 studies is that they highlight the large number of variables that may be relevant to a full analysis of media ownership issues .

the following is a partial list of variables that the researchers identified as relevant to their analyses: station ownership and affiliation characteristics , such as whether the station is owned by or affiliated with a major broadcast network , owned by a large station group that does not also own a network , affiliated with a non - major broadcast network , co - owned with one or more broadcast stations in its local market , cross - owned with a newspaper in its local market , cross - owned with a cable system in its local market , owned by a provider of a cable program network , locally owned , owned by a minority , or owned by a female .

local market characteristics , such as the number of broadcast stations ( television or radio ) in the market , the size of the market in terms of population or advertising revenues generated , market concentration , the number of co - owned stations in the market , the number of cross - owned media entities in the market , demographic factors ( such as age , race , ethnicity , english as a second language , income , and education levels ) , or the average commute time ( for radio ) .

quantitative measures of programming , at both the station and the market level , such as the amount of prime - time and non - prime - time local news programming ( including and excluding sports and weather ) , local public affairs programming , national news programming , national public affairs programming , minority programming , female programming , children's programming , violent programming , adult programming , general interest programming , or spanish language programming .

measures of program quality , such as program ratings and the amount of advertising shown on the programming ( which one researcher identified as a negative measure of quality ) .

broadcast network programming sources , such as whether the programming was produced by an affiliate of the broadcast network , by an affiliate of a competing broadcast network , or by an independent studio .

cable network programming sources , such as whether the programming was produced by an affiliate of the cable or satellite operator , by an affiliate of a major media company that does not have cable or satellite systems , or by an independent program producer .

the cable tiers on which program networks are placed .

regulatory variables , such as whether a particular network is covered by must - carry and retransmission consent requirements .

the studies showed that not all of these variables can be unambiguously defined and that , at times , data are not available to directly measure these variables , so proxy measures must be used .

the following is a brief snapshot of each study and its peer review .

the consumers union , consumer federation of america , and free press jointly submitted a 321-page document that , among other things , presents detailed criticisms of the 10 fcc - commissioned studies and provides the results of their own econometric models .

these models were constructed by revising some of the econometric models in the fcc - sponsored studies to "correct for" perceived mis - specifications that either had been identified by the peer reviewers or by the consumer commenters themselves and were run using the data from the fcc studies .

the consumer commenters state that "one of the positive externalities of the 10 studies is the creation of a usable data set for the public to use to conduct policy analysis of its own. .

but once they perform their own analysis , the consumer commenters claim that: once definitions are corrected and policy relevant variables included in properly specified statistical models , there is no support in the fcc data to relax media ownership limits .

in fact , the fcc's data show the opposite result .

newspaper - broadcast cross - ownership results in a net loss in the amount of local news that is produced across local markets by broadcast stations .

the commission has studied the impact of these mergers only at the station level , rather than at the market level .

at the market level , cross - ownership results in the loss of an independent voice as well as a decline in market - wide news production .

this finding obliterates the conclusions of the recent studies on cross - ownership as well as the basis for the commission's argument for relaxing the rule in the prometheus case .

the consumer commenters' studies were submitted during the comment period in the proceeding .

the public was given 15 days to submit reply comments responding to the comments .

media general , inc. , submitted reply comments that included an appendix by dr. harold furchtgott - roth , entitled "econometric review," that raised methodological issues with , and challenged the conclusions of , the consumer commenters' studies but did not provide regression analysis of its own .

the 10 fcc - commissioned studies , the peer reviews , and the comments and analysis submitted by the consumer commenters , in aggregate , provide a huge quantity of data , as well as points of analytical agreement and disagreement , that are helpful in the public policy debate on media ownership .

despite the lack of consensus on many issues , it appears that the following general statements can be made about the status of the data collection and analysis available to policy makers .

large , systematic , detailed , and accurate data sets on media ownership characteristics , viewer / listener preferences , and programming are now available for analysts and policy makers .

but several gaps remain in data collection .

most significantly the databases on minority and female ownership of broadcast and telecommunications properties are incomplete and / or inaccurate , and statistical analysis based on those data would not be reliable .

in addition , since most programming has been made available to consumers either as "free" over - the - air programming or as part of a large bundled tier of programming , there is very little information on the intensity of demand — how much people value and would be willing to pay — for individual programs or channels .

also , although mvpds increasingly offer their programming through multiple bundled tiers , the fcc does not appear to have collected data on the specific tiers on which programming is offered .

although the 10 fcc - commissioned studies present a large number of statistical findings , many of these relationships are not statistically significant across alternative model specifications .

this has led the researchers and peer reviewers to offer disclaimers that the findings are not robust and where they find statistical relationships they demonstrate correlation , not causality .

some of the researchers found that demand variables ( such as the preferences of viewers , or the length of commute time for radio listeners ) have a stronger influence over programming decisions than supply variables ( such as ownership characteristics ) .

but the implications of this finding has been open to competing interpretations .

some researchers have suggested this implies that ownership limits have little impact on the goals of localism and diversity .

but other researchers have suggested this shows that ownership limits ensure more diversity of voices without sacrificing local news and public affairs programming .

although several of the commissioned studies included lengthy discussions of cable ownership and programming as well as broadcast ownership and programming , only the study on vertical integration performed statistical analysis of the relationship between cable ownership and programming .

the peer reviewers and the consumer commenters identified a number of possible technical problems in the econometric analyses performed in the 10 studies .

the potentially most noteworthy criticism appears to be that all but one of the studies addressed the impact of media ownership characteristics on the programming provided by individual cross - owned stations , not on the total programming available to consumers in the local market , which arguably is the key public policy concern .

no process is in place to determine whether the criticisms are valid and / or whether the study results are reliable .

the consumer commenters claim that , when they modified the fcc - commissioned studies to take into account these criticisms , they obtained robust results demonstrating that loosening the media ownership limits harmed the public interest , though their results were not always consistent across model specifications .

their modified studies have not yet been subject to full review by others , though they were criticized in an econometric review by harold furchtgott - roth that was appended to the reply comments of media general .

the 1996 telecommunications act instructs the fcc to periodically review its media ownership rules to determine whether they are still in the public interest , and to modify or eliminate the rules if appropriate .

at the same time , the prometheus decision requires the commission to justify "with reasoned analysis" any explicit numerical limits in its rules .

the 10 fcc - commissioned studies are intended to provide data and analysis that support such reasoned analysis .

those studies and the additional data collection and analysis performed by the consumer commenters collectively provide policy makers and interested parties with far more detailed and accurate media ownership , viewer / listener preference , and programming databases than were previously available .

however , the fcc staff , commissioned researchers , peer reviewers , and commenting parties have identified continued gaps both in data collection and in data analysis , especially with respect to minority ownership .

on one hand , those gaps may render the current record insufficient for the fcc to perform reasoned analysis of some of the media ownership rules .

on the other hand , the data collection and analysis performed to date provide very useful insights that may help guide and direct the public policy discussion .

there is one additional complication .

the fcc is instructed to make a public interest determination , with diversity of voices one of the public interest goals , but there is no single understanding of what is meant by diversity of voices .

diversity might refer to , among other things , the number of different viewpoints on a particular subject , or the number of different issues that are addressed by media in a market , or the variety of programming offered in a market , or the number of different gatekeepers who determine what programming is provided , or some combination of these and other possible concepts of diversity .

as will be discussed below , this could be of particular concern if fcc rules , particularly as they involve minority ownership , are reviewed by the courts .

although three of the 10 fcc - commissioned studies attempted to collect data on minority and female ownership issues , and the consumer commenters attempted to supplement that data collection with their own effort , all the researchers ( and the peer reviewers ) agree that the fcc's databases on minority and female ownership are inaccurate and incomplete and their use for policy analysis would be fraught with risk .

this may have significant policy implications .

in its prometheus decision , the third circuit instructed the fcc to consider the impact of changes in its media ownership rules on minority ownership .

without accurate data on minority ( and female ) ownership , it is impossible to perform such analysis .

for example , one of the interesting hypotheses raised in study 8 that merits serious analysis is that loosening the television duopoly rule reduced opportunities for minority ownership because it increased demand for stations that were attractive as second television properties in a market , and the resulting sharp increase in station prices placed minority - owned stations in "double jeopardy" because they could not afford to trade up to better facilities and the duopoly stations against which they were competing became parts of large broadcast groups capable of bringing significant economies of scale to the market .

a related hypothesis is that further loosening of the duopoly rule would further reduce opportunities for minority ownership .

although study 8 did not properly test this hypothesis because it failed to take into account concurrent changes that might have affected minority ownership ( such as elimination of the minority tax certificate program ) , even if it had been constructed properly its results would have been suspect because they , by necessity , would have been based on the only available data on minority ownership , which is recognized by all to be inaccurate and incomplete .

the same problem arises with respect to the impact of each and every media ownership rule on minority and female ownership .

it is possible that the third circuit would not approve any fcc media ownership rule until the commission has developed a minority ownership database of sufficient accuracy to allow for reliable testing of the impact of the rules on minority ownership .

congress and the fcc have long held that diversity of ownership fosters diversity of voices and have supported programs to foster minority ownership .

however , any governmental measures to facilitate minority broadcast entry that are based on racial classification must satisfy the heightened constitutional standards that apply to governmental preferences for minorities under the equal protection clause .

the supreme court's ruling in adarand constructors , inc. v. peña requires that governmental measures based on racial classifications be analyzed using a "strict scrutiny" standard under which they would be deemed constitutional only if they are "narrowly tailored measures" that "further a compelling governmental interest. .

it is easier to meet these standards if race is but one of several criteria for program eligibility and not a definitive criterion .

proponents of measures to facilitate minority broadcast entry have been concerned , however , that broadening eligibility for such programs to include all small businesses might fail to foster diversity because focusing solely on economic disadvantage fails to take into account the social disadvantage suffered by certain groups .

for example , the children of established business people might qualify under the small business criterion .

proponents therefore have proposed constructing a definition of socially and economically disadvantaged businesses ( sdbs ) that would grant eligibility to individuals with social disadvantages stemming either from individualized factors or from membership in a class ( such as a racial group ) for which discrimination has inhibited entry and financing .

in its august 1 , 2007 second further notice , the fcc sought comment on how to define sdbs in a fashion that would satisfy constitutional standards .

while it is not possible to predict what sdb definition would satisfy the courts , it is possible to review past court decisions and dissents to identify the type of information the courts might demand in support of any definition .

for example , if a supreme court ruling were to follow the line of argument in a dissent , joined by two current supreme court justices ( scalia and kennedy ) , to the 1990 decision , metro broadcasting , inc. v. federal communications commission et al .

 , then any definition of sdbs that provides eligibility based on membership in a racial group , and not just on individual status , might require empirical evidence to demonstrate the nexus between membership in that group and the objective of the program .

the dissent states: the fcc assumes a particularly strong correlation of race and behavior .

the fcc justifies its conclusion that insufficiently diverse viewpoints are broadcast by reference to the percentage of minority - owned stations .

this assumption is correct only to the extent that minority - owned stations provide the desired additional views , and that stations owned by individuals not favored by the preferences cannot , or at least do not , broadcast underrepresented programming .

additionally , the fcc's focus on ownership to improve programming assumes that preferences linked to race are so strong that they will dictate the owner's behavior in operating the station , overcoming the owner's personal inclinations and regard for the market .

 ( at pp .

618-619 ) [o]ne particular flaw underscores the government's ill fit of means to ends .

the fcc's policies assume , and rely upon , the existence of a tightly bound "nexus" between the owners' race and the resulting programming.... three difficulties suggest that the nexus between owners' race and programming is considerably less than substantial .

first , the market shapes programming to a tremendous extent .

members of minority groups who own licenses might be thought , like other owners , to seek broadcast programs that will attract and retain audiences , rather than programs that reflect the owner's tastes and preferences.... second , station owners have only limited control over the content of programming.... third , the fcc had absolutely no factual basis for the nexus when it adopted the policies and has since established none to support its existence .

 ( at pp .

626-627 ) if this view were to gain the support of the majority of the supreme court , it would appear that if the fcc implements programs that provide preferences to sdbs , and some entities qualify as sdbs as part of a socially disadvantaged racial group rather than a socially disadvantaged individual , the burden would be on the commission to demonstrate the nexus between favoring that group and the compelling government interest in fostering diversity of voices .

as discussed earlier , there is no single understanding of diversity of voices .

one possible meaning could be the diversity of issues addressed in local news and public affairs programming .

a second meaning could be diversity in programming in the sense of an identifiable target audience .

whatever meaning of diversity is used , the fcc would have the burden to show that the broadcast ownership by members of the socially disadvantaged minority group affects programming in a fashion that fosters diversity .

but the fcc apparently has not collected the data needed to make such a showing .

it does not have an accurate database on minority ownership .

nor , if diverse programming is a compelling government interest , has it established that diverse programming is not currently being sufficiently provided but could be expected to be provided in greater quantity by minority owners .

the courts might expect the fcc , for example , to have performed a survey to identify the types of issues that are of particular interest to socially and economically disadvantaged groups — perhaps issues of homelessness , housing , discrimination , lack of public transportation — and then to have collected data on the local news and public affairs programming of all broadcast stations to determine whether stations owned by the racial minorities included in the sdb definition adopted by the fcc offer significantly more programming that addresses those issues than non - minority - owned stations .

no such data collection and analysis have been put forward .

the fcc's media ownership rules are applied when an entity proposes to make an acquisition that would increase its media holdings nationally or locally .

in its june 2 , 2003 order , the fcc reviewed the advantages and disadvantages of implementing bright line rules that incorporate specific limits on the number of media outlets a company can own in a local market ( without regard to the market - specific share of the post - merger company ) vs. implementing flexible , yet quantifiable rules that would allow for case - by - case reviews that take into account market - specific and company - specific market shares and characteristics .

the commission chose the bright - line approach , in large part because it identified regulatory certainty as an important goal in addition to the three traditional goals of diversity , localism , and competition .

it stated: any benefit to precision of a case - by - case review is outweighed , in our view , by the harm caused by a lack of regulatory certainty to the affected firms and to the capital markets that fund the growth and innovation in the media industry .

companies seeking to enter or exit the media market or seeking to grow larger or smaller will all benefit from clear rules in making business plans and investment decisions .

clear structural rules permit planning of financial transactions , ease application processing , and minimize regulatory costs .

after the third circuit remanded the fcc rules , then - chairman powell reportedly stated in an interview that: it may not be possible to line - draw .

part of me says maybe the best answer is to evaluate on a case - by - case basis .

the commission may end up getting more pushed in that direction .

given that the third circuit explicitly gave the fcc the opportunity "to justify or modify its approach to setting numerical limits," it did not signal a preference for a case - by - case approach vs. a bright - line rule .

currently , the fcc continues to use bright - line rules that set numerical limits .

 ( some of those limits are set by statute , not by fcc rulemaking. ) .

but in its 2006 further notice , the commission did ask , "whether our goals would be better addressed by employing an alternative regulatory scheme or set of rules. .

several aspects of the data collection and analysis performed to date suggest that it might be difficult to construct bright - line numerical limits or that such numerical limits might not always be effective in fostering diversity , localism , and competition .

although literally thousands of regression analyses have been performed by multiple researchers in an effort to identify relationships between various media ownership characteristics and the amount or type of various programming aired , the researchers report very few strong findings .

often , a statistically significant relationship is found with one particular model specification , but not found if the model specification is changed .

this led many of the researchers and peer reviewers to emphasize that the statistical findings were not robust .

where relationships are identified , the researchers tend to emphasize that these demonstrate correlation , not causality .

where relationships were found between an ownership characteristic and a programming objective , the studies were not structured to identify particular threshold ownership levels that could be used as the basis for setting numerical limits because moving beyond those levels might threaten policy goals .

in her internal memorandum , former fcc chief economist leslie marx laid out a possible methodology for determining "the critical number of outlets" required to be reasonably sure that the goals of competition , diversity , and localism are met , as part of a basis for justifying relaxation of newspaper - broadcast cross - ownership restriction .

but that analysis was at the drawing board stage , not complete , and it is not clear whether such models would generate statistical results sufficiently robust to justify particular numerical levels .

study 9 found robust empirical evidence that a large fraction — typically the majority — of the programming on any broadcast network during prime - time was made in - house .

but the findings explicitly ruled out a cost - based efficiency explanation for that vertical integration of broadcast networks into program production .

nor did the study find an efficiency explanation for the vertical integration of cable systems into cable network production .

the peer reviewer commented that "the overwhelming majority of 'independent' cable networks successfully launched in the period of the study are owned by affiliates of large media conglomerates who do not have cable system interests ... which implies that the financial resources or bargaining leverage in common to the large corporations which also own numerous other established networks , rather than vertical integration itself , may be the most significant advantage that successful cable network suppliers now have. .

it appears that the vertical integration that has decreased the diversity of program production sources is not driven by efficiency considerations .

if that is the case , then a bright - line rule that treats a broadcast station that is owned and operated by a major broadcast network exactly the same as an independently owned station would fail to take into account the impact of vertical integration on diversity and might not be as effective as case - by - case analysis in determining the impact of acquisitions with vertical elements on one measure of diversity .

the consumer commenters claim that the large media companies that own broadcast networks have been able to use their must - carry and retransmission consent rights to obtain broad mvpd carriage of their expanded suites of broadcast and cable networks , thus reducing the diversity of cable network program sources .

the must - carry and retransmission consent rules were implemented in the early 1990s to protect broadcasters from cable companies that were monopsony purchasers of broadcast programming .

now that cable companies face competition from dbs providers and telephone companies , and broadcasters have the retransmission rights to "must - have" sports and local programming that cable companies need to carry or risk the loss of subscribers to those competing mvpds that do carry the programming , the broadcasters enjoy a much stronger negotiating position ( though the large cable companies that have created large regional clusters appear to have countervailing leverage ) .

currently , it is uncertain what must - carry and retransmission consent rights the broadcasters will have as they begin to transmit multiple digital signals over their licensed spectrum ( that is , whether cable systems will be required to carry all of the local broadcast stations' signals or only the primary signal , which is the current requirement ) .

the resolution of this regulatory issue would likely affect how much leverage the various parties would have over programming decisions in local markets .

with such uncertainty about future must - carry and retransmission consent rules , there may be advantages to analyzing the public interest implications of proposed acquisitions on a case - by - case basis that can take into account changes in must - carry and retransmission consent rules rather than implementing bright - line numerical limits set under today's regulatory environment .

all of these factors suggest that the fcc might want to use the extensive data it has collected to analyze more fully the advantages and disadvantages of the case - by - case and bright - line limit approaches to reviewing acquisitions that increase an entity's media holdings .

there have been a number of proposals to require program networks to be made available — at both the wholesale level and the retail level — on an à la carte basis as well as bundled ( as part of a wholesale package or a retail tier ) .

one variation on those proposals would allow retail subscribers to opt out of receiving certain channels on a tier , and get a price reduction for the channels not received .

proponents of à la carte pricing argue that the industry - wide practice of offering only large bundles of advertiser - supported cable networks forces consumers to purchase networks they are not interested in receiving in order to obtain the networks they want .

they further argue that household price sensitivity is greater for individual programs than for a large tier of programs , so tiering makes it easier for mvpds to raise their prices .

in addition , they claim tiered pricing does not take into account the intensity of demand for individual channels in the tier , so it is possible that channels that are highly valued by niche audiences will not be carried while general interest channels that attract a larger audience but are not as highly valued will be carried .

proponents of tiering counter that tiering is the most cost - efficient way to offer programming and thus lowers retail prices , that it increases consumer benefits by allowing channel surfing , that it reduces the risks associated with introducing new cable networks , and that it helps support niche networks that could not generate sufficient revenues on their own .

they claim that new , independent cable networks , in particular , would have an extremely difficult time making themselves known , and attracting an audience and advertisers , in an à la carte environment .

the 10 fcc - commissioned studies collected some data that are relevant to the debate about these à la carte proposals: the nielsen survey ( study 1 ) asked questions about which channels mvpd subscribers would be interested in dropping from their service if they could receive a reduction in cost and which channels they would like to receive but do not currently subscribe to because they would have to subscribe to a larger package of channels .

when asked to identify the channels they would be interested in dropping , in no case was a particular channel identified by as many as 5% of the respondents .

this might suggest that most respondents could not immediately identify the specific channels they do not wish to receive and pay for or that most respondents are generally content to receive and pay for a large bundle of channels even if they actually watch only a small portion of the channels .

when asked to identify which channels they would like to receive but do not currently subscribe to because to do so would require them to subscribe to a larger package , the only channels identified by more than 2% of the respondents were premium channels — hbo ( 8.9% ) , showtime ( 3.6% ) , and cinemax ( 3.0% ) — not advertising - supported channels .

since most households subscribe to the enhanced basic tier , rather than a larger tier , this might suggest that most mvpds already include most general interest channels on their enhanced basic tiers .

the survey questions elicited information on consumer preferences , but did not generate any information on how sizeable a cost reduction consumers would demand to drop channels or how much additional they would be willing to spend to get additional channels .

nor did they generate data to help determine the intensity of demand for individual channels or for tiers of channels .

study 3 found , among other things , that niche , or special interest , programming ( minority , adult , religious ) is less widely available than general interest programming ( news , children's , family ) and that news and violent programming are the most highly rated programming types , with latino / spanish - language , children's , and family programming substantially lower , and non - latino minority and religious programming lower still .

it is not surprising that non - latino minority and religious programming , which have low audience ratings , are not widely available .

the public policy issue is how best to serve audiences for such niche programming , to further the goal of diversity .

as explained earlier , tiered pricing does not take into account the intensity of demand for individual channels in the tier , so it is possible that channels that are highly valued by niche audiences will not be carried while general interest channels that attract a larger audience but are not as highly valued will be carried .

mvpds typically offer mostly general interest and other large audience programming on their expanded basic tiers and make less popular programming available either as part of larger tiers that are available at higher prices or on an à la carte basis ( that could consist of a single channel or several closely related channels ) .

but data are not available on subscribers' intensity of demand for individual channels , so it is not possible to determine whether the tendency toward serving general audiences on basic tiers , and niche audiences on other tiers , increases or decreases overall consumer welfare .

it is possible , however , to investigate how the market appears to be operating today .

the market shows that a small number of viewers can support programming if they are willing to pay enough for such programming .

for example , although the audiences for non - spanish foreign language programming , such as korean language programming , are relatively small , as a result of the willingness of a threshold level of households to pay between $25 and $30 a month for a package of several korean language channels , both directv and dish tv offer korean language packages , as do some cable systems ( though these offerings may not be available universally throughout the u.s. ) .

the intensity of demand for non - spanish foreign language programming appears to be relatively high in households that include members that speak little or no english or that have a strong desire to maintain cultural connections even as their children become more assimilated .

it is not clear whether the intensity of demand for other niche programming , such as non - foreign language minority programming and religious programming , is sufficiently great to support such an à la carte solution .

the fcc does not have data available on the intensity of demand for such niche programming .

but the absence of à la carte options ( in the form of individual channels or very small , specialized bundles ) for such programming suggests that the mvpds do not expect the intensity of demand to be sufficient to support such programming ( especially when taking into account the opportunity cost of using scarce channel capacity to serve these niche audiences ) .

those niches programs are most likely available on larger , higher priced tiers .

subscribers to niche programming , such as korean language programming , that is available as part of an à la carte option also must purchase the basic cable tier , because of the statutory requirement that all cable subscribers receive the local broadcast stations as well as any public , educational , and governmental channels required by the franchising authority .

but they do not have to purchase any other cable networks .

that is not the case for households that seek niche programming that is not available on an à la carte basis .

some critics of the current system complain that it is unfair to require audiences for niche programming that is not available as part of an à la carte option to purchase tiers that are larger and more expensive than the expanded basic tier in order to receive that niche programming .

but absent data on the intensity of demand for the various niche and non - niche channels it is not possible to determine whether those niche channels could survive in an à la carte environment or to demonstrate consumer welfare loss from the current system .

and even if the current system does impose a consumer welfare loss on niche audiences , it is not clear how a regulation could be implemented to identify and require carriage of such niche channels .

