the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2007 ( h.r .

3887 ) , passed by the house on december 4 , 2007 , continues and reenforces the anti - trafficking efforts that began with trafficking victims protection act of 2000 .

that legislation sought to protect women and children , the most common victims of both international and domestic trafficking , with a series of diplomatic , immigration , and law enforcement initiatives .

h.r .

3887 follows in its path .

this report is limited to the bill's law enforcement initiatives or more precisely its proposals to amend federal criminal law .

neither the 2000 legislation nor h.r .

3887 write on a complete blank slate .

federal criminal law has long condemned both involuntary servitude as well as interstate and foreign transportation of individuals for illicit sexual purposes .

the involuntary servitude offenses , now found in chapter 77 of title 18 of the united states code , date from the nineteenth century .

the transportation - for - sexual - purposes offenses , now housed in chapter 117 of that title , originated in the mann act in the early twentieth century .

as did its predecessors , h.r .

3387 works in the area where the two overlap .

representative lantos introduced h.r .

3887 on october 17 , 2007 , for himself and several other members .

the house committee on foreign affairs reported an amended version of the bill on november 6 , 2007 .

a further revised version passed under suspension of the rules on december 4 , 2007 .

when the bill reached the senate its criminal law proposals included newly assigned sex trafficking offenses , a sex tourism offense , a coerced services offense , obstruction of justice offenses , an importation of prostitutes offense , a false statement offense , and provisions for civil liability , victim assistance , forfeiture , extraterritorial jurisdiction , justice department reorganization , and a model state statute .

paragraph 214 ( b ) ( 1 ) of section 214 would amend the victims of crime act of 1984 ( 42 u.s.c .

10601 et seq. ) .

by adding a new section 1404f ( 42 u.s.c .

10603f ) .

the crime victims fund finances victim compensation and assistance grants using the fines imposed for violation of federal criminal law , 18 u.s.c .

10601 ( b ) , although congress has capped the amount annually available from the fund .

the new section would trump any coverage limitations based on the characteristics of the victim of the crime to be compensated or assisted .

it would define "victim," "crime victim" and "victim of crime" for purposes of the federal crime victims compensation and assistance grants and related activities to include individuals "exploited or otherwise victimized" by a violation of 8 u.s.c .

1328 ( importation of an alien for prostitution or other immoral purposes ) or of any of the prohibitions in 18 u.s.c .

ch .

117 ( transportation of illegal sexual purposes including proposed and enlarged 18 u.s.c .

2430 ) or comparable offenses under state law – without any expressed regard for the victim's age , gender , consent , culpability , or participation in commercial sexual activity .

section 222 would establish extraterritorial jurisdiction over various peonage and trafficking offenses when the offender or the victim is an american or when the offender is in the united states , proposed 18 u.s.c .

1596 .

the offenses involved are: 18 u.s.c .

1581 ( peonage ) 18 u.s.c .

1583 ( enticement into slavery ) 18 u.s.c .

1584 ( sale into involuntary servitude ) 18 u.s.c .

1589 ( force labor ) 18 u.s.c .

1590 ( human trafficking ) 18 u.s.c .

2429 ( aggravated sex trafficking ) criminal jurisdiction is usually territorial .

the law of the place determines what is criminal and how crimes may be punished .

there are some circumstances , however , under which extraterritorial jurisdiction exists .

in the case of federal law , there are some circumstances under which federal crimes committed overseas may be prosecuted in federal court .

in large measure , those circumstances are either found in statute or presumed from the context of the statute , if consistent with related principles of international law .

for example , when a statute proscribes the theft of federal property , it is presumed that congress intends the prohibition to apply regardless of where the property may be stolen .

the courts have generally considered overseas application of federal criminal law consistent with international law when either the offender or the victim is american .

extraterritorial jurisdiction may also be considered consistent with international law when the overseas conduct has an impact within the united states , or when the criminal prohibition is enacted to implement a treaty or similar international obligation or with respect to a crime that is contrary to the law of nations , i.e. , that is abhorrent under the laws of all countries .

section 222 provides a statement of extraterritorial jurisdiction in some instances when it seems likely that federal courts would assume it even in the absence of such an explicit provision .

for instance , section 222 ( proposed 18 u.s.c .

1596 ) would permit prosecution of an overseas violation of proposed 18 u.s.c .

2429 ( aggravated sex trafficking ) when the victim is an american or when the offender is an american or when the offender is later found or brought to the united states .

however , the elements of proposed section 2429 limit the circumstances under which the offense can be committed overseas , because it outlaws misconduct only when committed within the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the united states or in or affecting the interstate or foreign commerce of the united states .

offenses committed in or affecting interstate commerce or within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states are by definition not committed overseas .

offenses committed in or affect the foreign commerce of the united states may occur overseas , but international law principles have been said to recognize extraterritorial application when a crime has an impact in this country .

on the other hand , the application of proposed section 1596 might prove more problematic when the only contact with the united states or its nationals or interests is the fact the offender is found or has been brought to the united states .

federal prosecution under 18 u.s.c .

1589 ( forced labor ) might be problematic , for example , when the misconduct occurs entirely within another country and neither the offender nor any of the victims of the offense are americans .

subsection 223 ( a ) would streamline section 278 of the immigration and nationality act ( 8 u.s.c .

1328 ) with little change in substance .

under the proposed amendment , section 278 would provide: ( a ) generally – whoever , for the purpose of prostitution or for any other sexual activity for which any person can be changed with a criminal offense – ( 1 ) knowingly imports or attempts to import any alien ; or ( 2 ) knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that an individual is an alien who lacks lawful authority to come to , enter , or reside in the united states , knowingly holds , keeps , maintains , supports , employs , or harbors the individual in any place in the united states , including any building or any means or transportation , attempts to do so , shall be fined under title 18 , united states code , or imprisoned not more than 10 years , or both .

 ( b ) special evidentiary rule – in all prosecutions under this section , the testimony of a husband or wife shall be admissible and competent evidence against each other .

the proposal would omit the venue language now found in the section that permits prosecution in any district into which the alien is imported .

the existing provision duplicates the otherwise available venue options under which prosecution is possible in any district through or into which an imported person moves .

subsection 234 ( a ) renames the justice department's child exploitation and obscenity section and expands the responsibilities of the innocence lost task forces to include sex trafficking ( proposed 18 u.s.c .

2430 ) offenses involving sexually exploited adults .

the section would become known as the sexual exploitation and obscenity section .

the child exploitation and obscenity section now prosecutes offenses involving federal obscenity , child pornography , interstate trafficking for sexual purposes , international sexual child abuse , and international parental kidnapping .

in 2003 , the section together with the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and the national center for missing & exploited children started an innocence lost initiative in 2003 .

the proposed amendment would greatly expand the section's jurisdiction , given the accompanying expansion of federal jurisdiction occasioned by proposed section 2430 which would outlaw trafficking in commercial sexual activity occurring in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce regardless of age or willingness of the individual trafficked .

the creation of divisions and sections within the department of justice , their jurisdictional assignments , and other matters of internal organization within the department are ordinarily matters internal to the department .

however , congress may address , and in the past has addressed , such matters in statute .

subsection 202 ( g ) would require those who recruit foreign workers to disclose various specifics regarding the circumstances and conditions of employment to recruits .

paragraph 202 ( g ) ( 3 ) would proscribe knowingly making a material false or misleading statement in such disclosures and would declare that , "the disclosure required by this section is a document concerning the proper administration of a matter within the jurisdiction of a department or agency of the united states for the purposes of section 1519 of title 18 , united states code. .

section 1519 of title 18 , united states code , proscribes the knowing falsification of records with the intent to impede , obstruct , or influence the proper administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the united states .

violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

in the absence of a reference to section 1519 , the proposed offense would instead be subject to the general false statement statute , 18 u.s.c .

1001 , which makes violations punishable by imprisonment by not more than 8 years if the offense relates to an offense under 18 u.s.c .

1591 ( sex trafficking of children or by force , fraud or coercion ) ; or 18 u.s.c .

ch .

109a ( sexual abuse ) , ch .

110 ( sexual exploitation of children ) , or ch .

117 ( transportation for illegal sexual activities ) .

the justice department drafted a model state anti - trafficking criminal statute in 2004 .

the model includes suggested language of state criminal laws relating to trafficking in persons , involuntary servitude , sexual servitude of a minor and trafficking in persons for forced labor or services .

a number of states have adopted comparable statutes .

section 224 would direct the attorney general to provide a similar model reflecting the misconduct proscribed in 18 u.s.c .

chs .

77 ( involuntary servitude ) and 117 ( mann act ) as those chapters would be amended by h.r .

3887 .

it would also instruct the attorney general to post the model on the department's website , distribute it to the states , assist the states in its implementation , and report annually to house and senate judiciary committees and the house foreign affairs committee as well as the senate foreign relations committee on the results of such efforts .

