in june 2007 , exxonmobil corporation and conocophillips , two of the largest u.s. oil companies , abandoned their multi - billion dollar investments in the heavy oil deposits of the orinoco basin in venezuela .

this action followed the breakdown of negotiations between the companies and the government of president hugo chavez and petroleos de venezuela ( pdv ) , the venezuelan national oil company .

four other international oil companies , including total sa from france , statoil from norway , bp from great britain , and chevron from the united states , accepted agreements that raised the pdv share in their orinoco projects from approximately 40% to a controlling interest of about 78% .

conocophillips , especially , was adversely affected by the decision .

conocophillips recorded 1.1 billion barrels of proved reserves from its venezuelan ventures .

this amounted to approximately 10% of the company's total reserve holdings , and its production from venezuela amounted to 4% of its total crude oil production .

although conocophillips continues to negotiate compensation for its holdings , the company took a $4.5 billion dollar write - off against second - quarter 2007 earnings .

the company was seen as less likely to be able to meet its reserve replacement targets and the price of its shares fell on the stock market .

on the venezuelan side , pdv expanded its reserve and production position , and its strength in the international oil market .

venezuela , traditionally , has a large share of crude oil imports into the united states .

this oil flow is now more directly under the control of the venezuelan government which may or may not allow the flow of crude oil to follow economic market forces .

this report assesses the position of national oil companies , and how their evolving strength may affect the availability of supply in the oil market , and hence , oil security .

the report also examines the effects of national oil company expansion on the major private international oil companies as well as how these companies might differ in motivation and results .

policy options to deal with the rise of national oil companies by the countries without them are also evaluated .

rankings of companies can be accomplished using a number of different criteria .

in the oil industry , based as it is on current production to generate current earnings and on reserve positions to ensure the future viability of the enterprise , several standards need to be applied to assess the evolving nature of the companies in the industry .

additionally , investment , in the form of exploration and development expenditures , serves as a link between the present and the future , ensuring an ongoing continuity for the company so that reserves are not unduly depleted by current activities .

consumers also have an interest in the structure and size of firms and their activities if the current production level , as well as the proved reserve position of the companies or industry , is declining .

if current production declines in the face of growing world demand , it is likely that prices will rise , and the possibility of physical shortages will be heightened .

if exploration and development expenditures are reduced because of problems encountered by some firms in accessing international capital markets , the relative scarcity of oil might increase , leading to higher future prices , as well as potentially restricted supply .

table 1 shows a ranking of the top 10 world oil companies on the basis of a composite criterion .

in 2006 , five of the top 10 companies could be classified as state owned and operated .

in 2000 , six of the top 10 companies were state owned and operated .

on the surface , these rankings appear to show a decline in the importance of state - owned firms in the world oil market .

however , these rankings may give an unclear picture of the underlying relative strengths of the private and state - owned companies in the world oil market .

table 2 shows the leading firms in terms of world - wide petroleum liquids reserves .

every firm in the top 10 reserve holders , with the exception of lukoil , in both 2006 and 2000 was state owned .

among the major international oil companies , exxonmobil is ranked fourteenth , bp seventeenth , chevron nineteenth , conocophillips , twenty - third , and shell is ranked twenty - fifth in 2006 .

these five firms hold only 3.8% of world liquid reserves , and their major holdings are in the united states and canada .

in contrast , the top 10 firms listed in table 2 hold 80.6% of the total world liquid reserves .

the top 10 companies in 2006 in table 2 have an average reserve to production ratio of 78 years , with inoc , the iraqi national oil company , the highest at 173 years and lukoil , a privately held russian company , the lowest at 24 years .

the five large international oil companies have reserve to production ratios of 11 years .

these values suggest that the 10 largest reserve holding companies , largely state owned , will be major forces in the world oil market about seven times as long as the five major international oil companies .

in a market where reserve position is likely to translate into production and pricing power , the state oil companies are in a dominant position , and the international oil companies are likely to continue to play a lesser role .

it is also not likely that the reserve positions of the companies will change in favor of the international oil companies in the future .

as nations establish their own national oil companies , territories open for exploration and development by private companies may diminish .

as suggested by the example of venezuela , cited in the opening section of this report , even in countries where there are partnerships between the private oil companies and national oil companies , if there is any revision of ownership shares , it is likely to be in favor of the national oil companies .

two factors affect this observation .

oil - producing nations seem to be displaying an ever more nationalistic attitude toward their natural resource endowments , and the national oil companies are viewed as custodians of that resource .

if there is opposition to u.s. foreign policy objectives , or if there is a more general negative reaction to the spread of global markets and private industry , nationalization of oil resources and transference to the national oil company is likely one of the most direct ways to make a political statement .

given the tight balance between global supply and demand , this statement can be made with little or no cost in lost revenues .

table 3 shows the 10 leading producing companies in the world .

a company's ability to produce crude oil depends on access to oil deposits , but it also depends on access to modern technology .

the private international oil companies generally have access to state - of - the - art technologies , which are less easily available to some other firms .

gaining access to the best technology for exploration , development , and production is one of the key motivations oil producing nations have for entering production - sharing agreements with the private international oil companies .

in 2006 , seven of the top 10 producing companies were state owned , including the five largest producers .

although the three largest international oil companies were among the top 10 producers , and two of them , bp and exxonmobil , even managed to increase their total output , their production was from relatively small reserve bases , shortening the time they can remain in the market as producers without major new discoveries .

the effects of rising world demand and higher prices since 2003 can be seen in the increased output of most of the companies on the list .

one final factor in the power of the national oil companies should be noted .

the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) allows these companies to compete to a degree they deem compatible with their national goals as specified by their governments and still coordinate their actions through opec when it is in their interests to show a more unified front in the world market .

this ability to compete or coordinate their activities and decisions when it is in their , and their nations' , interests is not available to the private international oil companies .

the reserve and production positions of the national oil companies might be little cause for concern if the companies operated much like the private international oil companies , and state ownership was only a matter of how the stock shares of the company were held .

however , it is likely that the objectives for many national oil companies , as well as the characteristics of their operations , differ from companies in the private sector of the oil industry .

recognition of national oil companies' growing dominance of the world oil market has led some experts to view this as an energy security issue .

the growing strength of the national oil companies implies , at least in a relative sense , the diminished importance of the private international oil companies .

this dynamic could transform the reaction of the market to demand and supply signals .

since a major thread of current policy toward oil is "let the market take care of it," a change in the way the market works might call for significant adjustments in the policies of oil - consuming nations .

some of the policy options presented below have been extensively debated in the past as features of broadly based energy strategies , while others are controversial and would likely be difficult to implement .

others , such as the creation of a u.s. national oil company are extremely unlikely to be considered while the world oil market continues to function as a viable market .

as the world oil market changes its structure to include the growing importance of national oil companies , a recognition of the likely consequences of this trend is an important first step in helping to secure oil supply .

if the national oil companies hold the title to ever greater portions of actual and potential oil reserves , production , and exploration and development activities , and if they are relatively less capable of utilizing those resources , oil supplies are likely to be relatively constrained in the future .

given projections of demand growth of about 50% by 2030 , constrained supply might imply sharply rising oil prices .

venezuela provides an early example of how the political influence of a government can affect the supply of oil , disturb existing market partnerships , both with companies and with the united states , and forward the interests of u.s. competitors .

the private international oil companies are unlikely to be able to counter national oil companies to preserve their own profit - seeking interests as well as those of the u.s. market , which requires adequate physical supply at moderate prices .

various policy directions are available to counter the effects of national oil companies , but the recognition that a potential problem exists , as well as a long - term commitment to any chosen policy direction , will likely be needed to minimize the threat to u.s. oil market stability and energy security .

the national oil companies cited in this report and their acronyms are identified below .

adnoc is the state - owned company of the united arab emigrates cnooc is a 71% state - owned company of china inoc is the state - owned company of iraq kpc is the state - owned company of kuwait libya noc is the state - owned company of libya nioc is the state - owned company of iran nnpc is the state - owned company of nigeria ongc is the 71.4% state - owned company of india pdvsa is the state - owned company of venezuela pemex is the state - owned company of mexico pertamina is the state - owned company of indonesia petrochina is the 90% state - owned company of china petronas is the state - owned company of malaysia qp is the state - owned company of qatar rosneft is the 75.16% state - owned company of russia saudi aramco is the state - owned company of saudi arabia sonatrach is the state - owned company of algeria statoil is the 70.9% state oil company of norwa .

