discretionary spending covers the costs of the routine activities commonly associated with such federal government functions as running executive branch agencies , congressional offices and agencies , and international operations of the government .

mandatory programs and net interest costs are the other components of federal spending .

essentially all spending on federal wages and salaries is discretionary .

discretionary spending also funds grants , purchases of equipment and other assets , and contractor services that support various federal programs and activities .

congress provides and controls discretionary funding through annual appropriations acts , which grant federal agencies the legal authority to obligate the u.s. government to make payments .

budget authority ( ba ) is the amount that can be legally obligated .

outlays are the payments made by the u.s. treasury to satisfy those obligations .

this report mostly discusses trends in outlays .

federal spending can be divided into three basic budget categories: discretionary spending ( $1.17 trillion in fy2014 outlays ) , mandatory spending ( $2.11 trillion in fy2014 outlays ) , and net interest costs ( about $230 billion in fy2014 ) , for a fy2014 total of $3,504 billion .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , funds entitlement programs , such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ; formerly known as the food stamps program ) , and other spending controlled by laws other than appropriation acts .

spending levels for mandatory programs generally depend on eligibility criteria , size of the eligible population , and participation rates .

different types of mandatory programs are set up in diverse ways , reflecting historical influences , technical demands , and specific legislative authorities .

while the term "entitlement" can be defined to coincide with the mandatory programs , many would distinguish programs providing benefits to large populations meeting set eligibility requirements from more special payments , such as salaries of judges covered by article iii of the constitution .

in some cases , mandatory and discretionary spending support similar activities .

for example , medicare health care benefits are classified as mandatory spending , while most health care benefits for veterans and military personnel are classified as discretionary spending .

legislative procedures for funding discretionary programs differ from those for mandatory programs .

congress provides discretionary funds ( ba ) each year through the annual appropriations process .

other types of legislation , such as authorization measures , control mandatory spending .

some mandatory programs , such as social security , are financed outside the annual appropriations process .

other mandatory programs , such as medicaid , are funded through appropriations measures , while the level of spending reflects eligibility requirements and other provisions set in authorizing legislation , as well as the pool of potential beneficiaries and program participation rates .

table 1 provides a simple division of federal spending ( i.e. , mandatory and discretionary spending ) by contrasting the type of budget authority needed for specific purposes .

policy disagreements about fiscal policy challenges continue to influence trends in discretionary spending .

fiscal policy describes how a government chooses to balance spending and revenues , which can be used to influence the level of economic activity .

substantial evidence suggests that fiscal policy can stimulate economic activity when an economy is operating below its potential level of output and when short - term interest rates are near zero .

discretionary spending , which is controlled through an annual budget process , is potentially a more flexible fiscal instrument than mandatory spending .

some features of mandatory programs have often been changed to respond to economic conditions .

for example , the period of eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits has often been changed during recessions .

tax policy changes have also been used to respond to macroeconomic conditions .

in addition , as incomes fall during recessions , tax revenues fall and more families become eligible for means - tested mandatory programs ; deficits rise , which helps dampen economic shocks .

when economic growth resumes , those changes run in the opposite direction .

those changes are therefore known as automatic stabilizers .

recent trends in discretionary spending have been controlled by statutory limits reestablished in the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , enacted on august 2 , 2011 .

those limits , which originally extended until fy2021 , are expected to shape future trends in discretionary spending .

subsequent legislation has modified those limits in ways discussed below .

submission of the obama administration's fy2014 budget was delayed until april 10 , 2013 , due to substantial changes enacted by atra at the beginning of january 2013 and the demands of the march 1 , 2013 , jsc sequester .

the president's fy2014 budget request proposed several modifications of bca caps on discretionary spending .

the administration proposed that fy2014 spending limits be set at revised cap levels ( i.e. , $552 billion for defense and $506 billion for non - defense ) rather than lowered cap levels ( i.e. , $498.1 billion for defense and $469.4 billion for non - defense ) , which would have allowed higher levels of discretionary spending while the economy is recovering from a major recession .

spending limits for the second half of the fy2013-fy2021 budget window , in the administration's proposals , would have been lowered by $60 billion each for defense and non - defense .

in addition , discretionary caps would have been extended to fy2022 and fy2023 .

the administration estimated that those spending cap modifications would reduce discretionary spending by $202 billion over fy2014-fy2023 .

thus , projected discretionary spending for fy2014-fy2018 shown in the figures below , which presume the president's budgetary proposals are adopted , reflects an assumption that bca constraints on discretionary spending would be loosened in fy2014 and tightened later , starting in fy2017 .

the administration's fy2014 budget plan also includes $260 billion in unspecified reductions in discretionary spending , mostly slated for fy2015 through fy2023 .

if those reductions were carried out , discretionary spending levels would have been less than those shown in figures below .

during the fy2014 budget cycle , the house and senate responded to the budgetary challenges presented by bca caps in different ways .

just before the august 2013 recess , the gap between house and senate totals for fy2014 discretionary spending stood at about $90 billion .

the house appropriations committee set suballocations for its subcommittees that totaled $973.1 billion , slightly above total discretionary spending at bca lowered caps levels ( $967.5 billion ) for fy2014 .

senate appropriations committee guidance for its subcommittees , however , indicated a total for fy2014 consistent with bca revised caps ( i.e. , a total of $1,058 billion split between a base defense subtotal of $552 billion and a non - defense total of $506 billion ) .

differences between house and senate discretionary spending levels were not resolved before the start of fy2014 on october 1 , 2013 , which resulted in a shutdown of most federal operations .

funding for federal operations was restored by passage of a continuing resolution ( h.r .

2775 ) on october 16 , 2013 , which was signed by the president the following morning ( continuing appropriations act , 2014 ; p.l .

113-46 ) .

the measure provides funding on an annualized basis of $986.3 billion before adjustments .

the bipartisan budget act ( p.l .

113-67 ; sections 115 and 116 ) provides authority for budgetary enforcement "in the same manner as for a concurrent resolution on the budget for fy2015" if no budget resolution were agreed to by the house and senate by april 15 , 2014 .

in each chamber , the chairman of the budget committee would then be mandated to submit information normally contained in a budget resolution after april 15 but before may 15 , 2014 .

the congressional budget office's budget and economic outlook , which contains updated economic and budgetary baseline projections through fy2024 , was released on february 4 , 2014 .

discretionary spending as a share of gdp , according to cbo current - law baseline projections , would fall by about 20% over the next decade , absent changes in statutory caps on discretionary spending .

 table 3 summarizes discretionary funding and modifications of statutory caps on discretionary funding for base defense and non - defense funding from fy2013 through fy2021 .

levels are shown in terms of scored budget authority ( ba ) that excludes war ( overseas contingency operations / oco ) , disaster , program integrity , and emergency funding .

the first two rows in both the defense and non - defense categories show revised caps before and after the fiscal cliff agreement ( atra ) , which reduced the size of the jsc sequester .

the next pair of rows show estimates of post - sequester funding in fy2013 and omb estimates of lowered cap levels in subsequent years .

next , the modifications of the defense and non - defense caps enacted in december 2013 by the bipartisan budget act are shown .

that act turned off the mechanism that lowers caps to recapture savings not obtained by the jsc for fy2014 and fy2015 , but did not change caps or the cap - lowering mechanism for later years .

finally , a pre - bca administration projection ( cbo reestimate of the fy2012 plan ) and the totals for the fy2014 budget submission are presented .

discretionary spending can be categorized in several different ways .

these divisions provide a rough indicator of national priorities as reflected in federal spending decisions .

in addition , some of these categories play or have played a role in budget enforcement mechanisms .

while discretionary spending , which chiefly funds the operations of federal agencies , accounts for about two - sevenths of federal outlays , it has been at the center of efforts to restrain federal spending .

in addition , long - term trends — to a large extent baby - boom demographics and health care costs — have helped tilt federal spending towards mandatory programs .

under current law , discretionary spending is projected to shrink to 23% of federal outlays by fy2024 .

in that year , discretionary spending is projected at $1.4 trillion ( current dollars ) .

while the federal deficit is projected to fall in fy2014 and fy2015 , higher interest costs and mandatory spending are expected to increase fiscal pressures in later years .

federal deficits , according to cbo current - law baseline projections , are projected to rise each year after fy2015 , reaching $1.1 trillion in fy2024 .

closing the gap between federal spending and receipts through reductions in discretionary spending , therefore , may be difficult .

the shift toward mandatory spending and away from discretionary spending may raise concerns for two reasons .

first , as the portion of the federal budget controlled on a year - by - year basis shrinks , making adjustments in spending levels may become more difficult .

mandatory spending , which requires changes in authorizing legislation , is not normally considered on an annual basis .

moreover , existing budget enforcement mechanisms are largely designed to constrain discretionary spending , while measures that can be used to reduce mandatory spending have been more difficult to apply in recent years .

second , the rise of mandatory programs' share of federal spending reflects an aging population .

policy makers may choose to adapt the structure of the federal budget to reflect the needs of a growing segment of retired or elderly americans .

such shifts in resource allocation , however , could affect intergenerational equity and the federal government's ability to respond to the needs of future generations .

 table a - 1 shows national defense ( budget function 050 ) and non - defense ( all other ) spending ( ba ) in current dollars and in constant fy2012 dollars ( i.e. , adjusted for inflation ) .

these figures exclude funding for the iraq and afghan wars and related activities .

