representative chet edwards , chair of the house committee on appropriations subcommittee on military construction , veterans affairs and related agencies , introduced the appropriations bill on june 11 , 2007 .

the house passed the bill on june 15 and sent it to the senate .

senator jack reed proposed amendment of the bill when it was brought to the floor on september 4 .

after debate and additional amendment , the senate adopted the measure on september 6 .

conference on the bill was held on november 5 , when was incorporated into division b of the labor - hhs - education appropriations bill ( h.r .

3043 ) .

the house agreed to the revised bill on november 6 .

nevertheless , during subsequent senate debate , division b was stripped after a point of order was raised .

the appropriations bill was combined with others and added to the state foreign operations and related activities appropriations bill ( h.r .

2764 ) on december 17 , 2007 , to form division i of the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2008 .

the senate concurred with the house amendments and both chambers cleared the bill for the white house on december 19 .

the president enacted the measure on december 26 , 2007 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

a detailed description of the legislative path for the appropriations bill , the accompanying national defense authorization bills , and several interim continuing resolutions can be found in section of this report entitled " enactment of the regular fy2008 appropriations . .

representative david r. obey , chair of the house committee on appropriations , introduced on september 25 , 2007 , a joint resolution ( h.j.res .

52 ) making continuing appropriations for fiscal year 2008 .

the resolution would provide funds needed to continue federal operations through november 16 at the rates provided in the applicable appropriations acts for fiscal year 2007 .

the house agreed by the yeas and nays ( 404 - 14 ) to an amended resolution on september 26 ( roll no .

911 , cr h10913-20 ) .

the senate passed the measure without amendment by a yea - nay vote ( 94 - 1 ) on the following day ( record vote no .

355 , cr s12255-58 ) , and the president signed it on november 13 ( p.l .

110-92 ) .

division b of the fy2008 dod appropriations act ( h.r .

3222 , p.l .

110-116 , enacted november 13 , 2007 ) continued government funding through december 14 , 2007 .

this cycle repeated during december .

representative obey introduced h.j.res .

69 , which would continue p.l .

110-92 through december 21 .

this measure passed both chambers on the following day , by the yeas and nays in the house ( 385-27 , roll no .

1162 , cr h15438 ) and by unanimous consent in the senate .

the president signed the resolution into law on december 14 .

the american battle monuments commission ( abmc ) is responsible for the maintenance and construction of u.s. monuments and memorials commemorating the achievements in battle of u.s. armed forces since the nation's entry into world war i ; the erection of monuments and markers by u.s. citizens and organizations in foreign countries ; and the design , construction , and maintenance of permanent cemeteries and memorials in foreign countries .

the commission maintains 24 cemeteries and 25 monuments , memorials , and markers in 15 countries , including three memorials on u.s. soil .

the abmc was responsible for the planning and construction of the world war ii memorial on the mall in washington , dc .

though the national park service assumed responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the memorial at its dedication , the abmc retains a fiduciary responsibility for the remaining public contributions given for its construction .

the abmc has undertaken the construction of an interpretive center at the normandy american cemetery in normandy , france , to commemorate the world war ii allied invasion of france on june 6 , 1944 , and the subsequent land battles in europe .

the new facility opened on june 6 , 2007 .

the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims was established by the veterans' administration adjudication procedure and judicial review act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-687 ) .

the court is an independent judicial tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the board of veterans' appeals .

it has the authority to decide all relevant questions of law ; interpret constitutional , statutory , and regulatory provisions ; and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an action by the va .

it is authorized to compel action by the va .

it is authorized to hold unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful and set aside decisions , findings , conclusions , rules and regulations issued or adopted by the va or the board of veterans' appeals .

the court currently occupies leased facilities near judiciary square in the district of columbia and is searching for a permanent location .

the court's major operational initiative is its transition to an electronic case filing system , which is also funded through this appropriation .

the secretary of the army is responsible for the administration , operation and maintenance of arlington national cemetery and the soldiers' and airmen's home national cemetery .

in addition to its principal function as a national cemetery , arlington is the site of approximately 3,100 non - funeral ceremonies each year and has approximately 4,000,000 visitors annually .

both the house - passed appropriation bill , h.r .

2642 , and the senate committee appropriation bill , s. 1645 , included additional funds in fy2008 for realignment of government - issued headstones and the construction of a heavy equipment storage facility .

the senate committee appropriation bill , s. 1645 , also included additional funds for costs not included in the budget request related to the relocation of utilities at arlington cemetery .

the fy2008 omnibus includes funds above the budget request for ate committee appropriation bill , s. 1645 , included additional funds in fy2008 for realignment of government - issued headstones , construction of a heavy equipment storage facility , and funds for costs not included in the budget request related to the relocation of utilities at arlington cemetery .

the armed forces retirement home trust fund provides funds to operate and maintain the armed forces retirement home in washington , dc ( also known as the united states soldiers' and airmen's home ) , and the armed forces retirement home in gulfport , mississippi ( originally located in philadelphia , pa , and known as the united states naval home ) .

these two facilities provide long - term housing and medical care for approximately 1,600 needy veterans .

the gulfport campus , encompassing a 19-story living accommodation and medical facility tower , was severely damaged by hurricane katrina at the end of august , 2005 , and is not currently in use .

residents of the facility were transferred to the washington , dc , location immediately after the storm .

a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) was signed between the afrh and the general services administration ( gsa ) for the rebuilding of the gulfport facility , with a targeted completion date in 2010 .

the appropriation for the afrh facilities is from the armed forces retirement home trust fund .

the trust fund is maintained through gifts , bequests , and a $0.50 per month assessment on the pay of active duty enlisted military personnel and warrant officers .

the fy2008 budget request includes a $5.1 million federal fund contribution to the trust fund , and $800,000 for a study of the long - term viability of the trust fund .

the house - passed appropriation bill , h.r .

2642 , did not include the federal contribution , but did include $800,000 for the study .

the senate committee appropriation bill , s. 1645 , provided the general fund transfer of $5.1 million to the trust , and $800,000 in general funds for the study .

the fy2008 omnibus provides $800,000 in general funds for the study of the long - term viability of the trust fund .

appendix a .

consolidated non - va funding tables appendix b .

additional resources budget crs report rl30002 , a defense budget primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report 98-720 , manual on the federal budget process , by [author name scrubbed] and allen schick ( pdf ) .

selected websites house committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.house.gov / senate committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.senate.gov / house committee on armed services http: / / www.house.gov / hasc / senate committee on armed services http: / / armed - services.senate.gov / house committee on veterans affairs http: / / veterans.house.gov / senate committee on veterans affairs http: / / veterans.senate.gov / commission on review of overseas military facility structure of the united states ( overseas basing commission ) http: / / www.obc.gov / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml crs multimedia library http: / / www.crs.gov / products / multimedia / multimedialibrary.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov / defense base closure and realignment commission ( brac commission ) http: / / www.brac.gov government accountability office http: / / www.gao.gov / .

