payment card interchange fees , which were paid without contention for almost seven decades , are now the source of controversy .

an interchange fee is paid by the merchant's bank to the cardholder's bank ( that issued the card ) after the cardholder purchases goods or services with a payment ( credit or debit ) card .

the durbin amendment to s. 3217 as amended and incorporated into the senate - passed version of h.r .

4173 proposes to ensure that small businesses and other entities that accept debit cards pay a reasonable and proportional price for using the payment card networks and prohibit the payment card network from imposing anti - competitive restrictions on small businesses and other entities that accept payment cards , such as providing discount to customers who pay with cash .

earlier in the 111 th congress , the house judiciary committee had introduced interchange fee legislation .

on june 4 , 2009 , house judiciary chairman john conyers jr. introduced the credit card fair fee act of 2009 ( h.r .

2695 ) , which would require voluntary interchange fee negotiations among merchants , the visa and mastercard associations , and card - issuing banks .

it would also require that the negotiating parties file the negotiation schedule with the u.s. attorney general within one month of the enactment of the bill .

if the negotiating parties do not file such a schedule within one month , the attorney general would issue the schedule .

the act would grant the negotiating parties limited antitrust immunity for negotiation of access fees and terms for using the electronic payment system to make electronic transactions .

some opponents of h.r .

2695 argue that the bill would force interchange negotiations whether or not the stake holders are interested in such negotiations .

the credit card accountability , responsibility and disclosure act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-24 ) was enacted on may 22 , 2009 , two weeks before h.r .

2695 was introduced .

p.l .

111-24 did not mandate any change in interchange fees .

however , it directed the government accountability office ( gao ) to complete a study of the interchange issues within six months of its enactment .

in the 110 th congress , chairman conyers established a congressional task force to look into interchange fees because some merchant and consumer groups had complained that these fees are cutting into merchants' profits and are costing the cardholders and non - cardholders , who ultimately pay the fee in the price of the goods or services .

according to chairman conyers , "in 2005 , u.s. families paid an average of more than $300 for hidden interchange fees including households that do not even use credit cards. .

another source estimated that , "in 2007 , retail merchants in the united states will pay banks issuing visa and mastercard payment cards more than $30 billion in collectively set per transaction interchange fees. .

at issue are increases in interchange fees set by the credit card associations like visa and mastercard and card - issuing banks or companies like discover card and american express to enable merchants to gain access to the associations' and issuers' electronic payment network .

interchange fees have been rising since the 1990s , despite diminishing fraud losses and technological advances in communications that lowered the costs of accessing the electronic payment system .

merchants argue that the card associations have not negotiated these fees with them but instead present them as take it or leave it offers .

economists who have studied the payment card market attribute the higher interchange fees to the nature and structure of the market , which is not the traditional market but a two - sided market .

within this structure , they have identified two conditions that , combined , could lead to high interchange fees .

the conditions are where the payment card issuers have market power and merchants have an inelastic demand for accepting payment cards .

some commentators note that if it is determined that interchange fees are excessive as a result of issuing banks' marketing power , those circumstances could lead to the government imposing legal or regulatory caps on interchange fees , as was the case in australia and the united kingdom .

related questions have been raised concerning the mechanism the government might use to induce merchants to lower their prices and pass the excess revenues back to the cardholders .

in these two countries , the pass back of the fees through price reduction has been voluntary , and there is no formal evidence that merchants lowered their prices .

this report focuses on the visa and mastercard card associations that account for more than three - fourths of the payment card market , with visa accounting for 44% and mastercard accounting for 31% of the market in the united states in 2008 .

the report does not discuss unitary payment card systems , such as american express and discover cards , that issue virtually all their own cards and sign up their own merchants .

this report does not analyze the application of antitrust statutes to interchange fees .

the report begins with a discussion of the nontraditional structure of the payment card market .

the second section is an analysis of the problem of the optimum level of payment cards to achieve the highest social welfare benefit for cardholders and merchants .

the third section discusses the durbin amendment to the restoring american financial stability act of 2010 ( s. 3217 ) and provisions of the credit card fair fee act of 2009 ( h.r .

2695 ) and 2008 ( h.r .

5546 ) , respectively .

the last section discusses the implications of the analysis .

students of the process of setting interchange fees , which include regulatory authorities , economists , and lawyers , have offered two proposed solutions to rising interchange fees .

the first would regulate the cost that a card system may use to calculate its interchange fees .

the second would permit merchants to put a surcharge on payment card transactions so that interchange fees could be passed on directly to the cardholder using the credit card .

each of these solutions has its own problems in terms of maximizing the overall social benefits of a payment card system .

the economic assessment of the two - sided market is a critical part of analyzing the interchange fee issue .

merchant complaints are focused on the rise of the merchant discount rate , indicating that the acquirer banks' costs do not justify the merchant's discount fee that they collect from them .

however , it is not clear that the merchants fully account for the costs of the issuing banks that are included in the discount fee .

some evidence shows that the amount of the merchant discount fee that the acquirer bank keeps is competitively determined ; it is estimated to be about 0.5% of the transaction amount for most payment cards , including discover and american express .

however , empirical evidence suggests that merchant's acceptance of payment cards has little to do with the acquirer bank's fees , because raising the acquirer fee did not show a reduction in card acceptance .

consequently , the focus turns to the cardholder and the issuing bank's side of the market .

on this side , there is evidence that payment card pricing has a dramatic effect on card usage because of the ease of switching to another card or method of payment .

cardholders avoid using a card rather than paying more , which may justify the card association making larger payments to the issuer banks , which lowers the costs to the cardholder but provides little perceived benefit to the merchants .

another implication concerns the market mechanism that would reverse any anti - competitive behavior existing in the payment card industry .

for example , if it is determined that the interchange fee is currently the result of anti - competitive behavior on the part of the card associations and issuing banks , interchange fees should arguably be lowered .

what mechanism might be used to ensure that the price of the goods and services is lowered to reflect the lower interchange fees ? .

although experience has shown that interchange fees can be lowered by regulatory caps and other government restrictions , there has been little discussion of how to pass the excess fees back to the cardholders .

if the government just lowers the fee with the expectation that merchants will pass the savings back to cardholders , it might not occur .

the government's regulatory caps would be redistributing revenues from the issuing banks to merchants .

the result could be that the social benefit of the electronic payment card system is lowered , because the government's action would lower revenues to the card - issuing banks , causing them to issue fewer than the optimal number of cards to cardholders .

with fewer cardholders using the payment system , merchants may not see the growth in customers they had in the past .

