the world meets 25% of its primary energy demand with coal , a number projected to increase steadily over the next 25 years .

overall , coal is responsible for about 20% of global greenhouse gas emissions .

with respect to carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , the most prevalent greenhouse gas , coal combustion was responsible for 41% of the world's co 2 emissions in 2005 ( 11 billion metric tons ) .

coal is particularly important for electricity supply .

in 2005 , coal was responsible for about 46% of the world's power generation , including 50% of the electricity generated in the united states , 89% of the electricity generated in china , and 81% of the electricity generated in india .

coal - fired power generation is estimated to increase 2.3% annually through 2030 , with resulting co 2 emissions estimated to increase from 7.9 billion metric tons per year to 13.9 billion metric tons per year .

for example , during 2006 , it is estimated that china added over 90 gigawatts ( gw ) of new coal - fired generating capacity , potentially adding an additional 500 million metric tons of co 2 to the atmosphere annually .

developing a means to control coal - derived greenhouse gas emissions is an imperative if serious reductions in worldwide emissions are to occur in the foreseeable future .

developing technology to accomplish this task in an environmentally , economically , and operationally acceptable manner has been an ongoing interest of the federal government and energy companies for a decade , but no commercial system to capture and store these emissions is currently available for large - scale coal - fired power plants .

arguably the most economic and technologically challenging part of the carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) equation is capturing the carbon and preparing it for transport and storage .

depending on site - specific conditions , the capture component of a ccs system can be the dominant cost - variable , and the component that could be improved most dramatically by further technological advancement .

as indicated in table 1 , capture costs could be 5-10 times the cost of storage .

breakthrough technologies that substantially reduce the cost of capturing co 2 from existing or new power plants , for example by 50% or more , would immediately reshape the economics of ccs .

moreover , technological breakthroughs would change the economics of ccs irrespective of a regulatory framework that emerges and governs how co 2 is transported away from the power plant and sequestered underground .

in contrast , the cost of transporting co 2 and sequestering it underground is likely less dependent on technological breakthroughs than on other factors , such as: the costs of construction materials and labor ( in the case of pipelines for co 2 transport ) ; the degree of geologic characterization required to permit sequestration ; the requirements for measuring , monitoring , and verifying permanent co 2 storage ; the costs of acquiring surface and subsurface rights to store co 2 ; costs of insurance and long - term liability ; and other variables driving the cost of transportation and sequestration .

that is not to say that the transportation and storage components of ccs are independent of cost and timing .

depending on the degree of public acceptance of a large - scale ccs enterprise , the transportation and sequestration costs could be very large , and it may take years to reach agreement on the regulatory framework that would guide long - term co 2 sequestration .

but the variables driving cost and timing for the transportation and storage of co 2 are less amenable to technological solution .

this report examines the current effort to develop technology that would capture co 2 .

first , the report outlines the current status of carbon capture technology .

second , the report examines the role of government in developing that technology , both in terms of creating a market for carbon capture technology and encouraging development of the technology .

finally , the report concludes with a discussion of implications of capture technology for climate change legislation .

major reductions in coal - fired co 2 emissions would require either pre - combustion , combustion modification , or post - combustion devices to capture the co 2 .

because there is currently over 300 gw of coal - fired electric generating capacity in the united states and about 600 gw in china , a retrofittable post - combustion capture device could have a substantial market , depending on the specifics of any climate change program .

the following discussion provides a brief summary of technology under development that may be available in the near term .

it is not an exhaustive survey of the technological initiatives currently underway in this area , but illustrative of the range of activity .

funding for current government research and development activities to improve these technologies and move them to commercialization are discussed later .

generally , studies that indicate that emerging , less carbon - intensive new technologies are both available and cost - effective incorporate a price mechanism ( such as a carbon tax ) that provides the necessary long - term price signal to direct research , development , demonstration , and deployment efforts ( called "demand - pull" or "market - pull" mechanisms ) .

developing such a price signal involves variables such as the magnitude and nature of the market signal , and its timing , direction , and duration .

in addition , studies indicate combining a sustained price signal with public support for research and development efforts is the most effective long - term strategy for encouraging development of new technology ( called "technology - push" mechanisms ) .

as stated by richard d. morgenstern: "the key to a long term research and development strategy is both a rising carbon price , and some form of government supported research program to compensate for market imperfections. .

the various roles the government could take in encouraging development of environmental technologies are illustrated in figure 5 .

the federal role in the innovation process is a complex one , reflecting the complexity of the innovation process itself .

the inventive activity reflected by government and private research and development efforts overlap with demand pull mechanisms to promote or require adoption of technology , shaping the efforts .

likewise , these initiatives are facilitated by the government as a forum for feedback gained through both developed and demonstration efforts and practical application .

the process is interlinked , overlapping , and dynamic , rather than linear .

attempting to implement one role in a vacuum can result in mis - directed funding or mis - timing of results .

this section discusses these different roles with respect to encouraging development of carbon capture technology , including ( 1 ) the need for a demand - pull mechanism and possible options ; ( 2 ) current technology - push efforts at the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) and the questions they raise ; and ( 3 ) comparison of current energy research and development efforts with past mission - oriented efforts .

economists note that the driving force behind the development of new and improved technologies is the profit motive... .

however , market forces will provide insufficient incentives to develop climate - friendly technologies if the market prices of energy inputs do not fully reflect their social cost ( inclusive of environmental consequences ) ... .

even if energy prices reflect all production costs , without an explicit greenhouse gas policy firms have no incentive to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions per se beyond the motivation to economize on energy costs .

for example , a utility would happily find a way to generate the same amount of electricity with less fuel , but without a policy that makes carbon dioxide emissions costly , it would not care specifically about the carbon content of its fuel mix in choosing between , say , coal and natural gas .

for firms to have the desire to innovate cheaper and better ways to reduce emissions ( and not merely inputs ) , they must bear additional financial costs for emissions .

much of the focus of debate on developing carbon capture technology has been on research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) needs .

however , for technology to be fully commercialized , it must meet a market demand — a demand created either through a price mechanism or a regulatory requirement .

as suggested by the previous discussion , any carbon capture technology for coal - fired power plants will increase the cost of electricity generation from affected plants with no increase in efficiency .

therefore , widespread commercialization of such technology is unlikely until it is required , either by regulation or by a carbon price .

indeed , regulated industries may find their regulators reluctant to accept the risks and cost of installing technology that is not required by legislation .

this sentiment was reflected in a recent decision by the virginia state corporation commission in denying an application by appalachian power company ( apco ) for a rate adjustment to construct an igcc facility: the company asserted that the value of this project is directly related to ( 1 ) potential future legal requirements for carbon capture and sequestration ; and ( 2 ) the proposed igcc plant's potential ability to comply cost effectively with any such requirements .

both of these factors , however , are unknown at this time and do not overcome the other infirmities in the application .

the legal necessity of , and the capability of , cost - effective carbon capture and sequestration in this particular igcc plant , at this time , has not been sufficiently established to render apco's application reasonable or prudent under the virginia statute we must follow .

at the same time , there is reluctance to invest in technology that is not required , and the unresolved nature of greenhouse gas regulation is affecting investment in any coal - fired generation .

the risk involved in investing in coal - fired generation absent anticipated greenhouse gas regulations is outlined in "the carbon principles" announced by three wall street banks — citi , jp morgan chase , and morgan stanley — in february 2008 .

as stated in their paper: the absence of comprehensive federal action on climate change creates unknown financial risks for those building and financing new fossil fuel generation resources .

the financial institutions that have signed the principles recognize that federal co 2 control legislation is being considered and is likely to be adopted during the service life of many new power plants .

it is prudent to take concrete actions today that help developers , investors and financiers to identify , analyze , reduce and mitigate climate risks .

similarly , lack of a regulatory scheme presents numerous risks to any rd&d effort designed to develop carbon capture technology .

unlike a mission - oriented research effort , like the manhattan project to develop an atomic bomb , where the ultimate goal is victory and the cost virtually irrelevant , research efforts focused on developing a commercial device need to know what the market wants in a product and how much the product is worth .

at the current time , the market value of a carbon capture device is zero in much of the country because there is no market for carbon emissions or regulations requiring their reduction .

all estimates of value are hypothetical — dependent on a reduction program or regulatory regime that doesn't exist .

with no market or regulatory signals determining appropriate performance standards and cost - effectiveness criteria , investment in carbon capture technology is a risky business that could easily result in the development of a "white elephant" or "gold - plated" technology that doesn't meet market demand .

while the "threat" of a carbon regime is stimulating rd&d efforts and influencing decisions about future energy ( particularly electricity ) supply , the current spread of greenhouse gas control regimes being proposed doesn't provide much guidance in suggesting appropriate performance and cost - effectiveness benchmarks for a solution with respect to coal - fired generation .

for example , isolating just one variable in the future price of carbon under a cap - and - trade program — tonnage reduction requirement — the future value of carbon reductions can vary substantially .

as illustrated by figure 6 , three possible reduction targets in 2050 — maintaining current 2008 levels ( 287 billion metric tons [bmt] ) , reducing emissions to 50% of 1990 levels ( 203 bmt ) , and reducing emissions to 20% of 1990 levels ( 167 bmt ) — result in substantially different price tracks for co 2 .

without a firm idea of the tonnage goal and reduction schedule , any deployment or commercialization strategy would be a high - risk venture , as suggested by the previously noted virginia state corporation commission conclusion .

there are two basic approaches to a demand - pull mechanism: ( 1 ) a regulatory requirement , and ( 2 ) a price signal via a market - based co 2 reduction program .

these approaches are not mutually exclusive and can serve different goals .

for example , a regulation focused on new construction ( such as the new source performance standard under section 111 of the clean air act ) could be used to phase in deployment of carbon capture technology and prevent more coal - fired facilities from being constructed without carbon capture ( or ensure they would be at least "ready" for carbon capture later ) .

at the same time , a carbon tax or cap - and - trade program could be initiated to begin sending a market signal to companies that further controls will be necessary in the future if they decide to continue operating coal - fired facilities .

the department of energy ( doe ) is engaged in a variety of activities to push development and demonstration of carbon capture technologies .

these activities include direct spending on research and development , and providing loan guarantees and tax credits to promote carbon capture projects .

these technology - push incentives , and the issues they raise , are discussed below .

each of the funding mechanisms described above — appropriations , loan guarantees , and tax credits — are examples of government "pushing" carbon capture technologies ( the upper left arrow in figure 5 ) via direct spending and through private sector incentives .

thus far , however , these activities are taking place in a vacuum with respect to a carbon market or a regulatory structure .

lacking a price signal or regulatory mandate , it is difficult to assess whether a government - push approach is sufficient for long - term technology development .

some studies appear to discount the necessity of a price signal or regulatory mandate , at least initially , and place a higher priority on the successful demonstration of large - scale technological , economic , and environmental performance of technologies that comprise all of the components of an integrated ccs system: capture , transportation , and storage .

so far , however , the only federally sponsored , fully integrated , large - scale ccs demonstration project — called futuregen ( see box below ) — failed in its original conception , which may have been due , in part , to the lack of a perceived market .

doe announced it was restructuring the futuregen program because of its rising costs , which are difficult to assess against the project's "benefits" without a monetary value attached to those benefits ( i.e. , the value of carbon extracted from the fuel and permanently sequestered ) .

a carbon market would at least provide some way of comparing costs against benefits .

one could argue that the benefits of ccs accrue to the amelioration of future costs of environmental degradation caused by greenhouse gas - induced global warming .

although it may be possible to identify overall environmental benefits to removing co 2 that would otherwise be released to the atmosphere , assigning a monetary value to those benefits to compare against costs is extremely difficult .

any comprehensive approach to reducing greenhouse gases substantially must address the world's dependency on coal for one - quarter of its energy demand , including almost half of its electricity demand .

to maintain coal as a key component in the world's energy mix in a carbon - constrained future would require developing a technology to capture and store its co 2 emissions .

this situation suggests to some that any greenhouse gas reduction program be delayed until such carbon capture technology has been demonstrated .

however , technological innovation and the demands of a carbon control regime are interlinked ; therefore , a technology policy is no substitute for environmental policy and must be developed in concert with it .

this linkage raises issues for legislators attempting to craft greenhouse gas reduction legislation .

for the demand - pull side of the equation , the issue revolves around how to create the appropriate market for emerging carbon capture technologies .

table 4 compares four different "price" signals across five different criteria that influence their effectiveness in promoting technology: magnitude : what size of price signal or stringency of the regulation is imposed initially ? .

direction : what influences the direction ( up or down ) of the price signal or stringency of the regulation over time ? .

timing : how quickly is the price or regulation imposed and strengthened ? .

stability : how stable is the price or regulation over time ? .

duration : how long is the price or regulation imposed on affected companies ? .

in general , the criteria suggest that regulation is the surest method of forcing the development of technology — price is not necessarily a direct consideration in decision - making .

however , regulation is also the most limiting ; technologies more or less stringent than the standard would have a limited domestic market ( although foreign opportunities may be available ) , and development could be frozen if the standards are not reviewed and strengthened periodically .

in contrast , allowance prices would provide the most equivocal signal , particularly if they are allocated free to participants .

experience has shown allowance prices to be subject to volatility with swings both up and down .

the experience with the so 2 cap - and - trade program suggests the incentive can be improved with "bonus" allowances ; however , the eligibility criteria used could be perceived as the government attempting to pick a winner .

in contrast , carbon taxes and allowance auctions ( particularly 100% auctions with a reserve price ) provide strong market - based price signals .

a carbon tax is the most stable price signal , providing a clear and transparent signal of the value of any method of greenhouse gas reductions .

substantial auctioning of allowances also places a price on carbon emissions , a price that can be strengthened by incorporating a reserve price into the structure of the auction .

however , each of these signals ultimately depends on the environmental goal envisioned and the specifics of the control program: ( 1 ) the stringency of the reduction requirement ; ( 2 ) the timing of desired reductions ; ( 3 ) the techniques allowed to achieve compliance .

the interplay of these factors informs the technology community about the urgency of the need for carbon capture technology ; the price signal informs the community what cost - performance parameters are appropriate for the emerging carbon market .

the nature of that price signal ( regulatory , market , stability ) informs the community of the confidence it can have that it is not wasting capital on a "white elephant" or on a project that the market does not want or need .

the issues for technology - push mechanisms are broader , and include not only the specifics of any reduction program and resulting price signal , but also international considerations and the interplay between carbon capture technology , storage , and the potential need for co 2 transport .

groups as diverse as the pew center , the electric power research institute , doe , and mit have suggested "roadmaps" and other schemes for preparing carbon capture technology for a pending greenhouse gas reduction program .

generally , all of these approaches agree on the need for demonstration - size ( 200-300 mw ) projects to sort out technical performance and cost effectiveness , and identify potential environmental and safety concerns .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110 - 140 ) reflected congress's desire for more integrated demonstration projects , and arra provides a dramatic step increase in funding for ccs technology over a relatively short period .

finally , it should be noted that the status quo for coal with respect to climate change legislation isn't necessarily the same as "business as usual. .

the financial markets and regulatory authorities appear to be hedging their bets on the outcomes of any federal legislation with respect to greenhouse gas reductions , and are becoming increasingly unwilling to accept the risk of a coal - fired power plant with or without carbon capture capacity .

this sort of limbo for coal - fired power plants is reinforced by the mit study , which makes a strong case against subsidizing new construction ( allowed for igcc under the epact2005 ) without carbon capture because of the unattractive costs of retrofits: coal plants will not be cheap to retrofit for co 2 capture .

our analysis confirms that the costs to retrofit an air - driven scpc [supercritical pulverized coal] plant for significant co 2 capture , say 90% , will be greater than the costs to retrofit an igcc plant .

however , ... the modifications needed to retrofit an igcc plant for appreciable ccs are extensive and not a matter of simply adding a single simple and inexpensive process step to an existing igcc plant.... consequently , igcc plants without ccs that receive assistance under the 2005 energy act will be more costly to retrofit and less likely to do so .

the concept of a " capture ready " igcc or pulverized coal plant is as yet unproven and unlikely to be fruitful .

the energy act envisions "capture ready" to apply to gasification technology .

[citation omitted] retrofitting igcc plants , or for that matter pulverized coal plants , to incorporate ccs technology involves substantial additional investments and a significant penalty to the efficiency and net electricity output of the plant .

as a result , we are unconvinced that such financial assistance to conventional igcc plants without ccs is wise .

[ emphasis in original ] as noted earlier , lack of a regulatory scheme ( or carbon price ) presents numerous risks to any research and development effort designed to develop carbon capture technology .

ultimately , it also presents a risk to the future of coal .

