by mid - march of 2008 , gasoline prices exceeded $3.39 / gallon ( gal ) while diesel fuel prices were $3.97 / gal , a differential of almost $0.60 / gal .

in mid - march of 2007 , the relationship between the two fuels was the reverse: gasoline prices were higher than diesel prices .

at that time , diesel prices were roughly $2.68 / gal , while the average price of gasoline for all grades was $2.76 — more than $0.08 higher than the average price of on - highway diesel .

additionally , where gasoline prices in mid - march 2008 are roughly $0.63 / gal higher than year - ago averages , diesel fuel prices have risen over $1.29 / gal over the same period .

over $0.60 / gal of this increase has occurred since the beginning of 2008 .

this has prompted questions of why the historic gap between gasoline and on - highway diesel prices has widened so greatly and over such a relatively brief period of time .

because diesel fuel costs affect the cost of shipping by truck , price increases affect the delivered cost of most consumer goods purchased in the united states , contributing to the over - all level of price inflation .

this report provides background and identifies some of the likely factors and forces in world markets that may have contributed to the evolution of the relative prices of gasoline and diesel fuel over the past several years .

among these are strong international demand for diesel fuel ; product mix decisions by refiners , and refinery investment to meet more stringent limits on the sulfur content of diesel fuel ; the similarities between diesel fuel and home heating oil ; and the effect on retail prices from local market conditions .

a barrel of crude oil is a composite of hydrocarbons of varying densities .

the initial step in refining crude oil is to separate its heavier and lighter "fractions" by heating it .

the lighter products are recovered at , or near the top of a distillation column where the temperature is lowest .

the heavier fractions are recovered from the bottom where the heat is greatest .

gasoline is among the lighter components .

diesel fuel and home heating oil come from the portion of the barrel that is termed "middle distillates" because the feedstock for these fuels settle out roughly in the middle of the distillation tower .

crude oil itself is of varying densities , as well as sulfur content , generally distinguished as "light" or "heavy," or high and low quality oil .

light crude will furnish a higher percentage of lighter products than heavy crude ; additional processing can increase the yield of lighter products from the heavier end of the barrel , but will add to product costs .

once distilled , gasoline and middle distillates are further processed "downstream," where the addition of blending components and other steps create the finished petroleum products that are released to markets .

the typical yields from a barrel of crude oil of gasoline and middle distillates range , respectively , around 45-47% and 25-27% depending on the time of year ( see table 1 ) .

typically , refiners take some of their facilities offline for brief periods to perform maintenance and make seasonal adjustments to slightly favor the yield of gasoline or middle distillates .

during the spring , refiners seek to build inventories of gasoline for the summer driving season .

conversely , production of home heating oil for the heating season is maximized beginning during the summer .

gasoline consumption has been averaging 9.0 million barrels daily ( mbd ) , while all distillate consumption is roughly 4.5 mbd .

in 2007 , u.s. imports of middle distillates averaged 348,000 b / d in 2007 .

as is discussed later in this report , world demand for middle distillates has grown and added to the pressure on prices for middle distillate imports .

the typical product yield from a barrel of crude oil is shown in table 1 .

as is also noted later in this report , some of the sharp runup in on - highway diesel fuel prices in recent months likely stems from the close similarity between diesel fuel and residential home heating oil .

both , as has been noted , are middle distillates and , to some extent , in competition with one another .

home heating oil and transportation diesel are chemically identical , but in the refinery they are processed in slightly different ways for their respective purposes .

in addition to having specified regulations and taxes , transportation diesel has a low sulfur standard , meaning that it must contain 0.05% sulfur or less .

home heating oil is required by law to contain not more than 0.5% sulfur content , but due to unintentional mixing of transportation diesel and home heating oil at the refinery , the sulfur content of home heating oil usually hovers around 0.2% .

table 2 shows recent demand for products that fall within the parameters of distillate fuels .

in 2006 , diesel fuel represented nearly 63% of distillate sales while residential home heating oil was 8% of sales .

this is compared with 58% and 10.8% , respectively , in the year 2002 .

table 2 also suggests that the distillate fuel market in the united states is not a growth market .

the total demand for distillates was no higher in 2006 than in 2003 , and less than 2% higher than the weak demand year of 2002 .

on - highway diesel was the only sector that showed continuous growth over the period .

other sectors , like residential and commercial , suggest seasonality related to the weather .

some sectors , like vessel bunkering , electric power , and military showed declining demand .

differing sectoral demand patterns within the same product group makes it likely that , in pricing terms , those sectors with the relatively strongest demand patterns might be charged prices which help to offset the lower returns that might be earned in sectors with weaker demand .

for example , since all of the distillates are joint products of the refining process , all must find a market .

however , if one segment of the market , say use in electric power generation , is relatively weak and declining , and another , on - highway use is increasing , it is likely that electric power distillates may be sold at a discount , while on - highway distillates may be sold at a premium .

the retail prices of gasoline and diesel fuel have four major components: the price of the crude feedstock ; federal and state taxes ; the cost of refining , reflected in what is referenced as the "refiner margin" ; and the costs of distribution ( transportation ) and marketing .

as the price of crude rises or fluctuates , along with any demand pressures , the relative percentage share of these components of retail price will shift .

the observed drop in the share represented by state and federal taxes — values that are constants over the period shown below — is a reflection of the significant change in the retail sales price for gasoline and diesel fuel .

these percentages for the last year for both gasoline and diesel fuel are set out in tables 3 and 4 , and depicted as graphs in figures 1 and 2 .

tables 3 and 4 suggest that the reason for the shift in the relative prices of gasoline and diesel fuel cannot be easily be identified through cost growth at any particular stage of the production process .

however , part of the explanation may be in the behavior of refining as a percentage of price .

the decline in refining cost in gasoline has been greater than the decline in refining cost in diesel .

this pattern suggests that the ability of refiners to pass through cost increases to the consumer is stronger in diesel than in gasoline , and that there are significant recoverable costs that have been added in diesel refining .

both may play a role .

as is discussed later in this report , mandated refinery investments have been required in diesel fuel refining to meet new product specifications .

on the demand side , the second half of 2007 and early 2008 have been characterized by record - setting crude oil prices .

gasoline prices lagged the increase in crude oil prices , leading to shrinking refiner margins and profitability .

possibly , because diesel fuel is an intermediary product in commercial use , and as such can be expected to be passed through to final consumers , refining costs as a percentage of cost remained stronger .

it is expressly because refiners often absorb the initial increases in crude prices that some are predicting that , if crude prices remain roughly in their current range or go higher , further price increases in all highway fuels are likely .

how steep these increases may prove to be will depend very critically on the demand response to the price of motor fuels .

gasoline demand is recently observed to be relatively flat , and stocks of gasoline are unseasonably high .

however , with the start of the summer driving season still some weeks off , any prediction about the price , supply , and demand for gasoline ( and diesel fuel ) during the summer of 2008 would be conjecture at best .

a variety of factors , some cyclical , and some structural , have likely contributed to the break - down of the traditional pattern of relative prices between gasoline and diesel fuel .

these are identified and described in turn .

on the basis of the market dynamics described in this report , the future price path of highway fuels and the relative disparity between the price of gasoline and diesel fuel cannot be predicted with any confidence .

at this time , the price support for diesel fuel is primarily demand - driven , with the united states competing for world supply to supplement domestic production of middle distillates with product imports .

it could be anticipated that , at some point , the price of a fuel could reach a level where there is some demand response .

it is unclear what these price points may be .

however , owing to the primary use of diesel fuel in the commercial sector for the delivery of goods and some services , demand for diesel is likely to be less elastic because , as has been noted , those costs will be passed on to consumers .

demand outside the united states may also prove to be less elastic .

a supply response could ameliorate prices somewhat , but any supply response is bounded by the nature of crude oil and refinery investment .

