economic and trade relations between the united states and india have experienced a number of ups and downs since india's independence in 1947 .

during much of the 1950s and early 1960s , the united states was a leading trading partner for india , providing the nation with about a third of its imports .

however , those economic ties quickly subsided when india fostered closer ties with the soviet union following the indo - pakistani war of 1965 .

for the next 40 years , political and economic relations between india and the united states were rather cool .

since 2004 , washington and new delhi have been pursuing a "strategic partnership" based on numerous shared values and improved economic and trade relations .

india is in the midst of a rapid economic expansion , and many u.s. companies view india as a lucrative market and a candidate for foreign investment .

for its part , the current indian government sees itself continuing the economic reforms started in 1991 , aimed at transforming a quasi - socialist economy into a more open , market - oriented economy .

however , the u.s. government is concerned that india's economic reforms are progressing too slowly and unevenly .

according to official u.s. trade statistics , bilateral merchandise trade with india has grown from under $10 billion in 1996 to nearly $31 billion in 2006 — a trebling in a decade .

in 1996 , india was the 32 nd largest market for u.s. exports and the 25 th largest source of imports .

by 2006 , india had risen to be 21 st biggest export market for the united states and the 18 th biggest supplier of imports .

the united states' total trade with india in 2006 exceeded that with israel , nigeria , and thailand .

both governments appear to be committed to improving trade relations .

on march 2 , 2006 , president george w. bush and indian prime minister manmohan singh endorsed the goal of doubling bilateral trade in three years .

on december 18 , 2006 , president bush signed into law h.r .

5682 , the henry j. hyde united states - india peaceful atomic energy cooperation act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-401 ) , signaling an intent to waive restrictions on civil nuclear cooperation with india .

despite the growth in bilateral trade and the improvement in trade relations , there are still a number of economic and trade issues between india and the united states .

both nations seek greater market access to the other's domestic markets , as well as the lowering of perceived trade barriers .

in addition , both india and the united states would like to see changes in the other nation's legal and regulatory policies to help protect and promote exports and foreign direct investment .

moreover , there are significant differences in the stances of the two countries in various multilateral trade fora , including the current doha round of negotiations .

for congress , resolution of some of the key economic and trade issues may involve alterations in current federal law .

in particular , changes in laws pertaining to agricultural goods , pharmaceuticals , nuclear and dual - use technology , and immigration may be considered as part of an effort to foster closer trade relations with india .

plus , congress may consider heightened oversight of u.s. - india trade relations .

this report provides a summary of india's current political climate ( with a focus on its effects on the nation's economic and trade policies ) , its economic condition and policies , the recent trends in bilateral trade and foreign direct investment , and key economic and trade issues between india and the united states .

where suitable , the report also compares india to china to provide a different perspective on u.s. relations with both nations .

new delhi's current ruling united progressive alliance ( upa ) coalition was seated in may 2004 , when the inc , long associated with the nehru - gandhi families , won 145 of the lok sabha's 543 seats and built a ruling coalition with the support of 14 smaller parties .

the election unseated a national democratic alliance ( nda ) coalition led by the bharatiya janata party ( bjp ) , which had been in power under prime minister atal vajpayee since 1998 .

some analysts saw in the election results a rejection of the bjp's neo - liberal economic reform program .

inc president sonia gandhi surprised supporters and opponents alike by declining to assume the office of prime minister , instead nominating her lieutenant , manmohan singh , a former finance minister .

the may 2004 poll results were notable for the best - ever national showing of a leftist alliance — commonly known as the left front — led by the communist party of india ( marxist ) ( cpi - m ) .

although this left front is not part of the upa coalition , it provides crucial parliamentary support from the outside and was described as being "militant" in its opposition to the bjp's privatization efforts .

the cpi - m seated the third largest number of parliamentarians in 2004 ( 43 ) , but its vote bank is almost wholly limited to the states of west bengal and kerala .

immediately following the election , investor fears that a coalition government including communists might curtail or halt india's economic reform and liberalization process apparently led to huge losses in the country's stock markets .

market recovery began when inc leaders quickly offered assurances that the new government would be "pro - growth , pro - savings , and pro - investment. .

indian industrial leaders also sought to assure foreign investors that left front members are not "cuba - style communists," but could be expected to support the upa reform agenda .

the chief minister of west bengal , buddhadeb bhattacharya , a cpi - m member , has himself actively sought corporate investment in his state .

however , since coming to power , the congress - led coalition has slowed certain aspects of its economic reform program , including suspending major disinvestment and special economic zone initiatives .

these moves are widely viewed as gestures to the left front .

while there are indications that both prime minister singh and party chief gandhi remain fairly popular figures in india , february 2007 state elections in punjab and uttaranchal saw inc candidates decisively defeated by the main opposition bjp and its allies , causing some pundits to suggest that national economic policies and rising inflation may be damaging the ruling coalition's standing .

some analysts saw the "neoliberal policies" of the upa as harming its electoral position .

in june , eight regional parties formally launched a new "third front" that might emerge as a national alternative to the upa and nda .

well - known tamil nadu leader jayalalithaa is likely to lead .

august 2007 political wrangling between the upa and its left front allies over planned u.s. - india civil nuclear cooperation ( the leftists oppose the plan ) has added to political instability in new delhi and led some to foresee early national polls if singh's coalition loses left front support .

over the last five years , india has been one of asia's fastest growing economies .

figure 1 shows india's nominal gross domestic product ( gdp ) for the years 2002 to 2007 .

in nominal terms , india's gdp grew from 24.5 trillion rupees in 2002 to 40.3 trillion rupees in 2006 — an increase of 64% in four years — and is projected to reach 45.6 trillion rupees in 2007 .

when converted into "real" gdp using a purchasing power parity conversion , india's gdp rose from $3.2 trillion in 2002 to $4.4 trillion in 2006 , and is projected to increase to $4.7 trillion in 2007 .

the upa coalition came into office promising sustained economic growth "in a manner that generates employment. .

it set out to enact guaranteed employment ( for minimum 100-day periods ) , and major public investment in social programs and in the agricultural and rural sectors .

the upa also vowed to give a high priority to the development of physical infrastructure such as roads , ports , power , railways , water supply , sewage treatment , and sanitation , even offering "explicit" subsidies to bring private sector participation in this area .

economic reforms were to be continued , but with a "human face": the upa reiterates its abiding commitment to economic reforms with a human face , that stimulates growth , investment , and employment .

further reforms are needed and will be carried out in agriculture , industry , and services .

the upa's economic reforms will be oriented primarily to spreading and deepening rural prosperity , to significantly improving the quality of public systems and delivery of public services , to bringing about a visible and tangible difference in the quality of life of ordinary citizens of our country .

the upa economic priorities were largely welcomed by analysts calling for india to "get over its obsession" with gdp growth and fdi so as to better attend to the needs of common citizens , especially those in the rural , agricultural economies .

these observers warn that a single - minded focus on economic expansion facilitates significant damage to the environment and to human health , as well as encouraging corruption .

the upa economic program also addresses many of the economic challenges listed in a july 2006 world bank report .

according to the world bank , india's most pressing economic issues are: improving the delivery of core public services such as healthcare , education , and power and water supply for all india's citizens ; making growth more inclusive by diminishing existing disparities , accelerating agricultural growth , improving the job market , and helping lagging states grow faster ; sustaining growth by addressing its fiscal and trade deficits , and pushing ahead with reforms that facilitate growth ; and addressing hiv / aids before the epidemic spreads to the general public .

economic and trade relations between the united states and india have been problematic in the past , but are currently considered comparatively cordial .

u.s. policymakers often identify in the indian political system shared core values , and this has facilitated increasingly friendly relations between the u.s. and indian governments .

in addition , the trade and investment reforms implemented by india over the last 15 years have generally fostered improved trade relations .

indian officials opine that the two national economies present "complimentary business interests rather than a standard developed - developing relationship. .

however , the improvement in trade relations has been punctuated by episodic problems , generally based on political — rather than economic — differences of opinion .

a major divergence came on may 13 , 1998 , when the united states imposed trade sanctions on india in response to its nuclear weapons tests .

besides the general multilateral and bilateral economic and trade issues described above , there are several sectoral or topical issues of significance between india and the united states .

some of these issues interplay with more general issues , such as the doha round negotiations or the bilateral trade balance .

what follows is a brief summary of each of these issues , arranged in alphabetical order .

given the relatively positive relationship between the united states and india , most of the economic and trade issues between india and the united states are developing trends with few direct legislative implications .

one of the exceptions is in the energy sector , where there are bills before congress concerning u.s. - indian energy cooperation .

however , in some cases , there is pending or possible congressional legislation that may have an indirect impact on u.s. - indian relations .

what follows is a summary of the more prominent issues or topics in u.s. - indian relations .

there currently is legislation before 110 th congress on the subject of u.s. - india energy cooperation .

the united states - india energy security cooperation act of 2007 ( h.r .

1186 ) would "promote global energy security through increased cooperation between the united states and india in diversifying sources of energy , stimulating development of alternative fuels , developing and deploying technologies that promote the clean and efficient use of coal , and improving energy efficiency. .

both the energy diplomacy and security act of 2007 ( s. 193 ) and the renewable fuels , consumer protection , and energy efficiency act of 2007 ( s. 1419 ) would , inter alia , establish a u.s. petroleum crisis response mechanism in conjunction with china and india .

a section of the international climate cooperation re - engagement act of 2007 ( h.r .

2420 ) would create foreign commercial service attaches and deploy these to india ( and china ) for the purpose of promoting u.s. exports in clean and energy efficient energy technologies .

the new direction for energy independence , national security , and consumer protection act ( h.r .

3221 ) , introduced in july 2007 , contains similar provisions .

moreover , and as noted above , an initiative to launch civil nuclear cooperation with india was provisionally endorsed by the 109 th congress in the hyde act ( p.l .

109-401 ) and any future "123 agreement" guiding such cooperation must be approved by congress .

immigration reform is a major issue for the 110 th congress .

the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2007 ( s. 1348 ) , currently being considered by the senate , would alter the eligibility requirements for h - 1b visas under the securing knowledge , innovation , and leadership act of 2007 ( skil act of 2007 ) , and limit the number of "market - based visas" to 115,000 per fiscal year .

while this is an increase from the current limit , it is below the level sought by both indian and u.s. information technology companies .

nor does the bill address the industry's desire to see the creation of a new visa category for short - term training of foreign nationals in the united states .

many provisions of the current omnibus farm bill , the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 ) , expire in 2007 .

india , along with brazil and other nations , have argued that certain aspects of the current u.s. farm program are "trade distorting,' and are pushing the united states to change various agricultural programs , including its farm subsidies .

it was previously hoped that the doha round would be completed in time for congress to consider the enabling legislation under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , and that any changes in u.s. agricultural policy could be including the enabling legislation .

however , since the doha round discussions are not completed , congress is considering the expiring programs without the benefit of knowing the terms of any new wto obligations .

the recently introduced h.r .

2419 provides for the continuation of the expiring farm programs , but may not prove to be in compliance with the results of any agreement coming out of the current doha round discussions .

the 110 th congress is considering legislation pertaining to the operation of the committee on foreign investment in the united states , or cfius , an interagency committee that overseas the security implications of foreign investments in the united states .

while u.s. laws governing fdi are generally viewed as being very liberal , there has been recent concern about the security implications of some proposed overseas investments , especially their implications for national defense and port security .

proposed legislation would require cfius to investigate all foreign investment transactions in which the entity is owned or controlled by a foreign government , regardless of the nature of the business .

given the recent increase in indian fdi in the united states , this could cause some tension with india , as well as weaken u.s. efforts to persuade india to lower its current barriers to fdi .

the growth of outsourcing various services to india , as well as other nations , is a serious concern for many u.s. workers .

current u.s. law provides some assistance to "displaced workers" via the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program authorized by the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) , the worker adjustment and retraining notification ( warn ) act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-379 ) of 1988 , and the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) .

however , various groups and individuals have called upon congress to revisit these programs , and strengthen the provisions protecting u.s. workers from job losses caused by outsourcing .

there are currently two bills before congress that offer additional assistance and / or protection to displaced u.s. workers .

the trade adjustment assistance reform act ( h.r .

1729 ) expands eligibility for displaced textile and apparel workers for trade adjustment assistance , arguably in response to the growth in clothing and textiles imports from india .

the second bill , the worker empowerment act ( s. 1330 ) , would amend the social security act to provide for wage insurance for dislocated workers .

