the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) is the primary organization for research and development ( r&d ) in the department of homeland security .

with a budget of $932.6 million in fy2009 , the directorate conducts r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d conducted by other government agencies , the department of energy national laboratories , industry , and universities .

in the past , some members of congress have been highly critical of the directorate's performance .

for example , in 2006 , the house appropriations committee said it was "concerned about the ability of [the] s&t [directorate] to advance the use of science and technology in battling terrorism and against other hazards related to homeland security," and the senate appropriations committee called the directorate "a rudderless ship without a clear way to get back on course" and said it was "extremely disappointed with the manner in which [the] s&t [directorate] is being managed. .

more recently , management changes have considerably muted this criticism .

for example , in 2007 , the senate appropriations committee stated that it was "pleased with the rapid progress s&t appears to be making toward resolving past difficulties .

the new under secretary has restructured the directorate's programs , worked to obligate resources in a timely fashion , and instituted a capable budget office able to deliver timely , accurate , and comprehensible documents. .

nevertheless , a number of fundamental issues remain .

this report describes the evolving mission , organization , and assets of the s&t directorate and the activities it conducts .

it outlines key policy issues , including the balance of the directorate's programs , its priorities and how they are set , its relationships with other r&d organizations , its mission , its budgeting and financial management , and other concerns .

the report concludes with a discussion of legislative issues for the 111 th congress .

other r&d organizations in the department ( such as the domestic nuclear detection office and the r&d activities of the u.s. coast guard ) are discussed only to the extent that they relate to the s&t directorate .

the directorate faces a variety of broader policy concerns in addition to the issues associated with the specific organizations and activities of the s&t directorate discussed above .

these include the evolution of its mission ; its allocation of resources to basic research , applied research , and development ; its choice of intramural or extramural performers for r&d ; its process for prioritization and strategic planning ; its relationships with other r&d organizations , both inside and outside dhs ; problems with its budget documents and financial management systems ; its responsiveness to congress and industry ; and metrics for evaluating its performance .

in contrast to some other federal departments and agencies , the dhs lacks budget authorization legislation .

several attempts have been made to provide such authorization , for example in the 110 th and previous congresses , but none have been passed into law .

instead , changes to particular programs have been made in the annual appropriations bills and their accompanying reports , in stand - alone bills devoted to specific topics , and in specific provisions within broader legislation .

as a result , changes to the responsibilities , components , and activities of the s&t directorate occur outside of a holistic context , with the focus of the change usually coinciding with the focus of the particular topic of the stand - alone bill .

examples of such legislation are provided below .

in each congress since the creation of the department , authorization legislation has been introduced to accompany the annual appropriations legislation .

while these bills have in some congresses passed the house , they have not passed into law .

the chairmen of the house committee on homeland security and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs have each stated their intention to introduce authorization bills again in the 111 th congress .

it is not yet clear , however , whether these bills will be more successful than past efforts .

the s&t directorate is funded , along with the rest of the department of homeland security , in the annual homeland security appropriations bill .

for fy2009 , the house and senate versions of this bill were h.r .

6947 and s. 3181 .

the final appropriation was made by a consolidated bill ( p.l .

110-329 ) .

for the fy2009 appropriated amounts , see table c - 2 in appendix c , and for more information , see crs report rl34482 , homeland security department: fy2009 appropriations , and crs report rl34448 , federal research and development funding: fy2009 .

table c - 2 also shows the administration's request for fy2010 .

the administration requested a total of $968 million for the s&t directorate for fy2010 .

this was 4% more than the fy2009 appropriation of $933 million .

fy2010 homeland security appropriations legislation has not been introduced in either chamber .

h.r .

549 , the national bombing prevention act of 2009 , authorizes , among other provisions , the establishment within the s&t directorate of an explosives research and development program and a technology transfer program for technology and equipment against explosives and improvised explosive devices .

h.r .

549 was passed by the house in february 2009 and referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

appendix a .

responsibilities and authorities of the under secretary the responsibilities and authorities of the under secretary for science and technology were established by sec .

302 of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 296 ) .

references to radiological and nuclear threats were deleted from paragraphs ( 2 ) and ( 5 ) ( a ) by sec .

501 of the safe port act ( p.l .

109 - 347 ) .

the full text as amended ( 6 u.s.c .

182 ) is quoted here for reference: responsibilities and authorities of the under secretary for science and technology .

the secretary , acting through the under secretary for science and technology , shall have the responsibility for — ( 1 ) advising the secretary regarding research and development efforts and priorities in support of the department's missions ; ( 2 ) developing , in consultation with other appropriate executive agencies , a national policy and strategic plan for , identifying priorities , goals , objectives and policies for , and coordinating the federal government's civilian efforts to identify and develop countermeasures to chemical , biological , and other emerging terrorist threats , including the development of comprehensive , research - based definable goals for such efforts and development of annual measurable objectives and specific targets to accomplish and evaluate the goals for such efforts ; ( 3 ) supporting the under secretary for information analysis and infrastructure protection , by assessing and testing homeland security vulnerabilities and possible threats ; ( 4 ) conducting basic and applied research , development , demonstration , testing , and evaluation activities that are relevant to any or all elements of the department , through both intramural and extramural programs , except that such responsibility does not extend to human health - related research and development activities ; ( 5 ) establishing priorities for , directing , funding , and conducting national research , development , test and evaluation , and procurement of technology and systems for — ( a ) preventing the importation of chemical , biological , and related weapons and material ; and ( b ) detecting , preventing , protecting against , and responding to terrorist attacks ; ( 6 ) establishing a system for transferring homeland security developments or technologies to federal , state , local government , and private sector entities ; ( 7 ) entering into work agreements , joint sponsorships , contracts , or any other agreements with the department of energy regarding the use of the national laboratories or sites and support of the science and technology base at those facilities ; ( 8 ) collaborating with the secretary of agriculture and the attorney general as provided in [7 u.s.c .

8401] ; ( 9 ) collaborating with the secretary of health and human services and the attorney general in determining any new biological agents and toxins that shall be listed as 'select agents' in appendix a of [42 c.f.r .

72] , pursuant to [42 u.s.c .

262a] ; ( 10 ) supporting united states leadership in science and technology ; ( 11 ) establishing and administering the primary research and development activities of the department , including the long - term research and development needs and capabilities for all elements of the department ; ( 12 ) coordinating and integrating all research , development , demonstration , testing , and evaluation activities of the department ; ( 13 ) coordinating with other appropriate executive agencies in developing and carrying out the science and technology agenda of the department to reduce duplication and identify unmet needs ; and ( 14 ) developing and overseeing the administration of guidelines for merit review of research and development projects throughout the department , and for the dissemination of research conducted or sponsored by the department .

appendix b .

previous organizational structure of the s&t directorate the present organizational structure of the s&t directorate was announced by under secretary cohen soon after his confirmation in august 2006 .

the restructuring changed both the directorate's functional organization and its operating policies .

an understanding of the previous structure may be helpful when considering budgets and other documents from the period before the change .

then , as now , the directorate had a matrix organization .

research areas known as portfolios were established in the office of programs , planning , and budget ( ppb , subsequently the office of programs , planning , and requirements ) .

the directorate's budgeting aligned with these portfolio topics .

actual management of r&d projects , however , was the responsibility of three other offices , depending on the nature of the work .

intramural r&d was managed by the office of research and development ( ord ) , extramural r&d by the homeland security advanced research projects agency ( hsarpa ) , and systems engineering and prototype transition by the office of systems engineering and development ( sed ) .

the heads of ppb , ord , hsarpa , and sed each reported directly to the under secretary .

only the congressionally authorized hsarpa survives in the current structure , and its scope is greatly reduced .

this particular matrix structure had some potential advantages .

the manager of each portfolio could allocate funds flexibly either within the government or outside it .

portfolio managers could facilitate information flow in their research topic between federal researchers and the private sector .

meanwhile , because ord , hsarpa , and sed each managed parts of multiple portfolios , they could identify and act upon synergies between research areas .

on the other hand , this matrix structure created management challenges and complicated reporting and oversight .

the manager of any given r&d project reported to the head of either ord , hsarpa , or sed but was funded by a portfolio manager in ppb .

conversely , the manager of a portfolio in ppb had only indirect authority over the project managers who executed the r&d he or she was funding .

management reporting chains and lines of budget responsibility met only in the office of the under secretary .

in addition to its inherent difficulties , this situation was unfamiliar and confusing to outside observers , including many in congress .

appendix c. funding history of the s&t directorate for reference , table c - 1 and table c - 2 present historical funding data for the s&t directorate from its inception in fy2003 through its appropriation for fy2009 .

this report does not attempt to track the appropriations process .

for more detailed information on fy2009 funding , see crs report rl34482 , homel and security department: fy2009 appropriations , and crs report rl34448 , federal research and development funding: fy2009 .

table c - 1 is in the directorate's old portfolio structure , as explained in appendix b .

table c - 2 is in the present division structure , as explained in the body of this report .

note that funding for fy2007 appears in both tables: fy2007 funds were appropriated in the old structure , but dhs provided a crosswalk into the new structure for comparison purposes ( for fy2007 only ) .

funding for dndo is shown in table c - 1 in order to allow historical comparisons .

even though dndo is not part of the s&t directorate , it evolved from the directorate's radiological and nuclear countermeasures portfolio before fy2006 , and its funding was appropriated together with the directorate's funding in fy2006 .

appendix d. activities of the s&t directorate a description of the directorate's activities follows .

the six divisions are discussed first , followed by the various offices , and finally activities funded by the directorate's management and administration account .

this aligns with the categories now used in the directorate's congressional budget justifications and in the committee and conference reports on the annual homeland security appropriations bill .

 ( in the appropriations bill itself , all the activities except for management and administration are combined into a single account for research , development , acquisition , and operations. ) .

chemical and biological the chemical and biological division ( fy2009 funding: $200.4 million ) is the largest of the six research divisions .

it works to increase preparedness against agricultural , biological , and chemical threats through improved threat awareness , advanced surveillance and detection , and protective countermeasures .

the agriculture component develops veterinary vaccines and other animal disease countermeasures and models the spread of animal diseases .

the biological countermeasures component includes programs in systems studies and decision support tools , threat awareness , surveillance and detection r&d , surveillance and detection operations , forensics , and response and restoration , but not r&d related to human medical countermeasures , which are the responsibility of the department of health and human services .

the chemical countermeasures component includes chemical threat analysis , development of forensic tools , r&d on chemical detection technologies , and development of technologies for response and recovery .

explosives the explosives division ( fy2009 funding: $96.1 million ) develops technologies to detect , interdict , and lessen the impacts of nonnuclear explosives used in terrorist attacks against mass transit , civil aviation , and critical infrastructure .

the bulk of its effort is devoted to explosives detection , largely through r&d programs that were transferred from the transportation security administration in fy2006 .

it also includes r&d on protecting commercial aircraft against shoulder - fired , surface - to - air missiles ( known as manpads , for man - portable air defense systems ) .

infrastructure and geophysical the infrastructure and geophysical division ( fy2009 funding: $75.8 million ) carries out activities in two main areas: critical infrastructure protection and preparedness and response .

the infrastructure protection component includes technology development for specific infrastructure sectors and geographical regions , modeling and simulation for decision support , and preparation of the national plan for research and development in support of critical infrastructure protection .

the preparedness and response component develops technologies such as protective equipment for first responders and information - management , decision - making , and training tools for incident commanders .

command , control , and interoperability the command , control , and interoperability division ( fy2009 funding: $74.9 million ) is focused on communications for emergency responders , the security and integrity of the internet , and other information - related topics .

its conducts r&d on the interoperability and compatibility of communications equipment ; cyber security ; knowledge management tools ; reconnaissance , surveillance , and investigative technologies ; and threat assessment .

borders and maritime security the borders and maritime security division ( fy2009 funding: $33.0 million ) researches , develops , and transitions technologies to improve the security of u.s. borders and waterways .

it has two focus areas , border protection and cargo security .

the border protection component ( known as border watch ) develops tools for border security law enforcement officers and technologies for detection , identification , apprehension , and enforcement at land and maritime borders .

the cargo security component develops sensor and communications technologies to improve the integrity of cargo container shipments .

human factors the human factors division ( fy2009 funding: $12.5 million ) focuses primarily on the social and behavioral sciences .

its r&d activities include developing biometric technologies for identifying known terrorists and criminals ; understanding user acceptance and application of new technologies ; improving the integration of human operators and technology for transportation security screening ; understanding terrorist motivation , intent , and behavior ; making risk communications more effective ; and better identifying public needs during emergencies .

research ( laboratory facilities and university programs ) the office of research includes the directorate's laboratory facilities ( fy2009 funding: $161.9 million ) and university programs ( fy2009 funding: $50.3 million ) .

its director also liaises with the six research divisions as discussed above .

laboratory facilities funds operation and construction of the s&t directorate's own laboratories .

the activities of the laboratory facilities program are executed by the office of national laboratories , one of a handful of organizational components of the s&t directorate that were established by statute .

university programs manages the directorate's university centers and a program of scholarships and fellowships .

innovation ( hsarpa and sbir ) the office of innovation ( fy2009 funding: $33.0 million ) includes the homeland security advanced research projects agency ( hsarpa ) , another component that was established by statute .

hsarpa has two main programs .

the homeland innovative prototypical solutions program is designed to demonstrate prototypes of high - payoff technologies in two to five years with moderate to high risk .

the high impact technology solutions program is designed to conduct high - risk basic research that provides proofs of concept for potential breakthroughs .

hsarpa also manages the s&t directorate's program of small business innovation research ( sbir ) , which is funded through a mandated set - aside of dhs r&d budget , achieved by setting aside funds from each dhs r&d program .

the director of the office of innovation also liaises with the six research divisions as discussed above .

transition ( safety act and technology clearinghouse ) the office of transition ( fy2009 funding: $28.8 million ) oversees interactions with dhs components outside the s&t directorate to expedite technology transition .

it also manages the office of safety act implementation , which evaluates and qualifies technologies for liability protection in accordance with the safety act , and the statutorily mandated technology clearinghouse .

its director also liaises with the six research divisions as discussed above .

test and evaluation and standards the office of test and evaluation and standards ( fy2009 funding: $28.7 million ) provides technical support and coordination to help emergency responders assess the safety , reliability , and effectiveness of equipment and procedures .

it also aids in establishing test and evaluation methodology for the directorate and acts as the test and evaluation executive for the department as a whole .

special programs the department of homeland security has original classification authority and funds some r&d projects that are classified ( although sec .

306 ( a ) of the homeland security act directs that "to the greatest extent practicable , research conducted or supported by the department shall be unclassified" ) .

the office of special programs oversees the directorate's classified projects .

agency and international liaison the office of agency and international liaison oversees the directorate's international outreach activities and interagency coordination responsibilities .

management and administration other activities of the directorate , including the office of the under secretary , are funded by a separate appropriation for management and administration ( fy2009 funding: $132.1 million ) .

this account also pays the salaries and expenses of all the directorate's federal employees .

