the federal government administers various programs to assist individuals and communities in responding to , recovering from , and preparing for disasters .

for example , after a disaster , some level of federal assistance may be available to rebuild damaged bridges or roads , demolish and dispose of damaged buildings , rebuild schools or hospitals , or rebuild damaged levees .

such projects often have at least some impact on the env ironment , and hence may be required to comply with any of a number of local , tribal , state , or federal environmental laws — including requirements of the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§4321 et seq. ) .

among other provisions , nepa requires federal agencies to assess the potential environmental impacts of a proposed action before proceeding .

exempted from nepa's requirements are emergency response actions under provisions of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act , 42 u.s.c .

§§5121-5206 ) .

these exempted activities include providing essential relief to victims and implementing protective measures necessary to reduce immediate threats to life , property , and public health and safety .

nepa's environmental review requirements may , however , be applicable to long - term recovery projects , such as the modification , mitigation , or expansion of existing structures or the relocation of certain structures located in a floodplain .

most agencies have implemented nepa as an "umbrella" statute .

as such , it forms a framework for the coordination or demonstration of compliance with any study , review , or consultation required by any other environmental law .

the use of nepa in this capacity has led to some confusion .

the need to comply with a separate environmental law such as the clean water act ( cwa ) , endangered species act ( esa ) , or national historic preservation act ( nhpa ) may be identified within the framework of the nepa process , but nepa itself is not the source of the obligation .

if , theoretically , the requirement to comply with nepa were removed , compliance with each applicable law would still be required .

in the past , there has been congressional interest in the nepa implementation process for disaster - related projects .

this interest has been driven , in part , by federal grant applicants who have been confused about both their role in the nepa process and what the law requires .

to address these issues , this report discusses the nepa process as it applies to projects for which federal funding to recover from or prepare for a disaster may be requested by local , tribal , or state grant applicants .

specifically , the report provides an overview of the nepa process as it applies to such projects , identifies the types of projects ( categorized by the federal funding source ) likely to require environmental review , and delineates both the types of projects for which no or minimal environmental review is required ( those for which statutory or categorical exclusions apply ) and those that likely require more in - depth review .

this report focuses on the nepa process as it applies to projects that require grant applicants ( i.e. , state or local agencies ) to provide certain information for their grant requests to be considered eligible for potential approval .

it does not address the nepa process as it applies to disaster - related projects that would likely involve collection of the necessary environmental review documentation by the federal agency responsible for the project ( eg , water resources projects undertaken by the army corps of engineers ) .

two agencies that provide a significant proportion of applicant - requested funding for disaster - related projects are the department of homeland security's federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

therefore , this report primarily discusses the nepa process as it applies to recovery and rebuilding projects funded under those agency programs .

nepa is a procedural statute with twin aims that require agencies to consider the environmental impacts of their proposed actions and inform the public that environmental concerns have been accounted for in the decision - making process .

the nepa process involves the steps an agency must take to demonstrate that it has met these aims .

when a community is devastated by a disaster , it may be overwhelmed by the number of projects that need to be undertaken .

under normal conditions unrelated to a disaster , when a local , tribal , or state agency participates in the nepa process for projects , projects proposed to receive federal funding have generally been planned or , at least to some degree , anticipated .

in the wake of a disaster , however , when entire neighborhoods , towns , or regions may be substantially damaged and in need of repair or reconstruction , agencies can quickly become overburdened by the task of navigating applicable compliance requirements .

coupled with the potential difficulty of determining the various federal funding sources available to recover from damages , local agencies responding to a disaster may become confused about their environmental compliance obligations .

if those obligations are not met , funding will be slowed .

from the federal agency perspective , the commitment to assist in rebuilding structures and facilities and restoring land must be done in a way that will result in greater protection from future disasters .

that is , federal agencies do not want to spend money that may have to be spent again when another disaster strikes .

elements of the nepa process , such as the requirement to demonstrate flood - plain management considerations , help federal agencies meet this goal .

to understand what is required of applicants , it is helpful to understand the types of disaster - related projects associated with various funding sources and the levels of environmental review that may be required for proposed projects .

when a community is devastated by a disaster , all at once it may be faced with the need to rebuild roads , bridges , private homes , and public buildings .

such projects , when undertaken under normal circumstances , may not qualify for federal funding , but when they do , as in the case after a disaster , the federal government must be assured that certain criteria are met before those funds are made available .

among other factors , the federal government needs confirmation that those funds will not be used in a way that increases the likelihood that their investment will be lost if and when another disaster strikes the same area .

further , before a federal agency will provide funds for disaster recovery or rebuilding , it must gain assurance that the project complies with applicable regulations , laws , and executive orders .

the nepa process is a vehicle by which that assurance can be obtained .

