as policymakers contemplate ways to address social security's long - term financial challenges , pension reforms across the world have gained new attention .

this report focuses on chile , one of the most oft - cited cases of pension reform internationally .

in 1981 , chile initiated sweeping reforms that replaced a state - run , pay - as - you - go defined benefit retirement system with a private , defined contribution individual retirement accounts system .

as a pioneer of individual accounts , chile has become a case study for many countries seeking to reform their retirement systems .

although the chilean experience is not directly comparable to the united states situation because of large differences between the countries , the case may offer some valuable insights for policymakers who are interested in individual retirement accounts .

the report begins with a description of the u.s. social security policy debate and a brief comparison of chile and the united states .

it discusses the backdrop against which the chilean pension reforms were implemented .

next , the report explains what chile's individual retirement accounts system is and how it works .

a pension reform bill , which is scheduled for consideration by the chilean congress in 2007 and expected to be passed before may 2008 , is detailed .

the final section provides an assessment of the individual retirement accounts system's performance relative to some of its initial goals .

this section provides a brief assessment of some of the major impacts of chile's individual retirement accounts system .

the section does not analyze potential effects of the reform bill under debate in the chilean congress as of may 2007 .

note that a complete analysis of the chilean individual retirement accounts system cannot be made until the first cohort of workers entirely under the new system reaches retirement age — around 2020 .

obtaining knowledge of other countries' experience with reforms in their social insurance programs has gained importance in recent years as policymakers contemplate how to address social security's long - term financial challenges .

it is difficult , however , to draw general lessons from one country's experience , as there is no universal solution to reform .

social security systems operate differently in different countries ; each faces its own unique set of political and socioeconomic conditions and has a different set of income support programs for the elderly .

moreover , what is viewed as successful or desirable in one country may not be in another .

nevertheless , information of reformed retirement systems around the globe can provide valuable insight to policymakers .

the performance of chile's individual retirement accounts system is mixed .

individual retirement accounts have contributed to the chilean economy in a number of ways and the returns on pension fund investments have been greater than expected .

the system seems to work well for workers with stable jobs who contribute regularly to their accounts over their working lives .

however , the transition to an individual retirement accounts system has proved fiscally expensive for chile .

concerns remain about low participation rates , especially among women and low - income workers , including members of the informal sector .

analysts also agree that administrative costs have been too high .

in an attempt to address these problems and improve the system , a pension reform bill was sent to the chilean congress for consideration in 2007 .

the bill aims to reduce administrative costs , increase benefits , and expand coverage to supplement the shortfalls in the existing system's safety net .

this development suggests that the chilean individual retirement accounts model continues to evolve after 26 years of existence .

