the food and drug administration amendments act ( fdaaa ; p.l .

110-85 ) was signed into law on september 27 , 2007 .

the law reauthorizes four expiring food and drug administration ( fda ) programs and expands the agency's authority to ensure the safety of prescription drugs and biologics , medical devices , and foods .

fdaaa represents the most comprehensive fda legislation since the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( fdama ; p.l .

105-115 ) .

the primary impetus for the legislation was the renewal of fda's authority for two key user fee programs that were set to expire at the end of fy2007: the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa , last reauthorized in 2002 ; p.l .

107-188 ) , and the medical device user fee and modernization act ( mdufma , enacted in 2002 ; p.l .

107-250 ) .

the law also reauthorizes two other expiring authorities , which are related to pediatric pharmaceuticals: the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca , last reauthorized in 2002 ; p.l .

107-109 ) , and the pediatric research equity act ( prea , enacted in 2002 ; p.l .

108-155 ) .

in addition to the reauthorizations , fdaaa contains several other fda - related provisions .

these include provisions designed to enhance drug safety , spark the development of pediatric medical devices , expand the types of trials and the substance of information in clinical trial databases , create a new nonprofit entity to assist fda with its mission , improve food safety , and affect a number of other areas related to public health .

several of fdaaa's provisions contain the authorization to appropriate funding ; these are listed in appendix a .

many create additional responsibilities with deadlines for federal agency personnel ; see appendix b .

in addition , several of the authorities have sunset dates in 2012 or early 2013 ; see appendix c .

fdaaa's impact on fda is important to two ongoing policy discussions .

one discussion centers around the possibility of additional legislation to refine or restructure the agency's regulatory role .

understanding current law , as amended by fdaaa , is a good starting point for any such discussion .

the second discussion is that of medical products in the health care system .

the agency plays a critical role in bringing medical products to market , which is described below .

in performing that role , as refined by fdaaa , fda's regulation of medical products affects their quality , availability , and cost within the health care system .

title i of fdaaa , the prescription drug user fee amendments of 2007 ( referred to as pdufa iv ) , provides a five - year extension of fda's authority to collect user fees from manufacturers of drug and biological products and expands the authorized uses of fee revenue .

user fee revenue has provided an increasing proportion of fda funding since pdufa was first enacted in 1992 .

in fy1994 , the first year fda noted pdufa revenue use in its budget justification documents , the fees contributed 9.7% of the human drug program's budget .

at the time of fdaaa's passage , the fy2007 budget showed that pdufa fees made up 44.7% of the agency's human drug program budget .

in the years leading to pdufa's enactment in 1992 , fda , consumers , and manufacturers all sought to shorten the time between a manufacturer's submission of an application and the agency's decision on whether to approve the product .

fda lacked the funding for staff to review those products quickly .

with pdufa , congress gave fda a revenue source to supplement direct appropriations .

congress also structured pdufa to restrict the use of collected funds to new product review , and established a mechanism for agency - industry collaboration to create performance goals that set targets , primarily for review times .

pdufa has had a range of effects .

new application review times decreased from 29 months in 1987 to 17 months in 1994 .

pdufa's restriction of the use of fee revenue to premarket review created what many saw as an imbalance between resources available to premarket and postmarket activities .

in its 1997 and 2002 reauthorizations , congress gave fda limited authority to use some of the fees for postmarket safety activities .

during 2004 discussions in preparation for pdufa iv , several safety problems with aggressively marketed drugs — such as vioxx — received wide publicity .

this heightened the ongoing concern over the balance of attention between premarket review and postapproval safety monitoring .

fdaaa reflects that increased focus on postapproval drug safety throughout , but especially in this title , described below , and in title ix ( enhanced authorities regarding postmarket safety of drugs ) , discussed later in this report .

title i of fdaaa addresses types of fees , authorized fee revenue , authorized uses of fees , new fees for the advisory review of direct - to - consumer television advertisements , reauthorization and report requirements , and effective dates , as summarized in the following material .

types of fees .

fdaaa reauthorizes the assessment , collection , and use of three types of fees from manufacturers of drugs and biological products .

these are application fees , establishment fees , and product fees .

authorized fee revenue .

fdaaa establishes fee revenues , for each fiscal year , of $392,783,000 , with various adjustments for inflation , workload , rent and rent - related expenses , and final - year adjustments .

congress added to that base amount fee revenues for drug safety totaling $225 million over the five - year reauthorization .

authorized uses of fees .

the new law expands the list of postmarket safety activities for which the fees could be used .

these include developing and using adverse - event data - collection systems , including information technology systems ; developing and using improved analytical tools to assess potential safety problems , including access to external data bases ; and implementing and enforcing new ffdca requirements relating to postapproval studies and clinical trials , labeling changes , risk evaluation and mitigation strategies , and adverse event reports and postmarket safety activities .

fdaaa also removes the calendar and time limitations on postapproval activities .

when congress first allowed pdufa revenue use on postmarket activities in 2002 , it set a three - year limit from the time of a drug's approval .

new fees for advisory review of advertisements .

fdaaa creates a new user fee to support fda's advisory review of prescription - drug television advertising .

the program calls for a manufacturer to pay a fee if it voluntarily submits an advertisement for pre - dissemination review .

the review is to be advisory .

the law authorizes fda to assess fees only on manufacturers that request such reviews .

it further directs that if the secretary has not received at least $11.25 million in fees by 120 days after enactment , the dtc advisory review user fee program shall not commence and all collected fees shall be refunded .

reauthorization and report requirements .

fdaaa codifies certain core elements of the prescription drug user fee program that , although included in pdufa i , ii , and iii , were never placed into the ffdca .

one is the requirement for annual performance and fiscal reports to congress .

the others relate to the secretary's interaction and communication with various stakeholders .

these include public hearings regarding the secretary's negotiations with industry regarding performance goals ; and the requirement that the secretary , in preparation for the next pdufa reauthorization , consult with congressional committees , scientific and academic experts , health - care professionals , representatives of patient and consumer advocacy groups , and the regulated industry to develop recommendations for pdufa v , including goals and plans for meeting the goals .

effective dates .

the amendments in this title took effect on october 1 , 2007 .

authority to assess , collect , and use drug fees ceases to be effective october 1 , 2012 .

the reporting requirements cease to be effective january 31 , 2013 .

title ii of fdaaa , the medical device user fee amendments of 2007 ( mdufa 2007 ) , reauthorizes fda's authority to collect user fees from medical device manufacturers , and makes certain other amendments to the regulation of devices .

congress initially gave the agency the authority to collect such fees in 2002 , with the medical device user fee and modernization act ( mdufma ; p.l .

107-250 ) .

mdufma established user fees for premarket applications ( pmas ) , premarket notifications ( 510 ( k ) s ) , and other types of requests to market medical devices .

the 2002 law incorporated , by reference , performance goals for many types of premarket device reviews .

it also enabled third - parties to conduct establishment inspections , and added new regulatory requirements for reprocessed single - use devices .

in fy2007 , when fdaaa was enacted , medical device user fees generated $35,202,000 .

this represents an increase of 144.7% over the amount first collected in fy2003 .

in fy2007 , devices user fees comprised 9.0% of the agency's user fee revenue , and 1.8% of its total budget .

fda's authority to collect medical device user fees was due to expire on october 1 , 2007 .

congress reauthorizes the authority in mdufa 2007 , subtitle a .

in subtitle b , it amends some aspects of the regulation of medical devices .

the details of each of these are discussed below .

title iii of fdaaa is the pediatric medical device safety and improvement act of 2007 ( pmdsia ) .

pmdsia was enacted based upon reports of a critical need for pediatric medical devices that help diagnose and treat diseases and conditions affecting children .

apparently , developing medical devices for children is less profitable and more problematic than developing them for adults .

fewer children need medical devices than adults , and children have physical attributes ( eg , size , biochemistry , growth rates ) , activities , and environmental influences that are different from those of adults .

in order to encourage the development of the pediatric devices , pmdsia creates some new reporting requirements related to certain pediatric devices , offers several types of incentives to manufacturers to create pediatric medical devices , and gives fda the authority to require postmarket studies of approved pediatric devices to ensure their continued efficacy and safety .

pmdsia creates a set of reporting requirements for applications made under ffdca 515 and 520 ( m ) .

section 515 governs pmas to market class iii devices ( these require fda's highest level of safety controls ) .

section 520 ( m ) governs humanitarian device exemptions ( hdes ) .

an hde allows a manufacturer with a device aimed at a u.s. patient population of less than 4,000 to market the product without having to demonstrate its effectiveness ( only its safety ) , and to have certain application fees waived .

the exemption from proving effectiveness is designed to encourage manufacturers to develop medical devices for these small markets , assisting patients with rare diseases and conditions who might otherwise not be served .

pmdsia creates requirements for both types of applications , inserting a new section , 515a , into the medical device approval regulations .

section 515a requires those requesting approval to market a device under 515 and 520 ( m ) to include , if readily available , a description of any pediatric subpopulation with the disease or condition that the devices is intended to treat , and the number of affected pediatric patients .

section 515a also allows the secretary to conclude that adult data can be used to support a reasonable assurance of effectiveness in pediatric subpopulations , as appropriate .

the section also requires the secretary to report annually to relevant congressional committees , specified information about pediatric devices approved in the preceding year .

pmdsia creates one set of incentives for manufacturers to create pediatric medical devices by making some modifications directly to the hde .

primarily , pmdsia exempts some specified manufacturers of pediatric devices from the general hde prohibition on selling a device for an amount that exceeds its costs of research and development , fabrication , and distribution .

the exemption extends only to specified requests submitted on or before october 1 , 2012 .

pmdsia gives the secretary specified pricing - exemption related enforcement and inspection authorities , and creates reporting requirements for adverse events related to devices that qualify for the pricing exemption .

the law also requires the comptroller general to submit a report to relevant congressional committees on the impact of the pricing exemption .

regarding funding for research on pediatric medical devices , the pmdsia requires the secretary to establish a demonstration project to promote pediatric device development .

the law authorizes $6 million per year for fy2008 through fy2012 to support the demonstration grants and related activities .

the law also requires the national institutes of health ( nih ) director to designate a contact point to help pediatric medical device developers locate funding .

in addition , it requires the secretary to submit a plan for expanding pediatric medical device research and development to relevant congressional committees .

finally , the pmdsia incorporates certain postmarket surveillance measures related to pediatric medical devices .

it expands the conditions under which the secretary may require postmarket studies as a condition of approval for class ii or iii devices to include devices expected to have significant use in pediatric subpopulations .

these studies may exceed the general 36-month limitation in duration if necessary to assess the impact of the device on pediatric populations' growth and development .

the pmdsia also includes a related dispute resolution provision , entitling a manufacturer to request a review , during which the device may not be deemed misbranded except as necessary to protect public health .

fda has approved for adult use many products never tested in children .

yet clinicians often prescribe them for children believing that the safety and effectiveness demonstrated with adults would hold for younger patients .

however , this off - label prescribing can result in children receiving products that do not work for them , or receiving too much or too little of a potentially useful drug .

studies show that , depending on the maturation and development of a child's organs and other factors , some drugs vary in how long they stay in the body , affecting their usefulness .

some side effects are unique to children or children of specific ages , including effects on growth and development .

recognizing the obstacles ( which could be economic , ethical , legal , or mechanical ) that make manufacturers reluctant to conduct research to address these questions , fda and congress developed two approaches to facilitate pediatric research .

fdaaa continues both programs .

the first , the pediatric research equity act ( fdaaa title iv , discussed in this section ) is a mandatory program that requires pediatric assessments as part of every new application regarding a new ingredient , indication , dosage form , dosing regimen , or route of administration .

the second , the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( fdaaa title v , discussed in the following section of this report ) is voluntary , offering a six - month marketing exclusivity for a product in return for pediatric studies .

in 1998 , fda published the pediatric rule , which mandated that manufacturers submit pediatric testing data , referred to as a pediatric assessment , at the time of all new drug applications .

in 2002 , a federal court declared the rule invalid , holding that fda lacked the statutory authority to promulgate it .

congress gave fda that authority with the enactment of the pediatric research equity act of 2003 ( prea ; p.l .

108-155 ) .

prea requirements cover all drug and biological product applications or supplements to applications concerning a new active ingredient , new indication , new dosage form , new dosing regiment , or new route of administration .

the act includes provisions for deferrals and waivers .

prea also authorizes the secretary to require the sponsor of an already approved and marketed drug or biological product to submit a pediatric assessment based on criteria described in the law .

the pediatric research equity act of 2007 , title iv of fdaaa , reauthorizes prea , amending it to strengthen standards for required tests , explanation of deferrals , labeling , and publicly accessible information .

prea now requires the secretary to establish an internal committee , composed of fda employees with specified expertise , to participate in the review of pediatric plans and assessments , deferrals , and waivers .

the law requires the secretary to track assessments and labeling changes and to make that information publicly accessible ; establishes a dispute resolution procedure , which allows the commissioner , after specified steps , to deem a drug to be misbranded if a manufacturer refuses to make a requested labeling change ; and includes review and reporting reporting requirements for adverse events .

prea requires reports from both the institute of medicine ( iom ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) .

it also continues to link the program's authorization to the five - year authority fdaaa provides to the pediatric exclusivity program .

 ( see discussion of fdaaa title v in the next section of this report. ) .

title v of fdaaa reauthorizes and changes legislation first passed in 1997 .

as part of the fda modernization act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-115 ) , congress provided drug manufacturers with a financial incentive to conduct pediatric use studies on their patented products .

the "pediatric studies of drugs" provision provided that if a manufacturer complied with a written fda request for a specific pediatric study , fda would add six months to its market exclusivity for that product .

this tool is the second approach that fda and congress have taken to encouraging pediatric drug research , the other , required pediatric assessments of new products , is discussed in the preceding section of this report regarding fdaaa title iv .

in 2002 , the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca 2002 ; p.l .

107-109 ) reauthorized the exclusivity provisions for another five years .

it also added provisions to encourage pediatric research of products that were no longer covered by patent or other marketing exclusivity agreements , to which pediatric exclusivity was not relevant .

it required the secretary to list those off - patent products for which pediatric studies are needed to assess safety and effectiveness .

it also established an off - patent research fund at nih ( phsa 409i ) and authorized appropriations of $200 million for fy2002 and such sums as are necessary for each of the five years until the provisions were set to sunset on october 1 , 2007 .

for on - patent drugs whose manufacturers declined fda's written requests for studies ( and , therefore , exclusivity ) , bpca 2002 amended ffdca 505a to allow fda to refer drugs needing pediatric studies to the foundation for the nih ( fnih , phsa 499 ) , creating a second program of fda - nih collaboration .

other provisions in the 2002 bpca included giving priority status to pediatric supplemental applications ; the establishment of an fda office of pediatric therapeutics ( opt ) ; the definition of pediatric age groups to include neonates ; and a direction to the secretary to contract with the iom for a review of regulations , federally prepared or supported reports , and federally supported evidence - based research , all relating to clinical research involving children .

the iom report to congress was also to include recommendations on best practices relating to research involving children .

title v of fdaaa again reauthorizes the pediatric exclusivity program , amending ffdca 505a to sunset on october 1 , 2012 .

it also encourages research on off - patent products , strengthens the requirements for labeling changes based on the results of pediatric use studies , and provides for the reporting of adverse events .

fdaaa authorizes the secretary to grant additional marketing exclusivity , for both new drugs and drugs already on the market , only after a sponsor has completed and reported on the studies that the secretary has requested in writing , including appropriate formulations of the drug for each age group of interest , and after any appropriate labeling changes are approved , all within the agreed upon time frames .

an applicant who turns down a request on the grounds that developing appropriate pediatric formulations of the drug is not possible must provide evidence to support that claim .

the new law requires that the sponsor propose pediatric labeling resulting from the studies .

for a product studied under this section , the labeling must include study results and the secretary's determination whether those results demonstrate the drug's safety and effectiveness ( if the results do or do not indicate safety and effectiveness , or if they are inconclusive ) .

the product sponsor must disseminate labeling change information to health care providers , and the commissioner must report to the secretary on the review of all adverse event reports and recommendations on actions in response .

other provisions of the law set time frames for the actions it requires .

public notice requirements are expanded beyond the current notice of an exclusivity decision to include copies of the written request .

the secretary must also publicly identify any drug with a developed pediatric formulation that studies had demonstrated to be safe and effective for children that an applicant has not introduced onto the market within one year .

a new dispute resolution process includes referral to the pediatric advisory committee .

the internal review committee , which fdaaa title iv requires the secretary to establish , must review all written requests .

the secretary , with that committee , must track all pediatric studies and labeling changes according to specified questions .

other provisions require applicants to submit , along with the report of requested studies , all postmarket adverse event reports regarding that drug ; refine study scope to allow the secretary to include preclinical studies ; and except from exclusivity any drug with another exclusivity that is to expire in less than nine months .

fdaaa amends phsa section 409i ( as discussed earlier ) , which required that the secretary , through the nih director and in consultation with the commissioner and pediatric research experts , list approved drugs for which pediatric studies are needed to assess safety and effectiveness .

it changes the specifications from an annual list of approved drugs to a list , revised every three years , of priority study needs in pediatric therapeutics , including drugs or indications .

if the secretary determines there is a need for pediatric information for a drug for which pediatric studies have not been completed , the secretary must either issue a proposal to award a grant to conduct such studies , if funds are available through fnih , or refer the drug for inclusion on the list established under phsa section 409i .

fdaaa also requires reports from the iom and the gao .

the provisions in title v of fdaaa make up the following two tables: the first addressing amendments to ffdca , the second relating to phsa .

title vii of fdaaa , conflicts of interest , contains provisions that revise fda's approach to advisory committee members' conflicts of interest .

fda uses advisory committees to provide the agency with independent advice from outside experts on issues related to human and veterinary drugs , biological products , medical devices , and food .

advisory committees make recommendations to fda , which fda may or may not follow .

to be credible and useful , many say that fda must eliminate or reduce conflicts of interest in its committees .

however , others note that the most expert members in the field are often those involved directly or indirectly in the activities about which fda is seeking advice , creating the potential for such conflicts .

in 2006 and 2007 , the media reported that fda advisory committees are biased in favor of drug approval , and that many committee members have conflicts of interest .

prior to the passage of fdaaa , the law generally required that committee members be free from conflicts of interest , but allowed for exceptions to that rule under specific circumstances .

a conflict of interest might have required a potential committee member to disclose the conflict , refrain from voting , and / or not participate in a committee , depending on the nature of the conflict .

the law was articulated primarily in three locations: ( 1 ) the federal advisory committee act ( 5 usc appendix ; faca ) ; ( 2 ) the fda advisory committee policy ( 21 usc 355 ( n ) ) , which applied only to trials of drugs and biologics — not devices ; and ( 3 ) a law governing special government employees — such as advisory committee members — acts affecting personal financial interest ( 18 usc 208 ) .

fdaaa inserts a new provision into chapter vii , subchapter a , of the ffdca , effective october 1 , 2007 .

the provision changes both the process of recruiting advisory committee members , as well as some circumstances under which and processes by which conflict - of - interest waivers may be granted .

the new provisions repeal 21usc 355 ( n ) , but move much of its substance to a new location ; the effect is that the requirements previously only applicable to drug and biologic advisory committees apply to committees providing advice on all types of products that fda regulates .

fdaaa defines an advisory committee as a faca - covered entity that provides the secretary with advice and recommendations regarding activities of the fda , and defines financial interest as defined under 18 usc 208 ( a ) .

this definition covers activities such as a person's or their family members' current or future employment , trusteeship , or directorship .

on its face , it does not apply to activities such as stock ownership , former employment , or receipt of a grant or contract , although fda's regulations do require disclosure of these types of activities .

fdaaa requires advisory committee member recruitment mechanisms to be focused on reaching experts from areas such as academia , medical research institutions , and public interest and consumer groups .

it also discourages the number of permissible exceptions to the financial conflict rules , such as the use of waivers or written certifications .

fdaaa requires advisory committee members' full financial disclosure prior to a meeting on a related matter .

it precludes participation by a member with a conflict of interest unless exempted by the office of government ethics .

the act also allows a waiver of the voting restriction if necessary to provide the committee with essential expertise .

fdaaa restricts the percentage of committees' membership that may consist of people who have received one of three types of exceptions to the financial conflict prohibitions: ( 1 ) waivers granted by the secretary under newly created fdaaa provisions , ( 2 ) written determinations under 18 usc 208 ( b ) ( 1 ) , and ( 3 ) written certifications under 208 ( b ) ( 3 ) .

the secretary is required to determine the number and proportion of advisory members who received exceptions in fy2007 .

for fy2008 through fy2012 , the secretary must reduce the proportion of excepted members by an additional 5% per year from the fy2007 number .

this limitation does not apply to financial interest exemptions made under 18 usc 208 ( b ) ( 2 ) .

fdaaa requires public disclosures for conflict - of - interest determinations , certifications , and waivers ( but not 208 ( b ) ( 2 ) exemptions ) , except for those exempted from disclosure under the freedom of information act of 1974 ( 5 usc 522 ) .

it requires the secretary to submit annual reports regarding advisory committee membership and conflict - of - interest waivers .

it also requires the secretary to review and update fda conflict - of - interest guidance not less than once every five years .

title viii of fdaaa , clinical trial databases , expands requirements for the registration of clinical trials , and adds requirements for the publication of their results .

the text of the title was arrived at after extensive discussions , which required an understanding of the nature of scientific inquiry and medical product development .

scientific inquiry is , at its best , an objective exercise in which results are not pre - ordained , and all valid findings are published .

medical product development depends upon traditional scientific methods , and product sponsors are typically business enterprises .

prior to marketing , product sponsors are required to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of their products , typically through clinical trials .

however , both sponsors and medical journals may be reluctant to publish the results of trials that fail to show that products perform better than a placebo , or that raise too many safety concerns .

in 2004 , congress and others raised questions about the safety and effectiveness of several fda - approved products ( eg , antidepressants , anti - inflammatory drugs , and cardiac stents ) about which unfavorable trial results had not been publicly disclosed .

the issue of public access to all trial results , regardless of their findings , then gained significant traction .

prior to the enactment of fdaaa , clinical trial registration was required at the outset of certain clinical trials testing drugs to treat life - threatening diseases or conditions .

this requirement was criticized because it did not mandate the registration of a broader range of trials , because it contained no enforcement mechanism , and because it did not require the posting of trial results .

title viii of fdaaa contains provisions related to all three criticisms .

fdaaa's provisions apply to trials involving not only drugs , but also devices and biologics .

the act includes requirements pertaining to most clinical trials beyond phase i .

in general , fdaaa requires that specified information be submitted by the trial's responsible party ( rp ; usually the trial sponsor ) , to the nih director .

following submission , the nih director is to make the information publicly available via the internet , with specified exceptions .

enforcement mechanisms are provided for noncompliant rps .

for the purpose of carrying out the clinical trials database provisions , fdaaa authorizes $10,000,000 for each fiscal year .

further details of the way that fdaaa amends current law are discussed below , in subsections entitled registry ; results ; coordination , compliance , and enforcement ; and other items .

title ix of fdaaa gives the fda new authorities to ensure drug safety and effectiveness .

these build on decades of incremental additions to fda's regulatory scope and its ability to identify drug safety problems and to correct or minimize them .

since the 1938 passage of the ffdca , the manufacturer of a new drug has had to demonstrate to fda the product's safety before the agency would approve it for marketing in the united states .

in 1962 , the harris - kefauver amendments to the ffdca added product effectiveness to the premarket requirements .

fda cannot assert that any drug is completely safe .

instead , it considers whether , given the available information , the drug is safe enough when used correctly by the types of individuals and for the diseases or conditions for which it was tested .

fda and others must remain alert to new information as those drugs are used more widely because , until a very large number of individuals have taken a drug , a rare adverse effect may not occur or a very common condition may not be recognized as drug - associated .

prior to fdaaa , the law allowed fda to require a postmarket study as a condition of its initial approval of a marketing application , but did not authorize fda to add such requirements after approval .

the law did not allow fda to require that manufacturers submit drug advertising material for review or approval before dissemination .

neither did it provide for civil penalties , authorizing only the revocation of approval or licensing ( or the threat of revocation ) to compel manufacturers to change labeling or advertising .

title x of fdaaa , entitled food safety , contains provisions designed to enhance fda's authority and responsibilities to ensure the safety of the food supply .

these were added to fdaaa after several widely reported outbreaks of food - borne illness that affected hundreds of individuals .

in response , many members of congress expressed concern about both domestic and imported food products and whether the current food safety system is adequate for handling the current globalized food supply .

as enacted , fdaaa requires the secretary to establish processing and ingredient standards , update labeling requirements for pet food , and establish an early warning and surveillance system to identify adulteration and outbreaks of illness associated with pet food .

the secretary is to work with states to improve the safety of produce and strengthen state food safety programs .

the act requires the creation of a registry for reportable information on foods ( including human and animal products ) with safety problems that allows for the identification of the supply chain of the reportable food .

alerts are to be issued for such foods , with records maintained and available for inspection .

additional provisions require attention to aquaculture and seafood inspection , environmental risks associated with genetically engineered seafood products , imported foods , pesticide monitoring and ginseng dietary supplements .

title xi of fdaaa , entitled other provisions , contains provisions relating to a number of topics .

it is divided into two subtitles .

subtitle a — in general covers a range of topics: fda employee publications , tropical disease treatments , genetic tests , nih , and severability of fdaaa .

subtitle b — antibiotic access and innovation focuses solely on that issue .

both are discussed below .

the first topic addressed in subtitle a is agency clearance of employee scientific publications .

the secretary is required to establish and make publicly available clear written policies to implement the publication provisions .

for fda officers or employees who are directed by policy to obtain agency review or clearance prior to their work's publication or presentation , fdaaa provides a timeline for such review or clearance .

nothing in the policy is to be construed as affecting any restrictions on publication or presentation provided by other law .

the second topic addressed in subtitle a is the introduction of a priority review voucher as an incentive to develop medical products that treat tropical diseases .

qualifying diseases are those listed in the law , and any other infectious disease the secretary designates by regulation .

diseases designated by regulation must disproportionately affect poor and marginalized populations , and must have treatments with no significant market in developed nations .

the fdaaa provision adds a new use to the older fda priority review mechanism .

rather than ( or in addition to ) providing the possible financial benefit of priority review to a sponsor for its tropical disease product application , fdaaa directs fda to reward that sponsor for developing that product by giving it a priority review voucher that it can use for any one proposed subsequent product that would not otherwise qualify for priority review .

the new provision further alters fda's priority review mechanism by allowing the tropical disease product sponsor to transfer the voucher , including by sale , to another entity .

the secretary is to establish a user fee program and set the fee amounts for sponsors of human drug applications that are the subject of a priority review voucher .

the third topic addressed is the regulation of genetic testing .

fdaaa requires that , if the specified secretary's advisory committee does not complete and submit its report and recommendations regarding regulation and oversight of genetic testing to the secretary by july 2008 , the secretary is to enter into a contract with the iom to conduct a study and issue a report on the topic .

the fourth topic consists of technical amendments to sections of the phsa ( 42 usc 201 et seq .

 ) , making five changes .

though the section is titled "nih technical amendments," the first provision does not apply to nih , but is rather a correction to p.l .

109-417 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act , and applies to the hospital preparedness program administered by the hhs assistant secretary for preparedness and response .

the provision amends phsa section 319c - 2 to make appropriate reference to the applicable funding formula for hospital preparedness and surge capacity grants .

the second provision adds minority health disparities to the types of data that the nih director is to assemble to assess research priorities .

the third provision adds postdoctoral training funded through research grants to the list of research activities that the nih director is required to catalog in a biennial report to congress .

the fourth provision designates phsa 403c ( relating to the drug diethylstilbestrol ) as 403d .

the fifth provision specifies that each institution that receives an nih award for training graduate students under its subchapter ( phsa , title iv , part a ) need only report to nih information regarding postdoctoral training funded through research grants , and not each degree - granting program at the institution .

it further indicates that leaves of absence are to be subtracted when calculating the average time between graduate study and receipt of a doctoral degree .

the fifth topic addressed is severability .

it directs that if any provision of fdaaa is found to be unconstitutional , the remainder of the act shall remain in effect .

fdaaa addresses antibiotic access and innovation by amending both the ffdca and the phsa .

it also requires a gao report assessing the effect of these provisions .

under separate sections of the ffdca , fda both regulates antibiotics and provides incentives for the development of orphan drugs .

fdaaa links those approaches by amending the orphan drug act to require the commissioner to consider ( including convening a public meeting ) which serious and life - threatening infectious diseases might be designated as rare diseases .

if appropriate , the secretary , by issuing new guidance , could designate product development activities for those diseases as qualifying for grants and contracts under the orphan drug act .

fdaaa also extends the secretary's authority to issue grants and contracts for orphan drug development , and authorizes the appropriation of $30 million for each of fy2008 through fy2012 .

fdaaa also adds a new subsection to ffdca that allows a sponsor to consider as the same active ingredient a specific kind of chemical variant ( a non - racemic drug ) of an ingredient in an approved ( racemic ) drug .

in addition , a separate provision of the law amends the phsa to require the secretary , through the commissioner , to make publicly available clinically susceptible concentrations of bacteria ( amounts that characterize the level of bacterial susceptibility and resistance to a drug ) .

appendix a .

authorized appropriations appendix b .

action items with deadlines for government officials the following chart contains a listing of fdaaa action items with deadlines for government officials .

it is broken down by fdaaa title .

within each title , action items are listed by deadline .

more detailed information regarding each of the items in the chart is available in the section of this report that corresponds to the title in which it is listed .

the following notes may be helpful to the reader .

first , the chart includes federal agency personnel deadlines with specific dates only .

it does not list deadlines for action by non - governmental personnel , though fdaaa includes many of these .

neither does it list required actions for federal agency personnel that have no specific deadlines , though fdaaa contains many of these as well .

second , for user ease , the title of the person required to take action is bolded .

third , for items that require action at regular intervals ( such as annual reports ) , only the initial item is listed by date .

the requirement for recurrence is specified in the text .

appendix c. authorities with sunset dates appendix d. alphabetical list of acronym .

