the davis - bacon act of 1931 ( as amended ) requires that not less than the locally prevailing wage be paid to workers employed under federal construction contracts .

it also affects manpower utilization on such projects: for example , the employment of helpers or unskilled and semi - skilled general utility workers .

with respect to the implementation of the act , congress has assigned wide administrative responsibility to the secretary of labor , but legislative oversight has been more or less continuous at least since the 1950s .

through the years , davis - bacon provisions have been written into numerous program statutes .

application of the act to these ( and to new ) legislative programs has continued to spark congressional interest .

some urge that the prevailing wage statute is as important now as in the 1930s .

others contend that the requirement should be set aside in order to stretch construction dollars by permitting payment of less than prevailing rates .

frequently , davis - bacon ( or the prevailing rate question ) has been contested within the context of program statutes in which wages were not the central focus of debate but that were , nonetheless , of considerable importance to employers , to workers , and to the communities in which they operate .

this report is essentially a tracking document .

it traces the most recent interests by congress in the davis - bacon act and suggests the concerns that have been and are being voiced with respect to the act .

in 1931 , at the urging of the hoover administration , congress enacted prevailing wage legislation for federal contract construction .

the legislation was cosponsored by representative robert bacon and senator james davis: thus , the davis - bacon act .

the act was significantly amended in 1935 and its scope broadened .

in 1964 , the definition of prevailing wage was expanded to include a fringe benefits component .

otherwise , the act remains essentially in its 1935 form .

although there have been intermittent efforts to repeal the davis - bacon act and the related copeland "anti - kickback" act ( 1934 ) , such initiatives have been consistently rejected by congress .

by the 1950s , congress had begun to add davis - bacon provisions to various program statutes in which federal funding made the work possible .

but , such extensions of coverage ( which would involve new and different types of contract work and a new body of contractors ) seem to have sparked increased uneasiness with the act .

through the years , arguments for and against davis - bacon have become largely fixed , as have counter arguments of defenders and critics .

in the evolving debate , few contentions about the act have gone ( or are likely to go ) unchallenged .

on both sides , there are assertions that advocates tend to accept without question .

current policy debate has focused upon whether to attempt to strengthen or diminish the davis - bacon impact or to repeal the statute outright .

outlined below are some of the arguments advanced by critics and by defenders of davis - bacon expressed in summary as each side in the ongoing debate might state them .

in policy terms , the division of opinion seems to be in some measure philosophical , reflecting basic attitudes toward labor - management relations rather than a division along partisan political lines .

perhaps the most frequently asked question concerning the davis - bacon act is: how much money could be saved if davis - bacon were repealed or modified to narrow its scope ? .

the short answer is probably: no one really knows .

conversely , does davis - bacon save money for the federal government in its purchases of construction ; for example , employment of more highly skilled workers on davis - bacon projects ? .

here again , a response may also be uncertain .

davis - bacon literature is extensive and diverse , much of it in the form of public materials ( i.e. , agency reports and analyses ) .

journalists have taken a continuing interest in the act , resulting in a substantial popular literature .

serious academic studies may be fewer .

it is extremely difficult for an independent scholar to review the administration of the act to assess its impact .

first .

there is the scope of the task: vast numbers of projects scattered throughout the united states , administered by different agencies and involving hundreds of contractors and subcontractors , working under dissimilar circumstances and in diverse labor markets .

second .

there is the problem of the availability of documentation .

since the contractors involved are of the private sector , how much useful information has been preserved ? .

third .

access presents a problem .

assuming that the data and documents have been preserved and could be made available , securing such documentation ( and access to administrative personnel ) may be problematic , both from the private sector ( contractors , workers and unions ) and from the various public agencies .

if one assumes that documentation exists , access is allowed , that all of the parties are cooperative , and that the means , financial and other , are available for such an undertaking , there remains a fourth and , perhaps , most difficult complication .

the analyst would be comparing something that did happen with something that in fact , for whatever reasons , did not happen .

payroll records , labor - management relationships , availability of skilled workers , quality of supervision , internal agency memoranda , etc. , all relate to an actual project and not to what might have happened under other circumstances .

in the absence of a davis - bacon requirement , would the contract have gone to the same contractor ? .

if so ( or if not ) , would the contract have been managed in the same way ? .

did the act have any impact upon the wages actually paid or upon workforce utilization ? .

without davis - bacon , would different workers have been employed ? .

the work of a governmental researcher may be further complicated by political or public policy considerations .

for all of these reasons , there appear to be significant gaps in our knowledge of the act and of its administration despite oversight by congress , extensive study by public and private agencies , and the work of individual scholars .

further , few studies of the act , whether public or private , have escaped criticism on grounds of flawed methodology or inadequate sample size .

thus , precise estimates of impacts ought to be viewed with considerable caution .

during each congress , some measures have normally been introduced that would strengthen , diminish , or repeal the davis - bacon act .

generally , the issues have been contentious and , in some cases , have been a threat to enactment of the underlying measures .

there follows a series of davis - bacon related issues upon which some legislative action has been taken during the 110 th congress .

in some cases , the presence of a davis - bacon proposal does not appear to have been an impediment to enactment ; in other cases , davis - bacon seems to have been determinant .

through more than a decade , authorization for funding of the clean water act state revolving fund ( cwa / srf ) has been a matter of contention with the authorizing committees of both the house and the senate .

each time a bill has been brought up for consideration , various issues were raised — among them , coverage under the davis - bacon act — and , ultimately , the bills died .

in the 110 th congress , consideration of the cwa / srf issue commenced in the house very early in 2007 , with davis - bacon an essential ingredient in the proceedings .

although the house has passed the cwa / srf , it has not been acted upon in the senate .

on january 12 , 2007 , representative nick rahall introduced h.r .

6 , the creating long - term energy alternatives for the nation act of 2007 .

a week later , the bill was adopted by the house ( 264 ayes to 163 nays ) and was subsequently placed on the senate legislative calendar .

ultimately , the bill was adopted by each body , becoming p.l .

110-140 .

the farm , nutrition , and bioenergy act of 2007 ( h.r .

2419 ) , as passed by the house , contains loan guarantees for biorefineries and biofuel production facilities .

it was the construction of these plants that suggested a davis - bacon provision and encouraged the committee on agriculture to propose one .

h.r .

2419 was passed by the house on july 27 , 2007 , with davis - bacon a part of the new farm bill .

on december 14 , 2007 , a much expanded farm bill was approved by the senate ( apparently without davis - bacon ) .

the senate asked for a conference .

that request did not meet with an immediate response ; and , the process continued into the spring without resolution and is ongoing .

in the wake of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there was a substantial restructuring of portions of the american government — a process that included the creation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

h.r .

2638 of the 110 th congress proposed additional funding and certain further adjustments in the agency's structure .

the house - passed bill ( june 15 , 2007 ) did contain a davis - bacon provision ; but , senate consideration was overtaken by a consolidated appropriations bill ( h.r .

2764 : p.l .

110-161 ) .

in the process , legislation was passed seemingly without reference to davis - bacon .

on january 17 , 2008 , representative kathy castor called up h.res .

922 , a resolution to make in order consideration of the bill h.r .

3524 , the hope vi improvement and reauthorization act of 2007 .

following debate , the house passed the measure with a davis - bacon provision included .

the bill was dispatched to the senate where it was referred to the committee on banking , housing and urban affairs .

during the spring of 2007 , two bills were introduced ( h.r .

1328 and s. 1200 ) , respectively in the house and in the senate , that dealt with improvements in indian health care and facilities .

in each case , the bills contained a provision for davis - bacon coverage of any construction 'funded in whole or in part' with federal funds associated with indian health care .

the bills began to move along relatively straight forward tracts ; but , ultimately , the senate moved more quickly — adopting new language and moving a senate - passed bill on to the house for further consideration .

on february 13 , 2008 , george miller , chairman of the committee on education and labor , presided over a hearing on the physical state of america's schools .

"we all agree on the urgent national priority of providing every child with a world - class education...," mr. miller began .

"it is clear that we cannot satisfy that priority unless we help states and school districts improve the physical condition of their school buildings and facilities. .

he concluded: "we can help mitigate the [current] economic damage by investing in school construction projects that will create jobs and inject demand into the economy. .

on july 22 and 24 , 2007 , the house took up h.r .

3074 , the appropriations for the departments of transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies .

ultimately , the measure was added to h.r .

2764 , the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 .

in late july and early august 2007 , the house took up h.r .

3161 , the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act ( 2008 ) .

representative rosa l. delauro presided over the discussion .

through the past half - century , the question of "helpers" has emerged as a davis - bacon issue: sometimes in legislative format ; on other occasions , as an administrative matter .

it will likely continue to be raised as davis - bacon remains a matter before congress — both as to the definition of a "helper" and with respect to the use of helpers on davis - bacon covered projects .

the davis - bacon act makes no mention of "helpers," nor does it refer to "trainees," "apprentices," or other skill groups .

rather , it refers to "various classes of laborers and mechanics" and then leaves up to the secretary of labor the determination of just what those "various classes" might be and how they might be distinguished one from the other .

under davis - bacon , before bids are solicited , the minimum locally prevailing wage rate is determined for each category of worker to be used on the project .

where a helper category is not recognized in the locality of the projected construction , craft or laborer rates have to be paid , potentially ( but not necessarily ) increasing the labor cost of construction .

labor proponents maintain that recognition of a helper category could defeat the purposes of the act: that is , allowing contractors to fragment tasks so that low - skilled , low - wage helpers could be employed .

some argue that such a policy could result in a downward wage spiral and that employment of helpers would undercut apprenticeship programs with a generally deleterious impact upon skills transfer .

through the years , helpers have been employed on davis - bacon construction where their use was common in the area and where they are clearly distinguished from laborers or craft workers .

however , their use appears to have been infrequent .

during the late 1970s , the carter administration opened the general issue of davis - bacon implementation .

seizing the opportunity , industry urged a closer adherence to area practice when establishing worker classifications — "especially 'helper' classifications. .

before new davis - bacon regulations could be given effect , president carter was replaced by president reagan .

regulations proposed by the former administration were withdrawn and their substance reconsidered .

new regulations proposed by the reagan administration ( may 1982 ) redefined the concept of helper and , potentially , expanded their use: a change applauded by industry and objected to by the building trades unions .

litigation followed .

in order to circumvent objections raised by the courts , dol redrafted the helper regulations .

in january 1989 , during the bush administration , the courts acquiesced in dol's judgment and cleared the regulations for implementation .

but , at that juncture , congress objected , refusing to appropriate funds for implementation and enforcement of the new regulations .

this restraint continued into the middle 1990s by which time the agency was free to act .

then , another impediment was raised: dol , under the clinton administration , declined to move forward with the regulation .

in june 1996 , the associated builders and contractors brought suit to require dol to enforce its helper regulations .

confronted with impending litigation , assistant secretary of labor bernard anderson affirmed that the helper regulation ( approved , but not enforced ) was "simply .. .

non - administratable. .

anderson explained that the distinction between helpers and other workers was insufficiently clear: that dol had no intention of implementing the regulation in its current form .

in august 1996 , dol noted that , during the 14 years that had passed since the regulation was first published , "additional information has become available which warrants review of the suspended rule. .

the regulation remained in abeyance .

through the next several months , dol reassessed the data and , in december 1996 , it announced that the helper regulation would remain suspended for the immediate future .

in july 1997 , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia ruled that the department was within its rights to issue an indefinite suspension of the helper regulation .

then , in april 1999 , dol issued a new proposed rule that would , essentially , reaffirm the status quo prior to the carter administration initiatives of the late 1970s — two decades earlier .

thus , the use of helpers would be limited by area practice and where they were clearly differentiated from "laborers" and other craft workers .

the use of helpers was expected to be infrequent .

whatever the immediate outcome of the helper question , the department , it appeared , had made a judgment .

for the foreseeable future , no further administrative involvement could be expected .

late in the 105 th congress ( 1998 ) , representative charlie norwood introduced legislation that would have created a special category of workers ( i.e. , 'helpers' ) for davis - bacon purposes .

no action , however , was taken on the proposal .

in the 106 th congress ( 1999 ) , mr. norwood introduced new helper legislation .

on july 21 , 1999 , the subcommittee on oversight and investigations , committee on education and the workforce , conducted a hearing on the impact of the helper rules for job opportunities .

the subcommittee , however , took no further action: the norwood bill was not reported .

during the same period , representative anne northup raised the helper issue during consideration of appropriations for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education .

at representative northup's request , language was added during mark - up that would have denied funding "to implement , administer , or enforce" the helper rule proposed by the clinton administration .

however , as the legislation progressed through the legislative process , the provision was dropped .

what impact its inclusion would have had may not have been entirely clear since , in essence , the bill would have codified existing practice .

as the 106 th congress was drawing to a close , dol again took up the matter , issuing a new final regulation governing the use of helpers .

it was dated november 14 , 2000 , and was set to take effect 60 days after its publication in the federal register — just hours prior to the end of the clinton administration .

the regulation provided that helpers were to be recognized as a "distinct classification ... only where" the following conditions occur: ( i ) the duties of the helper are clearly defined and distinct from those of any other classification on the wage determination ; ( ii ) the use of such helpers is an established prevailing practice in the area ; and ( iii ) the helper is not employed as a trainee in an informal training program .

the work of a helper was not to be performed by any other classification of worker "in the wage determination. .

another bill dealing with the issue was introduced during the 107 th congress but was not adopted .

in the 108 th congress ( may 2003 ) , the helper issue was raised again by representative marsha blackburn , with representatives norwood and king ( of iowa ) .

the proposal ( again , the helpers job opportunity act ) mandated that helpers "of laborers and mechanics shall be considered to be a separate classification. .

but , the prospects were no better than with prior congresses .

the bill was referred to the committee on education and the workforce and subsequently to the subcommittee on workforce protections , but no action was taken on the proposal .

on september 27 , 2005 ( the 109 th congress ) , representative blackburn , with mr. norwood as a co - sponsor , reintroduced the helpers job opportunity act ( h.r .

3907 ) .

again , the bill died in the committee on education and the workforce .

the final regulation , dating from the clinton administration , has gone into effect and , thus far , the bush administration has not revisited the issue .

however , this may not be the end of the process .

on the one hand , the department of labor , at its own discretion , could reevaluate the helper question and issue a new proposed rule .

or , conversely , congress could attempt to resolve the issue through new legislation .

of course , it may be that the matter has been resolved and that nothing further remains to be accomplished .

