member voting is perhaps the most important activity of any legislature — determining the fate of bills , resolutions , amendments , and other matters .

with record votes , legislators and their parties put themselves on the public record for or against specific questions .

the action of voting in the house of representatives appears to be a straightforward process , but it is an activity steeped in parliamentary complexity .

rules , precedents , and practices govern voting in the house and the committee of the whole house on the state of the union ( hereafter , the committee of the whole ) .

largely , voting procedures in the house and the committee of the whole have evolved to become similar since the legislative reorganization act of 1970 ( lra ) .

the first purpose of this report is to discuss the two momentous changes in record voting procedures that the house included in the lra and to analyze the evolution of rules , precedents , and practices on record voting procedures since that time .

the conduct of record votes in the house , moreover , has demonstrated a need for flexibility on some occasions and generated controversy on others .

the standards of official conduct committee and the house administration committee as well as a select committee have been called on formally or informally to investigate some controversies .

the second purpose of this report is to discuss how the house has adapted to exigencies in conducting record votes , and to analyze the occasion and resolution of controversies that have arisen .

the house in the 110 th congress adopted a rules change that sought to terminate record votes in a manner that allowed all members to vote but did not purposely reverse "an already - established outcome. .

yet , a vote taken on august 2 , 2007 , resulted in the house establishing a select committee to investigate the termination of that vote .

the third purpose of this report is to identify options and mechanisms available to the house if it wishes to address some of the rules , precedents , practices , exigencies , and controversies that have defined voting procedures .

the different forms of voting available in the house and the committee of the whole — voice , division , and record — and the procedures for obtaining these votes are succinctly explained in appendix b .

the constitutional provisions and rules of the 110 th congress pertinent to voting , and the speaker's policy in the 110 th congress on voting by electronic device , appear in appendix a .

points of order and parliamentary inquiries pertinent to voting in the 110 th congress , through may 2008 , appear in appendices c and d , respectively .

 ( the parliamentarian's notes in the constitution , jefferson ' s manual and rules of the house of representatives of the united states regularly cite practices and actions that established precedent , in addition to citing rulings on points of order and responses to parliamentary inquiries .

this document is published early in the first session of each congress , to incorporate rules changes and to update the parliamentarian's notes. ) .

this report is divided by first - level headings into sections .

the sections are divided into parts .

cross references within the report will therefore refer to another section or to another part .

on the eve of two momentous changes to house rules concerning voting , the features of voting that these changes overturned might seem shocking to members and staff today .

prior to enactment of the lra , record votes in the house were conducted by an oral , alphabetical call of the roll and the hand recording of members' positions .

in addition , record votes were not permitted in the committee of the whole , the form in which the house normally operates to debate and vote on amendments to measures before the house itself votes on passage .

the house administration committee in the 91 st congress ( 1969-1971 ) was studying the potential of an electronic voting system , but h.r .

17654 , the lra as reported by the rules committee , did not include a provision dealing with an automated voting system .

the house nonetheless amended h.r .

17654 to authorize the development of an electronic voting system to record votes .

on the second matter — no record votes in the committee of the whole — the house through its history had continued to follow ancient british practice: [the committee of the whole] originated in the time of the stuarts , when taxation arrayed the crown against the commons , and suspicion made the speaker a tale - bearer to the king .

to avoid the chair's espionage[,] the commons met in secret , elected a chairman in whom it had confidence , and[,] without fear of the king[,] freely exchanged its views respecting supplies .

the informality of its procedure survived the occasion for secrecy [in the house of representatives].... by rule and practice , the committee of the whole house continues today to use a separate set of procedures from those of the house .

before the lra's enactment , however , the forms of votes available in the committee of the whole were voice , division , and "teller. .

the house rule in the 91 st congress on voting , which continued largely intact from the first congress , stated: [the speaker]...shall put questions in this form , to wit: "as many as are in favor ( as the question may be ) , say aye ; " and after the affirmative voice is expressed , "as many as are opposed , say no ; " if he doubts , or a division is called for , the house shall divide ; those in the affirmative of the question shall first rise from their seats , and then those in the negative ; if he still doubts , or a count is required by at least one - fifth of a quorum , he shall name one from each side of the question to tell the members in the affirmative and negative ; which being reported , he shall rise and state the decision .

"tell" here was used to mean "count" or "enumerate. .

as explained by one member in debate on the lra , the teller vote was conceived "as a method of voting the will of the people while escaping the wrath of a powerful and vengeful monarch....we [kept the rule] because we said it helped expedite the often slow legislative process. .

h.r .

17654 , the lra as reported by the rules committee , also did not include a provision on record votes in the committee of the whole .

during committee markup , an amendment to allow such votes failed on a 6-6 vote .

the house nonetheless amended h.r .

17654 to authorize "recorded teller votes. .

this section of the report , on the evolution of house rules , precedents , and practices , related to record voting procedures since the 1970 lra , is divided into broad topics , such as obtaining a vote or allowing late - arriving members to vote / changing an outcome .

normally , a paragraph briefly explaining rules , precedents , or key changes since 1970 begins a topic .

a topic may be further divided so that the reader may easily find a topic's constituent parts .

the changes to house rules examined in this section of the report were contained in the rules packages adopted at the beginning of new congresses and in resolutions agreed to during various congresses , beginning with the 92 nd congress ( 1971-1973 ) .

the precedents and practices examined are based on the congressional record references in the parliamentarian's notes in the editions of constitution , jefferson ' s manual , and rules of the house of representatives for each congress ( referred to hereafter as the house rules and manual ) , from the 92 nd congress through the current congress .

the focus of this section of the report is rules , precedents , and practices specifically related to record voting procedures in the house and the committee of the whole .

this section draws principally from editions of the house rules and manual , as follows: sections 76 through 80 , which explicate precedents related to the constitutional provision on the yeas and nays ( art .

i , § 5 , cl .

3 ) ; rule i , cl .

6 ( rule 1 , cl .

5 , before recodification in the 106 th congress ( 1999-2001 ) ) , on the speaker putting a question ; rule iii ( rule viii ) , pertaining to members , delegates , and the resident commissioner ; rule xviii , cl .

6 ( rule xxiii , cl .

2 ) , on quorums and voting in the committee of the whole ; and rule xx ( rule i , cl .

5 , and rule xv ) , on quorums and voting in the house .

even within these rules and the parliamentarian's notes on them , however , some topics are examined introductorily or not at all in this report .

quorum in the house or the committee of the whole is a subject covered introductorily , for example , through footnotes explaining rules changes that restricted opportunities to obtain a quorum call .

the precedence of the motion to adjourn is an example of a subject that is not examined .

there are a few subjects that are covered introductorily , however , such as the motion to recommit , that do not relate specifically to record voting procedures .

they are included since a rules change increased the opportunities of members to obtain a record vote .

the explanations in this report of precedents and practices cited in the parliamentarian's notes normally indicate whether a procedural determination occurred in the house or the committee of the whole .

it is important to keep in mind , nonetheless , that the rules of the house generally apply to the committee of the whole .

rule xviii , cl .

12 , provides: "the rules of the house are the rules of the committee of the whole house on the state of the union so far as applicable. .

the reader should also keep in mind that the rules committee may report a special rule that , if agreed to by the house , may temporarily change or adapt house rules as they pertain to a specific piece of legislation .

for the reader's convenience , table 1 cross references house rules before and after recodification in the 106 th congress ( 1999-2001 ) .

since the electronic voting system's first use on january 23 , 1973 , it has been utilized for almost all record votes in the house of representatives .

while the electronic voting system has functioned with minimal disruption , it has failed to operate properly on several occasions .

the majority of these malfunctions were dealt with procedurally and adapted to flexibly within the rules of the house by the presiding officer .

voting issues can be divided into five categories: inoperative electronic voting system , inoperative display boards , members' personal explanations of votes , members attempting to vote , and holding votes open .

there have also been four occasions where voting issues were elevated to investigations conducted on three occasions by the committee on standards of official conduct and on one occasion by the specially created select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 .

these investigations are discussed in the section , investigations related to votes and voting since 1970 .

since the house began using the electronic voting system on january 23 , 1973 , there have been four instances where voting anomalies were reported to the house and resulted in investigations .

the first three instances were investigated by the committee on standards of official conduct and occurred in 1979 , 1987 , and 2003 .

the fourth investigation deals with roll call no .

814 taken on august 2 , 2007 , and has been undertaken by a select committee .

electronic voting has been in use for 35 years in the house of representatives .

however , members have been casting votes in other ways for over 200 years .

the process for voting has remained relatively unchanged in all that time , and the problems associated with voting have been relatively rare .

nevertheless , no matter how infrequently problems occur , when they do , the ramifications within the chamber can reverberate for days , or even longer .

whether changes to voting procedures are warranted , or even necessary , is open to discussion .

pursuant to h.res .

611 , the select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 is authorized to recommend changes to the rules and procedures of the house related to voting .

accordingly , this section discusses possible issues and options related to voting in the house .

the options range from making no changes to a complete overhaul in the procedures for conducting votes in the chamber .

some options are explored in detail , while others are presented only as questions to be considered .

further , some options , or variations of those options , may appear under more than one heading .

the headings are not listed in an order indicating their importance .

if the house chooses to make any changes to its voting protocol , there are several options available to effect such changes .

each may carry its own advantages and disadvantages .

house rules are traditionally changed on the opening day of a congress by adoption of a resolution .

the rules of the house in the prior congress are made the rules of the house for the new congress with this resolution .

the resolution also contains specific changes to those rules effective for the new congress .

the rules committee or the parties' leadership often solicit proposals or suggestions for rules changes in the late summer or fall prior to an election .

the majority members of the rules committee , with input from the majority leadership , consolidate and evaluate the suggestions .

any changes to voting processes could be included in this opening - day rules package .

historically , the rules resolution for a new congress has most often been numbered either h.res .

5 or h.res .

6 .

the rules package is usually considered for one hour as an indivisible and unamendable entity , although that has not always been the case .

it is therefore difficult to change any part of the resolution .

the minority party routinely offers an alternative rules package , but that normally fails on a party - line vote .

on occasion , house rules are changed by the adoption of a resolution on a day other than opening day .

again , such a resolution would likely be debatable for one hour and amendments would rarely be made in order .

house rules changes can also be effected by a so - called "self executing" or "hereby" provision in a related or unrelated special rule .

this process would allow the rules change to be made without a vote on the change itself .

in addition , although rarely successful , a measure making changes to house rules could be brought up for consideration through the use of a discharge petition , either discharging the measure itself or discharging a special rule making it in order to consider a resolution embodying the rules change .

it is possible to effect minor changes in the standing rules by unanimous consent .

congress may enact statutes setting forth rules and procedures to follow when the house considers certain kinds of legislation .

such statutes are enacted pursuant to the rulemaking power of congress and may be incorporated by reference in the preface of the resolution adopting the rules of the house .

once a statute is enacted , it normally takes enactment of a subsequent statute to change its effect , although both the house and senate reserve authority to change rules , even those that had been effected through a statute .

on opening day , or early in the first session of a new congress , the speaker promulgates what have been called "speaker announcements" or "speaker's policies. .

such announcements are protocols relating to legislative practices that are observed during a congress .

most of these practices reflect long - standing traditions that have not been raised to the level of inclusion in house rules , but relate to the operation of the chamber and to the legislative process .

a standing order is a continuing directive or regulation that has the force of a chamber rule but is not incorporated into the rules .

in that respect it is similar to items included in the speaker's announcements .

standing orders are more frequently used in the senate , although the house has , on occasion , effected change through their use .

the office of the clerk of the house , the office of the parliamentarian , and the committee on house administration , among other entities , have the authority to issue guidance , proclamations , or regulations related to the internal operations of the chamber , including on voting and the voting apparatus .

in the 110 th congress , to use a well - publicized example of an internal change , the clerk of the house altered the process for preparing an enrolled measure for presentation to the president .

in addition to the rules and procedures of the house , operations can be changed , albeit informally , through custom and tradition .

examples of such traditions include allowing party leaders time to conduct a colloquy about the work of the upcoming week , the allowance for party leaders to speak without the time being counted against controlled time , and yielding 30 minutes to the minority to debate a special rule .

perhaps the major issue related to voting is: when is it too late for a member to vote ? .

the constitution , one member stated , "enshrines the right of every member of the house of representatives to vote on the floor of the house on behalf of the people they were elected to serve. .

nevertheless , what does comity require in accommodating an opportunity for a member to vote ? .

with regard to potential changes to voting procedures , the house could consider enforcing a firm 15-minute voting time .

if a 15-minute time for voting was enforced , and the electronic voting system was closed at the end of that time , members would be unable to continue after 15 minutes to cast or change votes .

there could be a single exception to the 15-minute limit in the event the electronic voting system malfunctions .

a rules change would be needed to eliminate the "minimum" voting time of 15 minutes and replace it with a fixed voting time of 15 minutes .

closing the electronic voting system at a time certain could eliminate the use of well cards , unless they were retained solely for members who did not have their personalized electronic voting card .

the house could seek to require all votes to be by electronic device .

if well cards were eliminated , the house could consider an increase beyond 15 minutes in the time for voting in order to accommodate members' travel to the house chamber .

for example , a strict time limit of 20 minutes could be added to house rules .

alternately , the house could retain the minimum 15-minute time for voting by electronic device and continue the use of well cards , but place a cap on the time for all voting after 15 minutes .

a new clock could be activated , for example , to enable members to vote by electronic device or to use well cards for a period of five additional minutes .

members could continue the current practice for using well cards , but , in the speaker's policy or through another communication to the members , it could be strongly recommended or required that members arrive on the floor to vote within 15 minutes .

majority leader steny hoyer recently made such a statement .

well cards are traditionally kept on the round table in the well , near the official reporter .

by keeping them in this location , the table is within the view of television cameras , but members crowd in this area , possibly blocking the view of the presiding officer and other speaker's dais personnel .

is this location the appropriate place for the well cards ? .

would another location be better for members and for a clearer view by the presiding officer ? .

the sentence on reversing the outcome of a vote in house rule xx , cl .

2 ( a ) was new in the 110 th congress , although its intent stemmed from concerns that had existed for some time .

although points of order and parliamentary inquiries have been raised regarding the enforcement of the rule ( see appendices c and d , respectively ) , there have been questions about its use and its inherent ambiguity .

the rule could be repealed , or it could be clarified as to the form of a collateral determination of whether the rule had been violated .

alternatively , a house rule could be drafted to provide a potential point of order when a presiding officer has allowed voting to continue after voting time has expired , or a potential point of order when a member has not been allowed to vote if the member is in the well or , alternately , in the chamber .

house rules , or democratic caucus or republican conference rules , could authorize the speaker's announcements related to voting procedures .

such a provision could formalize a requirement that the speaker's announcement include information on voting by electronic device and a clarification of what is the well as opposed to what is the chamber and not the well , and could provide guidance to the speaker on the content of an announcement .

the house could clarify the relationship between house rules and the speaker's policies over what is official policy .

a point of order can be made against a violation of house rules , but there is no effective way to remedy violations of policies enunciated by the speaker .

should there be a way , and if so , what might it be ? .

a meeting of the select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 was held on the house floor to allow the clerk of the house to explain the electronic voting system .

members of the committee commented that most members were not aware of all that went into the conduct of a vote .

one response to this observation could be to require members to learn about voting procedures in the chamber generally and the operation of the electronic voting system specifically .

the clerk and the parliamentarian , who participated in the select committee's walk - through , could design a training session on the voting system for new members , and a re - introduction session for returning members .

the training could also include information on the role of each official on the speaker's dais .

training for members could be provided during early organization meetings , and a second session could be held within the first several months of a congress , after members have had the opportunity to participate in votes .

similarly , the clerk and the parliamentarian could design training sessions for all officials who work on the dais .

considering their interrelated roles , each official could benefit in performance of his or her role from understanding the roles and responsibilities of others on the dais .

further , the clerk and the parliamentarian could consider whether each role or function on the dais should be performed with limited flexibility to ensure that there is uniformity of action regardless of whether the person performing a role is a senior or junior staff member .

the clerk , in rotating staff serving on the dais , could also attempt to ensure a mixture of junior and senior staff so that the dais is never occupied by exclusively junior or exclusively senior staff .

training manuals could be prepared for both members and dais staff .

the manuals could include information on the responsibilities of each official on the dais , and information on voting procedures and the electronic voting system .

manuals could be distributed to members along with other materials provided at the early organization meetings or at another time .

dais personnel could presumably receive manuals prior to the convening of a new congress .

the house could require training for all members who are asked to preside over the house .

concomitantly , consideration could be given to a clarification of the role of the presiding officer , including how members are selected by the majority leadership to preside , how a member presiding carries out the speaker's role regarding decorum and comportment , and whether the presiding officer's role is "an impartial one. .

the role of the parliamentarian , moreover , could be made more explicit , for example , whether the parliamentarian should intervene in advising the presiding officer on a parliamentary development on the floor or should await the presiding officer's request for advise .

the parliamentarian currently provides members who preside with a brief overview document of the role of the presiding officer .

the document does not specifically address the language to be used , and it does not address issues that might arise .

 ( presiding officers are provided with cue cards containing the language to use in response to specific developments on the floor. ) .

if asked , the parliamentarian will provide in - person training to individual members prior to their time in the chair .

the training , among other things , could cover what the presiding officer should look and listen for , what the appropriate language to use is , and generally , what the presiding officer's role is in maintaining decorum in the chamber and recognizing members to speak .

because of the location of the parliamentarian and other officials on or near the rostrum , members and floor staff often approach the dais to speak with them .

it could be decided that the rostrum is to be limited only to members or selected leadership floor staff .

the number , and possibly names , of such staff could be determined by the speaker and minority leader .

alternately , if a member or floor staff aide wishes to speak to the parliamentarian , that conversation could be required to occur off the rostrum itself .

as already mentioned , training and an operations manual could be provided for dais personnel .

the house could consider reinstating the use of "pairs. .

for much of its history , the house recognized three types of pairs to enable absent members to have their position noted prior to a vote , or to indicate that their absence would not affect the outcome of a vote .

a general pair enabled two members to be listed without indication of how they would have voted ; a specific pair indicated how two absent members would have voted , with one supporting and one opposing a question , so that had they been present , their votes would have balanced out ; and a live pair , which matched two members , one absent and one voting present .

the rules for the 106 th congress eliminated all but live pairs .

a live pair was used in 2003 on the medicare prescription drug measure .

the house could institute an official policy regarding statements on missed votes .

for example , there could be a standard time set aside on the floor for members to deliver a statement , or there could be a section in the congressional record , such as at the end of legislative business , where all such statements would appear .

on march 6 , 2008 , a member asked unanimous consent to make a traditional missed - vote statement .

another member reserved the right to object , and spoke not about the request but about the legislative priorities of the house .

the first member withdrew her unanimous consent request .

the unanimous consent request was successfully renewed later that day .

the house might consider allowing such statements to be made by a means other than unanimous consent .

the absence of a "tally sheet" is integral to the investigation of the vote on august 2 , 2007 .

the house could require partial preparation of a tally sheet with the appropriate vote number as soon as the bells indicate the start of a vote .

a vote could also be deemed final and official only after a tally sheet was completed with the official tally by a clerk and provided to the presiding officer .

to distinguish a final tally sheet , a different color could be used for it .

if one or more tally sheets are used for a vote , they could all be marked to show their order of preparation and be retained as part of the official record of the vote .

alternately , as the house increasingly uses automated systems , it might be asked whether tally sheets could be abandoned and the display board or a desk monitor be used by the presiding officer .

one of the issues raised by the select committee was the appearance of the word "final" on the summary boards in the chamber , and whether the presiding officer used a summary board rather than a tally sheet to determine the vote tally .

the house may want to consider when or whether the word "final" should be displayed since it refers to a step in the clerk's termination of a vote rather than the presiding officer's announcement of a result .

it also might be worth considering having the presiding officer exercise greater control over both tally sheets and the summary boards .

control could also extend to activating and deactivating the bell and light system .

the number of voting stations in the chamber has remained constant since their installation .

the number and locations of the stations was determined without actual experience and long ago , at a time when members were called to the floor throughout the day to vote or to respond to a quorum call .

with over 30 years of experience , is the number and location still appropriate ? .

a survey could be conducted regarding the usage of each machine to determine if there should be more or fewer stations , and whether the locations of the voting stations are still appropriate .

both the house administration committee and the standards of official conduct committee have jurisdiction over aspects of voting in the house .

this relationship could be clarified so that all members understand which panel would exercise authority over voting in general , and the particular problems that may arise from it .

relatedly , the house rules committee has responsibility over the rules of the house and potential points of order which can be raised against those rules , including those related to voting .

the committee's authority could be clarified .

further , it could be determined if the new office of congressional ethics ( oce ) would have any role in looking into concerns about possible voting irregularities .

the house could require reports , perhaps biennially , from the house administration committee or clerk , or both , on the operation of electronic voting system , including but not limited to preparation for , conduct of , and conclusion of daily use of the electronic voting system ; use of the voting system by personnel on the speaker's dais ; support for the system and dais personnel during the day behind the scenes ; and security , including privileges accorded different staff members ; voting in general , specifically information on official absences , points of order raised with respect to voting irregularities , and malfunction of the electronic voting system ; and members making points of personal privilege related to voting irregularities .

each report could be prepared at the end of a congress , printed as an official document and provided to all members and dais personnel .

the documents could also be provided at training sessions for the new members .

one of the issues the house might consider is whether there is a problem associated with voting that requires action .

for example , it is possible that the events of august 2 , 2007 , are an isolated incident .

as such , the house could decide whether there is something really broken that needs to be fixed .

it is possible that changes to address one situation might produce unintended consequences at some future date .

appendix a .

constitutional provisions , house rules , and speaker's policies related to voting constitution article 1 , section 5 , clause 1 ( excerpt ) ...and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business ; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day , and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members , in such manner , and under such penalties as each house may provide .

article 1 , section 5 , clause 3 ( excerpt ) ...and the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question shall , at the desire of one fifth of those present , be entered on the journal .

article 1 , section 7 , clause 2 ( excerpt ) ...if after such reconsideration two thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill , it shall be sent together with the objections , to the other house , by which it shall likewise be reconsidered , and if approved by two thirds of that house , it shall become a law .

but in all such cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays , and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively .

article 1 , section 7 , clause 3 every order , resolution , or vote to which the concurrence of the senate and house of representatives may be necessary ( except on a question of adjournment ) shall be presented to the president of the united states ; and before the same shall take effect , shall be approved by him , or being disapproved by him , shall be repassed by two thirds of the senate and house of representatives , according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill .

rule i .

the speaker clause 1 ( excerpt ) approval of the journal ...having examined and approved the journal of the last day's proceedings , the speaker shall announce to the house his approval thereof .

the speaker's approval of the journal shall be deemed agreed to unless a member , delegate , or resident commissioner demands a vote thereon .

if such a vote is decided in the affirmative , it shall not be subject to a motion to reconsider .

if such a vote is decided in the negative , then one motion that the journal be read shall be privileged , shall be decided without debate , and shall not be subject to a motion to reconsider .

clause 5 ( excerpt ) questions of order the speaker shall decide all questions of order , subject to appeal by a member , delegate , or resident commissioner .

.. .

clause 6 form of a question the speaker shall rise to put a question but may state it sitting .

the speaker shall put a question in this form: "those in favor ( of the question ) , say 'aye .

'" ; and after the affirmative voice is expressed , "those opposed , say 'no.'" .

after a vote by voice under this clause , the speaker may use such voting procedures as may be invoked under rule xx .

clause 7 discretion to vote the speaker is not required to vote in ordinary legislative proceedings , except when his vote would be decisive or when the house is engaged in voting by ballot .

rule ii .

other officers and officials clause 1 ( excerpt ) there shall be elected at the commencement of each congress , to continue in office until their successors are chosen and qualified , a clerk , a sergeant - at - arms , a chief administrative officer , and a chaplain .

... rule iii .

the members , delegates , and resident commissioner of puerto rico clause 1 voting every member shall be present within the hall of the house during its sittings , unless excused or necessarily prevented , and shall vote on each question put , unless he has a direct personal or pecuniary interest in the event of such question .

clause 2 2 .

 ( a ) a member may not authorize any other person to cast his vote or record his presence in the house or the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

 ( b ) no other person may cast a member's vote or record a member's presence in the house or the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

clause 3 ( a ) ( excerpt ) delegates and the resident commissioner in a committee of the whole house on the state of the union , each delegate and the resident commissioner shall possess the same powers and privileges as members of the house .

... rule x .

organization of committees clause 5 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( excerpt ) election and membership of standing committees the standing committees specified in clause 1 shall be elected by the house within seven days after the commencement of each congress... .

clause 5 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( excerpt ) one of the members of each standing committee shall be elected by the house.... rule xiii .

calendars and committee reports clause 6 ( a ) ( 1 ) privileged reports by the committee on rules a report by the committee on rules on a rule , joint rule , or the order of business may not be called up for consideration on the same day it is presented to the house except — ( 1 ) when so determined by a vote of two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present ; clause 6 ( c ) ( c ) the committee on rules may not report — ( 1 ) a rule or order proposing that business under clause 6 of rule xv be set aside by a vote of less than two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present ; or ( 2 ) a rule or order that would prevent the motion to recommit a bill or joint resolution from being made as provided in clause 2 ( b ) of rule xix , including a motion to recommit with instructions to report back an amendment otherwise in order , if offered by the minority leader or a designee , except with respect to a senate bill or resolution for which the text of a house - passed measure has been substituted .

rule xiv .

order and priority of business clause 6 all questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by a majority without debate .

rule xv .

business in order on special days clause 1 ( a ) ( excerpt ) suspensions a rule may not be suspended except by a vote of two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present .

.. .

clause 5 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( excerpt ) private calendar , first and third tuesdays on the third tuesday of a month...the speaker may direct the clerk to call the bills and resolutions on the private calendar .

...two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present , may adopt a motion that the house dispense with the call on this day .

clause 6 ( a ) ( excerpt ) calendar call of committees , wednesdays on wednesday of each week , business shall not be in order before completion of the call of the committees ( except as provided by clause 4 of rule xiv ) unless two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present , agree to a motion that the house dispense with the call .

... rule xvi .

motions and amendment .

a third reading precedes passage when the speaker states the question: "shall the bill [or joint resolution] be engrossed [when applicable] and read a third time ? .

if that question is decided in the affirmative , then the bill or joint resolution shall be read the final time by title and then the question shall be put on its passage .

rule xviii .

the committee of the whole house on the state of the union clause 6 quorum and voting ( a ) a quorum of a committee of the whole house on the state of the union is 100 members .

the first time that a committee of the whole finds itself without a quorum during a day , the chairman shall invoke the procedure for a quorum call set forth in clause 2 of rule xx , unless he elects to invoke an alternate procedure set forth in clause 3 or clause 4 ( a ) of rule xx .

if a quorum appears , the committee of the whole shall continue its business .

if a quorum does not appear , the committee of the whole shall rise , and the chairman shall report the names of absentees to the house .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) the chairman may refuse to entertain a point of order that a quorum is not present during general debate .

 ( 2 ) after a quorum has once been established on a day , the chairman may entertain a point of order that a quorum is not present only when the committee of the whole house on the state of the union is operating under the five - minute rule and the chairman has put the pending proposition to a vote .

 ( 3 ) upon sustaining a point of order that a quorum is not present , the chairman may announce that , following a regular quorum call under paragraph ( a ) , the minimum time for electronic voting on the pending question shall be five minutes .

 ( c ) when ordering a quorum call in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union , the chairman may announce an intention to declare that a quorum is constituted at any time during the quorum call when he determines that a quorum has appeared .

if the chairman interrupts the quorum call by declaring that a quorum is constituted , proceedings under the quorum call shall be considered as vacated , and the committee of the whole shall continue its sitting and resume its business .

 ( d ) a quorum is not required in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union for adoption of a motion that the committee rise .

 ( e ) in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union , the chairman shall order a recorded vote on a request supported by at least 25 members .

 ( f ) in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union , the chairman may reduce to five minutes the minimum time for electronic voting without any intervening business or debate on any or all pending amendments after a record vote has been taken on the first pending amendment .

 ( g ) the chairman may postpone a request for a recorded vote on any amendment .

the chairman may resume proceedings on a postponed request at any time .

the chairman may reduce to five minutes the minimum time for electronic voting on any postponed question that follows another electronic vote without intervening business , provided that the minimum time for electronic voting on the first in any series of questions shall be 15 minutes .

 ( h ) whenever a recorded vote on any question has been decided by a margin within which the votes cast by the delegates and the resident commissioner have been decisive , the committee of the whole shall rise and the speaker shall put such question de novo without intervening motion .

upon the announcement of the vote on that question , the committee of the whole shall resume its sitting without intervening motion .

clause 12 applicability of rules of the house the rules of the house are the rules of the committee of the whole house on the state of the union so far as applicable .

rule xix .

motions following the amendment stage clause 2 ( a ) ( excerpt ) recommit after the previous question has been ordered on passage or adoption of a measure , or pending a motion to that end , it shall be in order to move that the house recommit ( or commit , as the case may be ) the measure , with or without instructions , to a standing or select committee .

... rule xx .

voting and quorum calls clause 1 ( a ) the house shall divide after the speaker has put a question to a vote by voice as provided in clause 6 of rule i if the speaker is in doubt or division is demanded .

those in favor of the question shall first rise from their seats to be counted , and then those opposed .

 ( b ) if a member , delegate , or resident commissioner requests a recorded vote , and that request is supported by at least one - fifth of a quorum , the vote shall be taken by electronic device unless the speaker invokes another procedure for recording votes provided in this rule .

a recorded vote taken in the house under this paragraph shall be considered a vote by the yeas and nays .

 ( c ) in case of a tie vote , a question shall be lost .

clause 2 ( a ) unless the speaker directs otherwise , the clerk shall conduct a record vote or quorum call by electronic device .

in such a case the clerk shall enter on the journal and publish in the congressional record , in alphabetical order in each category , the names of members recorded as voting in the affirmative , the names of members recorded as voting in the negative , and the names of members answering present as if they had been called in the manner provided in clause 3 .

a record vote by electronic device shall not be held open for the sole purpose of reversing the outcome of such vote .

except as otherwise permitted under clause 8 or 9 of this rule or under clause 6 of rule xviii , the minimum time for a record vote or quorum call by electronic device shall be 15 minutes .

 ( b ) when the electronic voting system is inoperable or is not used , the speaker or chairman may direct the clerk to conduct a record vote or quorum call as provided in clause 3 or 4 .

clause 3 the speaker may direct the clerk to conduct a record vote or quorum call by call of the roll .

in such a case the clerk shall call the names of members , alphabetically by surname .

when two or more have the same surname , the name of the state ( and , if necessary to distinguish among members from the same state , the given names of the members ) shall be added .

after the roll has been called once , the clerk shall call the names of those not recorded , alphabetically by surname .

members appearing after the second call , but before the result is announced , may vote or announce a pair .

clause 4 ( a ) the speaker may direct a record vote or quorum call to be conducted by tellers .

in such a case the tellers named by the speaker shall record the names of the members voting on each side of the question or record their presence , as the case may be , which the clerk shall enter on the journal and publish in the congressional record .

absentees shall be noted , but the doors may not be closed except when ordered by the speaker .

the minimum time for a record vote or quorum call by tellers shall be 15 minutes .

 ( b ) on the demand of a member , or at the suggestion of the speaker , the names of members sufficient to make a quorum in the hall of the house who do not vote shall be noted by the clerk , entered on the journal , reported to the speaker with the names of the members voting , and be counted and announced in determining the presence of a quorum to do business .

clause 5 ( a ) in the absence of a quorum , a majority comprising at least 15 members , which may include the speaker , may compel the attendance of absent members .

 ( b ) subject to clause 7 ( b ) a majority described in paragraph ( a ) may order the sergeant - at - arms to send officers appointed by him to arrest those members for whom no sufficient excuse is made and shall secure and retain their attendance .

the house shall determine on what condition they shall be discharged .

unless the house otherwise directs , the members who voluntarily appear shall be admitted immediately to the hall of the house and shall report their names to the clerk to be entered on the journal as present .

 ( c ) ( 1 ) if the house should be without a quorum due to catastrophic circumstances , then — ( a ) until there appear in the house a sufficient number of representatives to constitute a quorum among the whole number of the house , a quorum in the house shall be determined based upon the provisional number of the house ; and ( b ) the provisional number of the house , as of the close of the call of the house described in subparagraph ( 3 ) ( c ) , shall be the number of representatives responding to that call of the house .

 ( 2 ) if a representative counted in determining the provisional number of the house thereafter ceases to be a representative , or if a representative not counted in determining the provisional number of the house thereafter appears in the house , the provisional number of the house shall be adjusted accordingly .

 ( 3 ) for the purposes of subparagraph ( 1 ) , the house shall be considered to be without a quorum due to catastrophic circumstances if , after a motion under clause 5 ( a ) of rule xx has been disposed of and without intervening adjournment , each of the following occurs in the stated sequence: ( a ) a call of the house ( or a series of calls of the house ) is closed after aggregating a period in excess of 72 hours ( excluding time the house is in recess ) without producing a quorum .

 ( b ) the speaker — ( i ) with the majority leader and the minority leader , receives from the sergeant - at - arms ( or his designee ) a catastrophic quorum failure report , as described in subparagraph ( 4 ) ; ( ii ) consults with the majority leader and the minority leader on the content of that report ; and ( iii ) announces the content of that report to the house .

 ( c ) a further call of the house ( or a series of calls of the house ) is closed after aggregating a period in excess of 24 hours ( excluding time the house is in recess ) without producing a quorum .

 ( 4 ) ( a ) for purposes of subparagraph ( 3 ) , a catastrophic quorum failure report is a report advising that the inability of the house to establish a quorum is attributable to catastrophic circumstances involving natural disaster , attack , contagion , or similar calamity rendering representatives incapable of attending the proceedings of the house .

 ( b ) such report shall specify the following: ( i ) the number of vacancies in the house and the names of former representatives whose seats are vacant .

 ( ii ) the names of representatives considered incapacitated .

 ( iii ) the names of representatives not incapacitated but otherwise incapable of attending the proceedings of the house .

 ( iv ) the names of representatives unaccounted for .

 ( c ) such report shall be prepared on the basis of the most authoritative information available after consultation with the attending physician to the congress and the clerk ( or their respective designees ) and pertinent public health and law enforcement officials .

 ( d ) such report shall be updated every legislative day for the duration of any proceedings under or in reliance on this paragraph .

the speaker shall make such updates available to the house .

 ( 5 ) an announcement by the speaker under subparagraph ( 3 ) ( b ) ( iii ) shall not be subject to appeal .

 ( 6 ) subparagraph ( 1 ) does not apply to a proposal to create a vacancy in the representation from any state in respect of a representative not incapacitated but otherwise incapable of attending the proceedings of the house .

 ( 7 ) for purposes of this paragraph: ( a ) the term "provisional number of the house" means the number of representatives upon which a quorum will be computed in the house until representatives sufficient in number to constitute a quorum among the whole number of the house appear in the house .

 ( b ) the term "whole number of the house" means the number of representatives chosen , sworn , and living whose membership in the house has not been terminated by resignation or by the action of the house .

 ( d ) upon the death , resignation , expulsion , disqualification , removal , or swearing of a member , the whole number of the house shall be adjusted accordingly .

the speaker shall announce the adjustment to the house .

such an announcement shall not be subject to appeal .

in the case of a death , the speaker may lay before the house such documentation from federal , state , or local officials as he deems pertinent .

clause 6 ( a ) when a quorum fails to vote on a question , a quorum is not present , and objection is made for that cause ( unless the house shall adjourn ) — ( 1 ) there shall be a call of the house ; ( 2 ) the sergeant - at - arms shall proceed forthwith to bring in absent members ; and ( 3 ) the yeas and nays on the pending question shall at the same time be considered as ordered .

 ( b ) the clerk shall record members by the yeas and nays on the pending question , using such procedure as the speaker may invoke under clause 2 , 3 , or 4 .

each member arrested under this clause shall be brought by the sergeant - at - arms before the house , whereupon he shall be noted as present , discharged from arrest , and given an opportunity to vote ; and his vote shall be recorded .

if those voting on the question and those who are present and decline to vote together make a majority of the house , the speaker shall declare that a quorum is constituted , and the pending question shall be decided as the requisite majority of those voting shall have determined .

thereupon further proceedings under the call shall be considered as dispensed with .

 ( c ) at any time after members have had the requisite opportunity to respond by the yeas and nays , but before a result has been announced , a motion that the house adjourn shall be in order if seconded by a majority of those present , to be ascertained by actual count by the speaker .

if the house adjourns on such a motion , all proceedings under this clause shall be considered as vacated .

clause 7 ( a ) the speaker may not entertain a point of order that a quorum is not present unless a question has been put to a vote .

 ( b ) subject to paragraph ( c ) the speaker may recognize a member , delegate , or resident commissioner to move a call of the house at any time .

when a quorum is established pursuant to a call of the house , further proceedings under the call shall be considered as dispensed with unless the speaker recognizes for a motion to compel attendance of members under clause 5 ( b ) .

 ( c ) a call of the house shall not be in order after the previous question is ordered unless the speaker determines by actual count that a quorum is not present .

clause 8 postponement of proceedings ( a ) ( 1 ) when a recorded vote is ordered , or the yeas and nays are ordered , or a vote is objected to under clause 6 — ( a ) on any of the questions specified in subparagraph ( 2 ) , the speaker may postpone further proceedings to a designated place in the legislative schedule within two additional legislative days ; and ( b ) on the question of agreeing to the speaker's approval of the journal , the speaker may postpone further proceedings to a designated place in the legislative schedule on that legislative day .

 ( 2 ) the questions described in subparagraph ( 1 ) are as follows: ( a ) the question of passing a bill or joint resolution .

 ( b ) the question of adopting a resolution or concurrent resolution .

 ( c ) the question of agreeing to a motion to instruct managers on the part of the house ( except that proceedings may not resume on such a motion under clause 7 ( c ) of rule xxii if the managers have filed a report in the house ) .

 ( d ) the question of agreeing to a conference report .

 ( e ) the question of ordering the previous question on a question described in subdivision ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , or ( d ) .

 ( f ) the question of agreeing to a motion to suspend the rules .

 ( g ) the question of agreeing to a motion to reconsider or the question of agreeing to a motion to lay on the table a motion to reconsider .

 ( h ) the question of agreeing to an amendment reported from the committee of the whole .

 ( b ) at the time designated by the speaker for further proceedings on questions postponed under paragraph ( a ) , the speaker shall resume proceedings on each postponed question .

 ( c ) the speaker may reduce to five minutes the minimum time for electronic voting on a question postponed under this clause , or on a question incidental thereto , that follows another electronic vote without intervening business , so long as the minimum time for electronic voting on the first in any series of questions is 15 minutes .

 ( d ) if the house adjourns on a legislative day designated for further proceedings on questions postponed under this clause without disposing of such questions , then on the next legislative day the unfinished business is the disposition of such questions .

clause 9 five - minute votes the speaker may reduce to five minutes the minimum time for electronic voting on any question arising without intervening business after an electronic vote on another question if notice of possible five - minute voting for a given series of votes was issued before the preceding electronic vote .

clause 10 automatic yeas and nays the yeas and nays shall be considered as ordered when the speaker puts the question on passage of a bill or joint resolution , or on adoption of a conference report , making general appropriations , or increasing federal income tax rates ( within the meaning of clause 5 of rule xxi ) , or on final adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget or conference report thereon .

clause 11 ballot votes in a case of ballot for election , a majority of the votes shall be necessary to an election .

when there is not such a majority on the first ballot , the process shall be repeated until a majority is obtained .

in all balloting blanks shall be rejected , may not be counted in the enumeration of votes , and may not be reported by the tellers .

rule xxi .

restrictions on certain bill .

passage of tax rate increases a bill or joint resolution , amendment , or conference report carrying a federal income tax rate increase may not be considered as passed or agreed to unless so determined by a vote of not less than three - fifths of the members voting , a quorum being present .

... rule xxii .

house and senate relations clause 12 ( a ) ( excerpt ) ( 1 ) subject to subparagraph ( 2 ) , a meeting of each conference committee shall be open to the public .

 ( 2 ) in open session of the house , a motion that managers on the part of the house be permitted to close to the public a meeting or meetings of their conference committee shall be privileged , shall be decided without debate , and shall be decided by the yeas and nays .

rule xxiii .

code of official conduct clause 10 a member , delegate , or resident commissioner who has been convicted by a court of record for the commission of a crime for which a sentence of two or more years' imprisonment may be imposed should refrain from participation in the business of each committee of which he is a member , and a member should refrain from voting on any question at a meeting of the house or of the committee of the whole house on the state of the union , unless or until judicial or executive proceedings result in reinstatement of the presumption of his innocence or until he is reelected to the house after the date of such conviction .

speaker's policies following a tradition beginning in the 1980s , speaker nancy pelosi announced policies on certain aspects of the legislative process at the beginning of the new congress .

one policy dealt with voting by electronic device .

the speaker's announced policies for the 110 th congress appeared in the congressional record ( daily edition ) on january 5 , 2007 , on pages h59-h61 .

6 .

conduct of votes by electronic device the speaker's policy announced on january 4 , 1995 , with respect to the conduct of electronic votes will continue in the 110 th congress with modifications as follows .

as members are aware , clause 2 ( a ) of rule xx provides that members shall have not less than 15 minutes in which to answer an ordinary record vote or quorum call .

the rule obviously establishes 15 minutes as a minimum .

still , with the cooperation of the members , a vote can easily be completed in that time .

the events of october 30 , 1991 , stand out as proof of this point .

on that occasion , the house was considering a bill in the committee of the whole under a special rule that placed an overall time limit on the amendment process , including the time consumed by record votes .

the chair announced , and then strictly enforced , a policy of closing electronic votes as soon as possible after the guaranteed period of 15 minutes .

members appreciated and cooperated with the chair's enforcement of the policy on that occasion .

the chair desires that the example of october 30 , 1991 , be made the regular practice of the house .

to that end , the chair enlists the assistance of all members in avoiding the unnecessary loss of time in conducting the business of the house .

the chair encourages all members to depart for the chamber promptly upon the appropriate bell and light signal .

as in recent congresses , the cloakrooms should not forward to the chair requests to hold a vote by electronic device , but should simply apprise inquiring members of the time remaining on the voting clock .

members should not rely on signals relayed from outside the chamber to assume that votes will be held open until they arrive in the chamber .

members will be given a reasonable amount of time in which to accurately record their votes .

no occupant of the chair would prevent a member who is in the well before the announcement of the result from casting his or her vote .

appendix b .

house voting procedures: forms and requirements [author name scrubbed] government and finance division voting is among the most public acts of representatives .

generally , members try not to miss a vote , because it is an important demonstration to their constituents that they are always on the job .

procedural considerations suffuse voting , and thus it is important to understand the methods of voting in both the house and in the committee of the whole , where much of the chamber's business is conducted .

in the house there are four ways for lawmakers to obtain a vote in the house .

they are voice votes , division votes , yea and nay votes , and recorded votes .

voice vote .

this means that lawmakers call out "yea" or "nay" when a question is first put by the speaker or speaker pro tempore .

as rule i , clause 6 , states , the speaker will first say , "those in favor ( of the question ) , say 'aye'. .

then the speaker will ask: "those opposed , say 'no'. .

a voice vote can be quick and easy , but it is sometimes difficult for the speaker to determine — based on the volume of each response — whether more lawmakers shouted "aye" compared to those who shouted "no. .

division vote .

rule xx , clause 1 ( a ) , states that if the speaker is uncertain about the outcome of a voice vote , or if a member demands a division , the house shall divide .

"those in favor of the question shall first rise from their seats to be counted," and then those who are opposed to the proposition shall stand to be counted .

this procedure is reasonably accurate and takes only a few minutes , but it does not provide a public record of how each member voted .

only vote totals ( 95 for , 65 against , for instance ) are announced in this seldom - employed method of voting .

yea and nay vote .

the constitution ( article i , section 5 ) declares that "the yeas and nays of the members...on any question" shall be obtained "at the desire of one fifth of those present. .

under this provision , it does not matter if a quorum of the house ( 218 members ) is not present to conduct business — which the constitution requires — because any member can say , "mr. speaker , on that vote , i demand the yeas and nays. .

if the demand is supported by one - fifth of those present , the speaker will say "the yeas and nays" are ordered .

there is also an "automatic" yea and nay ( or rollcall ) vote provided in house rule xx , clause 6 .

for example , if it is evident to a lawmaker that a quorum is not present in the chamber , he or she may object to a vote on that ground and , "automatically," a vote will be ordered by the chair .

to request an automatic vote , a member says , "i object to the vote on the ground that a quorum is not present , and i make a point of order that a quorum is not present. .

the actual vote will then simultaneously determine both issues: the presence of a quorum and the vote on the pending question .

clause 10 of rule xx also states that the "yeas and nays shall be considered as ordered" on final passage of a limited number of measures or matters , such as concurrent budget resolutions .

the constitution requires that votes to override presidential vetoes shall be determined by the yeas and nays .

recorded vote .

under rule xx , clause 1 ( b ) , if any member , delegate , or resident commissioner "requests a recorded vote , and that request is supported by at least one - fifth of a quorum , such vote shall be taken by electronic device. .

 ( yea and nay and recorded votes are all taken by electronic device — employed since 1973 — unless the computerized voting system malfunctions ; then standby procedures outlined in rule xx , clause 2 ( b ) , are used to conduct the votes. ) .

to obtain a recorded vote , a member states , "mr. speaker , on that i demand a recorded vote. .

if at least one - fifth of a quorum of 218 — or 44 members — stand and support the request , then the recorded vote will be taken by electronic device .

recall that the distinction between recorded votes and the yeas and nays goes to the number of members required to support each request: one - fifth of those present for the yeas and nays and one - fifth of a quorum ( 44 of 218 ) for recorded votes .

in the committee of the whole .

three methods of voting are available in the committee of the whole: voice , division , and recorded .

yea and nay votes are not permitted in the committee , either the constitutional or "automatic" forms .

in short , there is only one way to obtain a recorded vote in the committee — where a quorum is 100 members — and it is outlined in rule xviii , clause 6 ( e ) .

this rule of the house states: the "chairman shall order a recorded vote on a request supported by at least 25 members. .

thus , any member may say , "i request a recorded vote," and , if 25 lawmakers ( the member who made the request can be part of the tally , too ) rise to be counted by the chair , the recorded vote will occur by electronic device .

alternatively , a lawmaker who plans to request a recorded vote even though few members are present in the chamber will usually say , "mr. chairman , i request a recorded vote and , pending that , i make a point of order that a quorum is not present. .

once the chair ascertains that a quorum is not present , there is an immediate quorum call and the member who requested the recorded vote can ask 24 other colleagues to support his request as they come onto the floor .

length of time for voting .

under rule xx , clause 2 ( a ) , the minimum time for a record vote by electronic device is 15 minutes in either the house or the committee of the whole .

the 15-minute period is the minimum , rather than the maximum , time allowed for the conduct of a recorded vote .

the chair has the discretion to hold the vote open longer .

a new 110 th rule states that votes are not to be held open for the sole purpose of reversing the outcome of a vote .

however , this rule seems difficult to interpret in practice .

there are also occasions in the house ( see rule xx , clause 9 ) when the speaker has the discretion to reduce the voting time to not less than five minutes .

the speaker also has the authority under rule xx , clause 8 , to postpone and cluster certain votes .

votes in the committee of the whole may also be reduced to five minutes , as noted in rule xviii , clause 6 ( f ) .

appendix c. points of order relating to voting in the 110 th congress to compile the list of points of order in the 110 th congress relating to voting in the house , a search was run using the legislative information system for points of order in the congressional record .

the result was 443 documents that contained "point of order" between january 4 , 2007 , and may 23 , 2008 .

each individual document was examined and was again searched using firefox's search function .

points of order dealing with voting , the date they occurred , the member who raised the point of order , the congressional record ( cr ) page number , and the colloquy with the presiding officer are displayed in the following table .

appendix d. parliamentary inquiries relating to voting in the 110 th congress to compile the list of parliamentary inquiries in the 110 th congress relating to voting in the house , a search was run using the legislative information system for parliamentary inquiries in the congressional record .

the result was 220 documents that contained "parliamentary inquiry" between january 4 , 2007 , and may 23 , 2008 .

each individual document was examined and was again searched using firefox's search function .

parliamentary inquiries dealing with voting , the date they occurred , the member who raised the inquiry , the congressional record ( cr ) page number , and the colloquy with the presiding officer are displayed in the following table .

