according to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , seafood inspectors have detected fraud in at least 40% of all products submitted to them voluntarily .

media attention to seafood fraud has increased and a variety of schemes to defraud other seafood businesses , retail stores , restaurants , and the public have been reported .

these incidents have raised public concern with the identity , value , and safety of seafood .

incidents of seafood fraud have included the following: serving lower - priced seafood as higher - priced items ; marketing mislabeled seafood products ; transshipping products to avoid antidumping and countervailing duties ; and overtreating products and labeling seafood packages with inaccurate counts or weights .

most seafood fraud is based on supplying something different from and inferior to the product that the consumer expects .

when consumers purchase a product of lower quality or become aware of seafood substitution , their perception of seafood quality may decrease .

in addition , these occurrences may lower consumers' demand for seafood products , and result in economic losses to law - abiding seafood businesses .

seafood fraud also is related to food safety when fish that contain toxins are mislabeled or when fish high in mercury are substituted for another species .

on a broader scale , seafood fraud has been linked to international concerns with illegal , unreported , and unregulated ( iuu ) fishing .

it has been reported that a significant portion of seafood traded in international markets , including seafood imported into the united states , is harvested by iuu fishing activity .

on june 17 , 2014 , president obama released a presidential memorandum entitled — "comprehensive framework to combat illegal , unreported , and unregulated fishing and seafood fraud. .

the memorandum calls on executive departments and agencies to use existing authorities to combat iuu fishing and seafood fraud .

on march 15 , 2015 , the task force released its final recommendations , which included both international and domestic measures .

however , some segments of the seafood industry have questioned whether iuu fishing and seafood fraud should be addressed as part of the same initiative .

they contend that although sometimes related , iuu fishing and seafood fraud are different issues and should be addressed as such .

during the last several congresses , legislation was introduced to address seafood fraud .

in the 113 th congress , two nearly identical bills ( h.r .

1012 and s. 520 ) were designed to strengthen seafood safety and fraud prevention by adopting several different measures .

the bills would have required the secretary of commerce and the secretary of health and human services to execute a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to improve agency cooperation on seafood safety and seafood fraud .

to improve compliance with existing laws , both bills would have incorporated penalties under provisions of the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( 16 u.s.c .

§§1801 et seq. ) .

for violations related to seafood fraud .

they also would have required a report to congress every two years to assess the problem and evaluate progress made to improve seafood safety and prevent seafood fraud .

in addition , the bills would have enhanced seafood traceability by requiring the following tracking information for seafood imported into the united states or offered for sale in interstate commerce: fishing area in which the fish was caught ; acceptable market name and scientific name ; method of harvest ; date of the catch ; and weight or number of the individual fish or lot .

no action was taken on either of these bills during the 113 th congress .

in the 112 th congress , s. 50 proposed directing the departments of commerce and of health and human services , the federal trade commission , and other federal agencies to combat seafood fraud ; the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported this bill ( s.rept .

112-131 ) on january 26 , 2012 , but no further action was taken .

h.r .

6200 sought to address seafood fraud by requiring labels to identify species and origin for both domestic and imported fish and by requiring a plan to coordinate the food and drug administration ( fda ) and national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) seafood inspections .

no further action was taken on h.r .

6200 during the 112 th congress .

some have questioned whether fda has sufficient resources to carry out its responsibilities to enforce laws related to seafood fraud .

some believe that fda requires additional funding to systematically monitor for economic fraud and mislabeling , determine the scope and scale of these types of problems , and develop new programs to address these concerns .

they also insist that fda needs new authorities to facilitate seafood traceability and improve compliance .

it remains an open question whether fda can address seafood fraud using existing authorities and resources or whether new legislation and funding increases will be necessary .

in the 114 th congress , two food safety bills ( h.r .

609 and s. 287 ) and two bills that focus on seafood ( s. 190 and h.r .

3282 ) have been introduced .

h.r .

609 and s. 287 are similar comprehensive food safety bills that would modify the federal food safety system .

s. 190 would seek to improve seafood safety by requiring equivalent standards in exporting countries , increasing inspections of exporting facilities , and inspecting and testing at least 20% of seafood imports .

h.r .

3282 would seek to improve seafood safety and prevent seafood fraud by requiring coordination of inspection activities through the national sea grant program , developing a list of exporters that violate u.s. seafood safety laws , and including seafood fraud detection and prevention during seafood safety inspections .

h.r .

3282 also would add new seafood traceability requirements .

to date , no action has been taken on any of these bills .

seafood fraud - related issues that may receive further attention during the 114 th congress include whether federal agencies are collaborating effectively ; greater authority is needed to improve traceability of seafood through the supply chain ; penalties for seafood fraud offenses are a deterrent ; and resources for federal agency detection and enforcement are sufficient .

during the last several decades , international seafood trade and movement of seafood throughout the united states have increased .

most seafood is no longer obtained from local sources ; more than 90% of seafood consumed in the united states is imported .

this shift has led to greater industry and consumer interest in tracing seafood throughout the supply chain from fishing vessel or aquaculture operation to the final consumer .

the bioterrorism act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) requires producers , distributers , importers , transporters , and packers to maintain records of the sources and recipients of its products , or one step forward and one step back in the supply chain .

the law also requires businesses to make these records available to fda when there is a reasonable belief that adulterated food presents a threat of serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals .

seafood traceability can be used to identify , locate , and withdraw harmful products from stores and restaurants .

traceability of products also can identify where fraud occurs in the supply chain or detect seafood products obtained from iuu activities .

consumers are becoming more concerned with product quality , identity , and sustainability .

currently , most seafood businesses do not provide information such as where , how , and when a specific seafood item was caught .

some fisheries are certified as sustainable by nongovernmental organizations and labeled as such to convey this information to consumers .

for certified products , traceability through the supply chain is required to confirm the origin and identity of seafood products .

some segments of the fishing industry believe that adopting systems to trace products from "capture to plate" can improve profits .

tracking requires tagging fish at the time of capture and recording related information such as vessel , date , species , weight , and location of capture at the time of unloading .

this information is linked to products as barcodes or tags as they move through the supply chain .

because fish are a perishable commodity , the ability to quickly identify products and their location can improve efficiency and decrease waste .

traceability also can improve customer service by providing the capacity to quickly identify and correct problems when they occur .

whether similar information should be required for all seafood items and markets remains an open question .

broad adoption of seafood tracing systems would require universal standards and information from across businesses in the supply chain .

although more information could decrease costs associated with seafood fraud and potentially improve efficiency , these gains would need to be weighed against potential costs of developing and maintaining the traceability system .

there are no estimates of total economic losses associated with seafood fraud , but costs to consumers and legitimate seafood business likely are substantial .

when seafood products are short - weighted , the losses to the buyer or consumer are in proportion to the difference between the labeled and actual weights .

in 2012 , u.s. consumers spent $82.6 billion for seafood products , which includes $55.2 billion in expenditures at food service establishments and $26.8 billion in retail sales for home consumption .

when paying for excess water or breadcrumbs , consumers may sustain direct losses in proportion to the excess filler used to increase the weight of the product .

the national institute of standards and technology speculated that if only 2% of the weight of all seafood is short - weighted , the annual loss to consumers could be as high as $1.6 billion .

consumers may incur losses when purchasing a lower - valued substitute for the price of a higher - valued product .

they also may gain less utility from consuming a product of lower quality even when they are unaware of whether substitution has taken place .

consumers may find inferior substitutes to be less desirable and factor this experience into future food purchases .

it is not clear whether the amount of fraud and deception in seafood sales and marketing is increasing , but media and nongovernmental organization attention to this issue has raised its profile with the public .

these reports may deter consumers from purchasing seafood because of suspicions that they may not be getting the product they expect .

both consumer experiences and reports of seafood fraud may change consumer tastes and preferences for seafood products and decrease demand for seafood .

for example , a study of floridians found that 62% of respondents were familiar with media reports of restaurants substituting lower - valued species for grouper .

among respondents who were aware of the reports and order grouper at restaurants , 39% said they were less likely to purchase grouper at restaurants , 21% said they were less likely to purchase grouper for home consumption , 13% said they were less likely to order other types of fish at restaurants , and 9% said they were less likely to purchase other fish for home consumption .

study participants were willing to pay $0.83 to $3.18 more for grouper entrees in restaurants if these products were supplied with an integrity label .

the seafood industry also is likely to sustain losses because of the lower consumer perception of its products and a related decrease in demand .

a decrease in demand would result in lower prices and losses in revenue to law - abiding businesses .

these businesses also compete with those selling fraudulent products for lower prices .

lower - priced substitutes , albeit fraudulent , can put downward pressure on prices for legitimate , high - quality products .

in 1986 , the southeastern fisheries association introduced a seafood product quality code program — one of the first efforts by a fisheries trade association to inform wholesale and retail seafood buyers .

the code , a voluntary educational and promotional concept developed by the seafood industry , cataloged the industry's recommended measures for product quality of specific seafood products .

each product , such as raw headless shrimp , is listed with a description of its characteristics , such as production method , product types , product forms , quality attributes , packaging , and labeling .

the availability of this information was intended to increase quality and safety awareness and to improve communication between buyers and sellers .

in october 2006 , concerns that seafood fraud had eroded consumer confidence in seafood led the national fisheries institute ( nfi ) to announce an initiative to promote economic integrity within the seafood industry .

nfi officially launched its better seafood bureau in july 2007 .

implementation of this initiative identified three primary concerns: transshipment of products to avoid antidumping and countervailing duties ; mislabeling of products or species substitution ; and mislabeling of weights or counts of products .

nfi is pursuing its initiative by obtaining commitments from the ceos of nfi member companies to comply with industry principles of economic integrity and to report suppliers committing economic fraud .

as part of its economic integrity initiative , nfi reported that , in the year ending in august 2008 , it sent more than 80 letters to fda documenting specific examples of fraudulent weights .

however , nfi has not been an advocate for new seafood fraud laws .

nfi has maintained that "fda needs to fulfill its mandate to fight seafood fraud" and "enforce laws that are already on the books. .

it contends that calling for new laws suggests some advocacy groups do not understand the issue .

nfi adds that its "members have been aggressive in rooting out bad actors and pushing regulators to enforce laws designed to stop this type of activity. .

in 2013 , nfi and the national restaurant association signed an mou to join forces in the fight against seafood fraud .

on june 17 , 2014 , president obama released a presidential memorandum entitled "comprehensive framework to combat illegal , unreported , and unregulated fishing and seafood fraud. .

the memorandum called on executive departments and agencies to use existing authorities to combat iuu fishing and seafood fraud .

the memorandum also established a task force composed of senior - level federal agency representatives to develop recommendations for a comprehensive framework that targets iuu fishing and seafood fraud .

on march 15 , 2015 , the task force released its final recommendations , which included both international and domestic measures .

the task force's 15 recommendations are organized according to the following categories: international : work with international governments , regional fisheries management organizations , and others to combat iuu fishing and seafood fraud at the international level .

enforcement : strengthen enforcement tools to combat iuu fishing .

partnership : create and expand partnerships with u.s. state and local governments , industry , and nongovernmental organizations to identify and eliminate seafood fraud and iuu seafood in u.s. commerce .

traceability : create a risk - based traceability program to track seafood from harvest to entry into u.s. commerce to prevent entry of illegal product into the supply chain and better inform retailers and consumers .

the national ocean council has been changed with establishing an iuu fishing and seafood fraud committee to coordinate implementation of the task force's recommendations .

iuu fishing occurs throughout the world , and a significant portion of seafood entering the united states reportedly is obtained from iuu fishing activities .

although iuu fishing may be a significant problem , some have questioned whether iuu fishing and seafood fraud should be addressed as part of the same initiative .

those who harvest seafood illegally may attempt to avoid detection by concealing its origin or mislabeling seafood , but seafood fraud can occur whether seafood products are harvested legally or illegally .

some have recommended that iuu fishing needs to be addressed at the source , before the product enters the market system .

in contrast , seafood fraud may occur at different points in the supply chain and needs to be addressed accordingly .

furthermore , some explain that the terms seafood fraud and iuu are being used very broadly and question whether they need to be redefined or categorized to address specific types of illegal activity .

in february 2009 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on seafood fraud that focused on the federal government's role in addressing this problem .

gao concluded that federal agencies have not taken advantage of opportunities to share information that could benefit individual agency efforts to detect and prevent seafood fraud , and have not identified similar and sometimes overlapping activities that could be better coordinated to use limited resources more efficiently .

the reported concluded that the lack of collaboration among customs and border protection , national marine fisheries service ( noaa ) , and fda has resulted in overlapping actions and inefficient use of resources .

according to gao , fda has considered detection of seafood fraud - related violations to be a low priority and has devoted minimal resources to this activity .

at the time of gao's study in 2009 , fda program guidance to field staff stated that "no resources have been allocated for seafood fraud - related work , and resource expenditures in this area should be kept to a minimum. .

fda officials stated that , "the agency does not have the staff or resources to address economic fraud in addition to their food safety responsibilities. .

since gao released its report in 2009 , fda has dedicated resources to improving dna testing for seafood fraud , collecting data related to the occurrence of seafood fraud , and launching an online training module related to seafood fraud .

gao also questioned whether seafood safety requirements of fda's hazard analysis critical control point ( haccp ) regulations should include seafood fraud .

under haccp , domestic processors are required to prepare site - and product - specific plans that analyze potential safety hazards , identify where possible hazards occur during processing , monitor hazard control points , and determine how hazards will be controlled .

importers of seafood produced in other countries also must take steps to verify that the products obtained from foreign processors are in compliance with haccp rules .

when haccp regulations were developed in 1995 , fda also proposed guidelines for using an haccp - based approach to control economic fraud under ffdca .

however , measures related to economic fraud were not included in the haccp regulations that fda adopted for seafood safety .

fda explained that the food system would need to mature before the agency should address matters other than food safety .

gao recommended fda propose changes to its haccp regulations to include requirements for identifying and mitigating economic fraud risks .

on october 9 , 2009 , noaa and fda concluded an mou to improve cooperation and information sharing in the inspection of seafood products and establishments .

the arrangement attempts to address the gao recommendations by strengthening the agencies' partnership and outlines procedures to work together both at headquarters and in the field .

the mou recognizes that fda may take noaa inspections into account when establishing inspection priorities .

the mou represents a broad outline of the parties' intent to collaborate in areas of mutual interest , but it did not create binding and enforceable obligations for either agency .

