under current law , employer - provided health insurance coverage is excluded from employees' income for determining their federal income taxes .

exclusions also apply to federal employment taxes ( social security , medicare , and unemployment taxes ) and to state income and payroll taxes as well .

considering the average cost of employment - based insurance , now around $4,750 a year for single coverage and $12,700 for family coverage , these exclusions result in significant tax savings for many workers .

because employment - based health insurance covers more than three - fifths of the population under the age of 65 , the exclusions also result in considerable revenue loss to the government .

ending the exclusions could raise several hundred billion dollars a year , depending on exactly what would be repealed and how workers and employers adjust .

revenue effects of this magnitude make the exclusions a tempting target for policy makers and other advocates who seek to raise revenues without explicitly raising tax rates .

the federal income tax exclusion — the focus of this report — has been targeted for other reasons as well .

because it reduces the after - tax cost of insurance to the worker in ways that are not transparent , it likely results in people with insurance obtaining more coverage than they otherwise would .

not being explicitly capped or limited in some other manner , it does little to restrict the generosity of the insurance or annual premium increases .

these attributes contribute to what many economists argue is a welfare ( or efficiency ) loss from excess health insurance for those with coverage .

these attributes also contribute to rising health care costs and spending throughout the country .

in addition , the federal income tax exclusion often is criticized as unfair because the workers' tax savings depend on their marginal tax rate .

high - income workers generally have greater savings than middle - income workers , and the latter usually have more than low - income workers .

when these tax savings are viewed simply as an economic subsidy , this pattern strikes many people as wasteful and inequitable .

these three assertions about the income tax exclusion — that the revenues could help to reduce the deficit , that it contributes to inefficiency and rising health care costs , and that higher - income taxpayers unfairly get greater tax savings — are the principal arguments put forth for repeal .

each is discussed in this report .

before turning to them , however , the report discusses the scope and origins of the exclusion , both of which are more complex than is generally recognized .

the income tax exclusion has been in the tax code for more than 50 years , and its repeal could have unintended consequences unless policy makers understand what transactions it covers and what role it has had in the development of employment - based insurance .

a discussion of the scope and origins will also reveal some of the uncertainties repeal would raise for both tax and health care policy .

limited to these topics , the report does not address all issues that might be raised about the exclusion .

a comprehensive analysis would be difficult because of limited knowledge about who actually pays for employer - provided health insurance and how workers value insurance at different ages and income levels .

while there is general understanding about these matters — it is reasonable to assume that much of the employer contribution is actually borne by workers through reduced wages — that is unlikely to be sufficient , and could be misleading , for drawing conclusions applicable to the diversity of employment arrangements throughout the country .

for legislation , differences among types of employers ( by size and industry , for example ) and types of workers ( by gender , family status , and income ) often are important .

the statutory provision allowing an income tax exclusion for employer - provided health insurance is short but complex .

it covers more than health insurance ( and health plans that often are described as insurance ) and applies to most but not all workers , including members of the workers' families .

how other forms of coverage would be affected by repeal of the exclusion for health insurance might be considered .

in order to understand the tax issue the exclusion resolves , it should be considered along with another exclusion applying to benefits .

when employees receive something of value from their employer , the general presumption under an income tax is that it will be taxable .

whether taxes will actually be paid depends on the deductions and credits a taxpayer might claim , but at least the starting position is that whatever is received should be taken into account for the purpose of determining an employee's tax liability .

this rule is reflected in section 61 ( a ) of the internal revenue code , which provides that all forms of income from whatever source are taxable unless there is an express exception .

with respect to employer - provided health insurance , there are two exceptions that are relevant , an exclusion for coverage and an exclusion for benefits received .

these exceptions reflect two different tax questions that arise with this insurance , whether the provision of coverage by itself should be taxable ( regardless of whether the taxpayer actually uses insurance benefits ) and whether the insurance benefits used should be taxable ( regardless of whether the taxpayer paid for the coverage ) .

proposals to end the exclusion for employer - provided health insurance involve the former question and not the latter , but there are interactions that might be noted .

in addition , because the exclusion for coverage applies to more than health insurance as it is commonly understood , this section of the report also discusses whether it might be appropriate to retain the exclusion for some purposes .

the origins of the tax exclusion for employer - provided health insurance have become part of the debate over whether the exclusion should be repealed .

to some , initial determinations about a narrow tax issue , coupled with contemporaneous regulatory decisions , account for the predominance of employer - provided coverage in the united states .

however , the history of the exclusion is not unambiguous in this respect , and it reveals concerns about tax policy questions that remain today .

section 106 was enacted in 1954 as part of a comprehensive revision of the internal revenue code .

at the time , it consisted only of what later became section 106 ( a ) , though the wording has changed several times .

current law subsections ( b ) , ( c ) , and ( d ) , which are not relevant to the present discussion , were added relatively recently .

prior to 1954 , there was no statutory provision that explicitly allowed an exclusion for coverage under employer - provided accident and health insurance .

regulatory rulings shortly after the modern income tax began had conflicting outcomes , first providing that premiums on life , accident and health insurance were considered income to employees but then saying they were not , at least in the case of group life coverage .

a 1943 ruling held that an employer contribution for group medical and hospitalization insurance issued by a commercial insurer was exempt income to workers .

since group coverage of this sort had started spreading in the 1930s , the need for resolution had become important .

nonetheless , apparently the distinction between which insurance arrangements qualified for the exclusion and which did not remained unclear .

employer payments for individual coverage were always taxable prior to 1954 .

various rationales were advanced for the different treatment of group plans ( or at least certain group plans ) and individual insurance .

although the economic value of employer payments for individual insurance could be determined from the premiums individuals were charged , the economic value of group coverage would vary among individuals , perhaps substantially .

it was not at all clear — as it still is not today — how to value coverage for someone who would not be insurable in the individual market .

in addition , there was parallel treatment at the time for life insurance: employer coverage for individual life insurance ( or life insurance with cash value ) was taxable , while group coverage for term insurance was not , at least to a point .

finally , health insurance at the time often included wage continuation payments for periods of illness ; since rights for this were forfeited when employment was terminated , it was not clear whether coverage by itself ( in contrast to actual receipt of payments ) constituted income .

the enactment of section 106 provided a basis for excluding employer payments for individual insurance and certain other coverage such as union plans .

it also clarified a number of other points , though other ambiguities remained .

sections 104 ( a ) ( 3 ) and 105 ( b ) were also enacted as part of the 1954 code and have remained largely unchanged since .

the predecessor to section 104 ( a ) ( 3 ) can be traced back to the revenue act of 1918 , when it was added to clarify that amounts received through accident or health insurance or from workmen's compensation acts would be exempt .

under that provision as well as the successor section 22 ( b ) ( 5 ) of the 1939 code , the exclusion was limited to amounts received through accident and health "insurance," which included commercially insured arrangements but not most private employer or employee association plans .

benefits from private employer plans were sometimes exempt when they were established pursuant to state law .

further uncertainty about the definition of "insurance" arose from the 1952 seventh circuit decision in epmeier v. u.s . , which applied the term to a self - insured plan paying benefits based upon salary and length of employment , that is , a form of wage continuation .

the 1954 code clarified these issues by carrying over the language in section 22 ( b ) ( 5 ) of the 1939 code to present law section 104 ( a ) ( 3 ) and adding a new section , 105 ( b ) , that provided an exemption for benefits from self - insured plans .

the legislation allowed a limited exemption for wage replacement benefits in section 105 ( d ) , but this was repealed by the tax reform act of 1976 .

one criticism of the exclusion for employer - provided health insurance is that it reduces the after - tax cost of insurance to workers in ways that are not transparent , likely resulting in their obtaining more coverage than they otherwise would .

not being explicitly capped or limited in some other manner , it does little to restrict the generosity of the insurance or annual premium increases .

the exclusion thus contributes to what some economists consider an excess of insurance coverage and a significant welfare ( or efficiency ) loss for insured individuals and society as a whole .

how repealing the exclusion would affect this welfare loss is a complicated question , however , depending on how consumers react to higher cost - sharing .

it could be challenging to determine alternative tax benefits to replace the exclusion without adversely affecting people with high costs .

the welfare loss from excess insurance , particularly insurance with low deductibles and copayments , occurs because people pay more for health care services than they would if everyone assumed more of the cost themselves .

this outcome is caused partly by the increased demand attributable to insurance ( people generally use more services when they have coverage because their effective price at the time of service drops ) and partly by the increase in market prices for services due to higher aggregate demand .

increased market prices in turn encourage people to purchase more insurance in order to avoid or minimize the additional financial risk from higher prices .

low deductibles and copayments reduce the financial risk insured people face , and this welfare gain must be offset against the losses described above .

even taking this into account , estimates of the net welfare loss from health insurance indicated that it could be a large sum .

in an article on this issue in 1973 , martin feldstein estimated that raising the coinsurance rate from one - third to two - thirds of private hospital expenditures could have saved $4 billion a year out of a base of $12.6 billion in 1969 .

a later revision of feldstein's work in a 1991 study estimated that the net welfare loss from excess health insurance could have been $109.3 billion in 1984 dollars , assuming that insurance induces a large increase in gross prices and consumers place large marginal value on medical spending .

assuming constant prices and high marginal valuation , the estimate would still have been $33.4 billion .

these figures obviously would be much higher in today's dollars .

health insurance and health care have changed since the 1980s , and some of the excesses at that time might have been attributable to unrestricted fee - for - service plans that no longer are common .

in 1988 , 73% of workers with employment - based coverage were enrolled in conventional insurance plans while in 2007 only 3% were .

in the latter year , 57% were enrolled in preferred - provider organization ( ppo ) plans and 21% in health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) ; in 1988 , only 27% were enrolled in either .

today it is not unusual for health plans both to control utilization directly ( requiring approval by gatekeepers for access to specialists , for example ) and to limit providers' charges as a condition of their participating in a network .

in these respects , employment - based health insurance is subject to restrictions even though the tax exclusion itself is not .

nonetheless , for the most part employment - based insurance does not have high deductibles .

in 2007 , more than 80% of workers in hmos did not have any general annual deductible , which was also the case for just under 30% of workers in ppo plans and more than 50% of workers in point - of - service ( pos ) plans .

for those with a general annual deductible , the average amounts for single coverage were only $401 in hmos , $461 for ppo plans , and $621 for pos plans .

although the average deductible in high - deductible plans with savings options was $1,729 , only 5% of covered workers were in these plans .

 ( enrollees in all of these plans would likely have had copayments for most services. ) .

whether moving to higher insurance cost sharing would reduce health care spending is not at issue ; notwithstanding measurement difficulties , economic theory , actuarial experience , and empirical studies all indicate that it does .

probably the most frequently cited research demonstrating this point is the rand health insurance experiment ( hie ) , a carefully designed study of nearly 6,000 people between 1974 and 1982 .

among other things , the study showed that per capita expenses for patients with a 95% coinsurance requirement for outpatient services were 31% lower than those for patients without cost - sharing .

reductions were also present but somewhat smaller for patients with lower coinsurance requirements , as they were for those with deductible policies .

reductions occurred for a broad range of conditions , especially for ambulatory care but also for hospitalizations .

more debatable is what effect reductions in spending have on individuals' health , which could affect measures of the welfare loss .

a common reading of the rand hie is that the health outcomes of those with high cost sharing were not different from those having conventional coverage , with several exceptions .

 ( the exceptions included high blood pressure and vision imperfections in adults and anemia in children. ) .

although more health problems might have arisen for the high cost sharing group had the experiment continued longer , there is no way to prove or disprove this now .

however , the similarity in outcomes for participants in the hie did not occur because individuals with high cost sharing chose to forgo only services of limited clinical value .

instead , it reflected a beneficial reduction in harmful medical services that offset a detrimental reduction in useful services .

bad care and good care were both forgone , resulting in outcomes similar to those having conventional coverage .

today there may be more effective treatments for chronic diseases that higher cost sharing would place at risk , and formerly untreatable or acute illnesses may now be considered chronic and subject to treatment .

a critical question here is whether greater cost sharing can be combined with other reforms so that individuals reduce their spending but maintain or even increase effective care .

possible changes include reducing or eliminating cost sharing for services likely to impart high value , providing better information and helping people use it , and making prices for services and products more available and transparent .

some steps have already been taken in these directions ( in consumer - driven health care plans , for example ) , though it is too early to tell how far they will spread and whether they will make a significant difference .

two equity issues arise with respect to the tax exclusion of employer - provided coverage .

one is how people with employer - provided coverage are treated for tax purposes compared to otherwise similar people who have coverage purchased in the individual market .

the other is how people with employer - provided coverage are treated at different income levels .

the former issue , which is addressed first , is easier to analyze , and there is an obvious solution to what some people consider a problem .

the latter issue is more complicated than is usually recognized and may defy simple solutions .

the tax exclusion sometimes is criticized for providing tax savings when employers pay for the insurance , while coverage purchased in the individual market generally has no tax savings .

to some , this creates an unwarranted distortion in the insurance markets .

in their view , it is not obvious why health insurance , which is essentially a personal matter , should be tied to one's job .

it is argued that the tie limits workers' health plan choices and penalizes workers who might be able to work more productively elsewhere .

under current law , there are two provisions that provide tax savings to people who purchase insurance in the individual market .

one is the 100% deduction allowed self - employed taxpayers who buy policies for themselves and their family members ; this applies only to a small number of people , less than 3% of all who file returns .

the other is the itemized deduction for unreimbursed medical expenses , which is available only to taxpayers who itemize their deductions and only to the extent the expenses exceed 7.5% of their adjusted gross income .

for most taxpayers , the standard deduction is larger than the sum of their potential itemized deductions , and of those who itemize , most do not have extensive unreimbursed medical expenses .

in 2005 , about 35% of all returns had itemized deductions , and of these , less than 21% ( about 7% of all returns ) claimed the medical expense deduction .

most people who purchase insurance in the individual market cannot claim either of these deductions .

this imbalance in individuals' tax savings could largely be remedied by allowing an above - the - line deduction for premiums that is available to everyone without employer - provided coverage .

this type of deduction , which could be claimed whether or not one itemized , might be a standard deduction like president george w. bush proposed or limited to premiums actually paid ; in the latter case , the income tax savings to individuals would be approximately the same as those from the exclusion for equivalently - priced employer - provided insurance .

the income tax deduction just described would not provide savings from the exclusion for employment taxes , but an additional deduction might be allowed people with employment income for that purpose .

some might oppose this solution since employer - provided insurance generally has broader and more stable risk pooling ; in their view , this should be protected and rewarded despite the apparent inequity in tax savings .

the second tax equity issue is how people with employer - provided coverage are treated at different income levels .

income tax savings from the exclusion for employer provided health insurance depend on taxpayers' marginal tax rates .

for low - income taxpayers , the savings on federal income taxes might be 10% or as little as none , depending on their income .

in 2008 , for example , single tax filers generally will not have a regular tax liability until their income exceeds $8,950 , the sum of their standard deduction and personal exemption .

until their income exceeds $16,975 , their taxable income ( the difference between $16,975 and $8,950 ) would be taxed at 10% .

thus , if single taxpayers with wage income of $13,000 were given employer - paid insurance worth $3,000 , their savings from the income tax exclusion would be $300 ( i.e. , $3,000 x 10% ) .

for higher - income taxpayers , the income tax savings would be greater .

for single filers in the top tax bracket of 35% , the tax savings from the exclusion of $3,000 of coverage would be $1,050 , appreciably more than the savings for low - income workers .

for middle - income taxpayers in the 15% or 25% brackets , the income tax savings would be $450 or $750 , respectively .

 ( in 2008 , the 15% bracket for single filers applies to taxable incomes of $8,026 to $32,550 ; the 25% bracket to taxable incomes of $32,551 to $78,850 ; and the 35% bracket to taxable incomes over $357,700 ) .

different figures apply to taxpayers filing as married or head of households , but the pattern just described would be the same .

taxpayers often get additional savings from a parallel exclusion on their state income taxes .

currently , 43 states and the district of columbia impose taxes on individual incomes .

rates vary from state to state , and while some of the tax savings would be offset by a reduction in the itemized deduction for state income taxes , typically higher income taxpayers would get greater savings .

this picture is complicated by tax savings from the exclusion for employment taxes .

medicare taxes of 1.85% of wages ( considering just the employee's share ) apply to workers regardless of income ; thus all would be affected equally by an exclusion for insurance worth $3,000 .

for social security taxes , however , the exclusion benefits low and middle - income workers but not those with wages above $102,000 , the wage base ceiling in 2008 .

the exclusion would save the former 6.2% ( considering just the employee's share ) , or $186 for $3,000 worth of insurance .

employment taxes aside , the figures above show that middle income taxpayers generally benefit more from the exclusion than low income taxpayers , and that high income taxpayers generally benefit more than those with middle incomes .

when these tax savings are viewed purely as an economic subsidy , this pattern seems unfair if not wasteful .

it is unlikely that an insurance subsidy program using appropriated funds would be designed in this manner .

the equity problems are likely to be exacerbated in several respects .

for one thing , higher - income workers are more likely to be eligible for employer - provided health insurance .

one study showed that 89.6% of workers with family incomes above 400% of the federal poverty level were eligible for employer coverage in contrast to 39.8% of workers with incomes below the poverty level in 2005 .

the same study also showed that 83% of those eligible in the higher - income group actually accepted coverage , compared with 63.5% of those eligible in the lower - income group .

where these patterns occur , the disparities in tax savings based on the $3,000 figure in the discussion above would understate differences among income groups .

moreover , higher - income taxpayers may benefit more from the exclusion if their employment - based insurance on average provides greater economic benefits than identical coverage provides lower - income taxpayers .

as described in the previous section , income on average increases with age , at least until the late middle ages , and age usually is associated with higher health care expenditures .

the preceding analysis is not the only way of looking at the tax equity issue .

to some extent , the tax savings shown above might not be an inequitable subsidy but only a consequence of the proper treatment of losses under a progressive income tax .

in a progressive tax system , when gains are taxed at higher and higher rates depending on income , then it is conceptually appropriate to deduct losses at those same rates .

to the extent that health insurance is viewed as a method of smoothing losses over time and individuals , then the greater tax savings for higher income people from the exclusion would not be inappropriate or , for that matter , unfair .

the argument about progressivity would have greater force if health insurance covered only catastrophic expenditures that everyone would clearly see as losses ( for example , hospitalization for accidents or heart attacks ) .

however , since a portion of its cost is for anticipated expenditures for routine care , not all of the exclusion can be associated with a loss of this nature .

the root issue is whether health care is like other forms of personal consumption .

on reflection , many people might conclude that it is not .

health care takes time , provides no personal pleasure , and , most important , usually is designed to return patients to a condition prior to an accident or illness that no one would choose to have had .

absent the latter , it does not result in gratification or enhancement of one's well being .

on the other hand , health insurance , which is the subject of the exclusion , provides additional value because people recognize they cannot predict their health with certainty and worry that they might not be able to afford care when they need it .

it buys peace of mind as well as services .

in this respect , insurance may be like other forms of personal consumption in that it is not directly associated with a loss that should be recognized under an income tax .

because it is difficult to determine what portion of an insurance premium merits treatment as a tax loss , it is challenging to think of what might be an appropriate remedy .

the issue is compounded by the diversity of insurance arrangements and uncertainty about the extent to which particular workers ultimately bear the cost of employer - provided coverage .

there is much to be said for moving toward a health care financing system that is more transparent , equitable , and efficient .

given the extraordinary complexity of american health care and increasing concerns about rising costs and the growing numbers of uninsured , new policy approaches are widely being given careful consideration .

whether ending the exclusion should be part of these approaches depends on what the replacement policies are .

problems attributable to the exclusion might also occur with new measures , or other problems could arise .

it is difficult to evaluate one step without knowing the other .

given the origin of the exclusion , it would not be inappropriate to consider revisions in light of today's problems .

however , one might move carefully before dismantling a policy that has been in place for more than 50 years .

some policymakers appear to be interested in the exclusion primarily to reduce the federal deficit .

however , if the sole objective were to raise revenues , it might be simpler just to increase taxes generally .

for many people who currently have employment - based insurance — over three - fifths of the population under the age of 65 — the mathematical effect might be roughly the same , at least for income taxes .

for people under the age of 65 paying for other private insurance , an offsetting deduction could provide tax equity .

people under the age of 65 with other public insurance might not be affected , considering that their income often is too low to be taxed .

nonetheless , some argue that the exclusion should be ended not to raise money but to improve efficiency and limit costs and spending .

in the absence of alternative proposals to achieve these goals , termination might be appropriate .

a principal policy decision appears to be whether to maintain and possibly strengthen the employment - based system of health care .

if that is the goal , then maintaining the exclusion might be appropriate since it is unclear what the effects of termination would be over time .

if instead the goal were to move towards individual market insurance or an expansion of public coverage , then ending the exclusion should be given greater consideration .

the general formula for calculating federal income taxes appears below .

the list omits some steps , such as prepayments ( from withholding and estimated payments ) and the alternative minimum tax .

1 .

gross income ( everything counted for tax purposes ) 2 .

minus deductions ( or adjustments ) for determining adjusted gross income ( agi ) — "above the line deductions" 3 .

equals agi 4 .

minus greater of standard or itemized deductions 5 .

minus personal and dependency exemptions 6 .

equals taxable income 7 .

times tax rate 8 .

equals tax on taxable income ( i.e. , "regular tax liability" ) 9 .

minus credits 10 .

equals final tax liabilit .

