u.s. scientists and engineers who are working at the molecular level , or nanoscale , are developing novel materials and derivative products at a rapid pace .

the unique physical , chemical , and biological properties of engineered nanoscale materials lend themselves to a huge array of applications that , some analysts believe , will transform industries , foster sustainable economic growth , deliver more effective treatments for chronic diseases , and vastly improve energy efficiency .

many nations , including the united states , are eager to lead this nanotechnology revolution , and to reap its benefits .

the european union has been particularly active , but there also is intense activity in japan , china , and other nations .

in the united states and some other nations , enthusiasm and investment in nanotechnology are somewhat restrained , however , by questions about the possible environmental , human health , and safety ( ehs ) risks associated with this new technology .

does nanotechnology pose risks to human health or the environment that are not being adequately controlled ? .

if so , how will consumers here and abroad react if possible hazards are identified ? .

should commerce in nanomaterials or associated products be subjected to some level of government regulation ? .

if so , do federal agencies have sufficient statutory authority , expertise , and resources to regulate potential ehs risks of engineered nanoscale materials and derivative products ? .

the answers to such questions may determine the nature , timing , distribution , and extent of the social and economic costs and benefits associated with nanotechnology .

some groups are calling on congress to regulate engineered nanoscale materials and derivative products to control potential ehs risks , arguing that lack of federal regulation might increase the risks of unanticipated adverse consequences .

the cost of such consequences would depend on their actual , as well as publicly perceived , severity , frequency , and reversibility .

the cost to the nanotechnology industry also could be great , if consumers responded by indiscriminately rejecting all products of nanotechnology , rather than the offending nanomaterial or an individual application .

others oppose federal regulatory requirements , arguing that they might unnecessarily delay the environmental , health , and economic rewards expected from nanotechnology .

questions about the need for , and ideal form of , regulation for nanotechnology are exceedingly difficult to address , given the current state of scientific understanding of engineered nanoscale materials .

the purpose of this report is to consider certain challenges faced by federal ehs risk assessors , risk managers , and policy makers , and to discuss possible legislative approaches to address those challenges .

for more information about the national nanotechnology research agenda , appropriations , and authorizing legislation , see crs report rl34401 , the national nanotechnology initiative: overview , reauthorization , and appropriations issues , by [author name scrubbed .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , food and drug administration ( fda ) , consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) , and occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) are actively exploring the health and safety implications of nanotechnology and the possible need for regulations .

other federal agencies also are doing research on environmental , health , and safety applications or implications of nanotechnology .

they face many challenges , including those discussed below .

as agencies consider the possible need for and shape of regulations , some stakeholders are voluntarily engaging in what is called "responsible development" of nanotechnologies .

professional organizations , industries , universities , environmental organizations , and government have been involved in such efforts .

a few of the better known initiatives are described below .

the ieee ( formerly the institute of electrical and electronics engineers ) is developing standard methods needed to mass produce and market electronics and photonics products while protecting workers and addressing environmental concerns .

intel , dupont , and other large companies voluntarily adhere to responsible principles that have served in the past to minimize ehs problems associated with production of materials that are not nanoscale .

they complain , however , that the adequacy of such practices with respect to nanotechnologies is unknown , and urge the federal government to sponsor additional research to "shed more light on what the best approach to protecting health and safety should be. .

the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) is working with industry to gather data on exposure and worker health that should help guide the design of studies in occupational settings .

in its 2007 white paper , epa expressed the view that partnerships with industrial sectors will ensure that responsible development is part of initial decision making .

working in partnership with producers , their suppliers , and users of nanomaterials to develop best practices and standards in the workplace , throughout the supply chain , as well as other environmental programs , would help ensure the responsible development of the production , use , and end of life management of nanomaterials .

in that spirit , epa worked with stakeholder groups to develop a voluntary nanoscale materials stewardship program ( nmsp ) .

the program , which pertains to engineered nanoscale materials that are in commerce or about to enter commerce , was launched january 28 , 2008 .

the nmsp allows two levels of participation , basic and in - depth .

under the basic program , epa will collect available data and information from manufacturers and processors of existing chemical nanoscale materials .

in addition , epa will ask participants to identify their risk management practices and to develop a risk management plan .

participants in the in - depth program will develop new test data needed to provide a firm scientific foundation for future work and regulatory / policy decisions .

the agency intends to use the information gained from the stewardship program to guide development of its tsca program for nanoscale materials .

another voluntary initiative produced a guidebook for responsible corporate behavior called the nano risk framework .

the six - point program was developed by dupont corporation working in partnership with environmental defense , an advocacy group , and was announced june 21 , 2007 , at a seminar sponsored by the woodrow wilson international center for scholars , project on emerging nanotechnologies .

the framework presents a process "for identifying , managing , and reducing potential environmental , health , and safety risks of engineered nanomaterials across all stages of a product's 'lifecycle.' .

a final example of a voluntary initiative that aims to promote responsible development of nanotechnology is spearheaded by the international council on nanotechnology ( icon ) at rice university .

as described on its website , "icon is a technically driven organization whose activities are broadly supported by industry , non - profit foundations , and governments .

its multi - stakeholder partnerships and governance , with members that span the globe , make it uniquely positioned to ensure global coordination and cooperation in nanotechnology risk management. .

its mission is "to develop and communicate information regarding potential environmental and health risks of nanotechnology , thereby fostering risk reduction while maximizing societal benefit. .

icon encourages close work between developers of nanotechnology and toxicologists .

as explained by vicki colvin , executive director of icon , "if we understand why a material is cytotoxic [that is , toxic to cells] , we should be able to make it less reactive and knock out its toxicity.... " thus , she advises , "chemists making systematic changes in materials must work with people who can measure their biological effects .

tight collaboration between materials engineers , chemists , and toxicologists could provide the essential data that can enable us to engineer safer nanomaterials from the beginning. .

the regulatory challenges posed by nanomaterials and nanotechnologies may be resolved over time and to some extent without significant legislative action , as stakeholders work together , scientists learn more about processes and properties on the nanoscale , and federal regulators gradually adapt rules to implement existing statutory authorities .

congress might , therefore , continue to take a wait - and - see approach to nanotechnologies , perhaps combined with congressional oversight of agencies' activities .

however , should congress choose to intervene , a range of legislative strategies is available , as described below .

the need for additional research to identify the potential hazards that might be associated with nanotechnology and to evaluate risks related to the environment and human health and safety ( ehs ) is not in dispute .

however , there is a range of views about whether there is a need for increased federal intervention at this time .

the regulatory challenges posed by nanomaterials and nanotechnologies are many — the diversity of nanomaterials , lack of data characterizing the materials , lack of standardization in nomenclature and metrics , the proprietary nature of private research results , limited resources in regulatory agencies , and possibly inadequate statutory authority .

these difficulties may be surmounted over time without legislative action , or congress may choose to intervene .

if it does , it might choose any of several approaches .

selected approaches include increasing funding for workshops in standardization and other ehs research , changing the allocation of research money among agencies , adopting and implementing a national and / or international research strategy , or enacting legislation that authorizes , mandates , or constrains agency actions to require information collection or to restrict production , sale , use , or disposal of nanomaterials .

h.r .

4040 , as passed by the house , and s. 3274 , as introduced , would require appointment of an official who would be required to oversee development and implementation of an ehs research plan .

it is noteworthy that congress is considering its options at this early stage of technology development , when only a few nanomaterials are being manufactured on a large scale .

risk management decisions nonetheless are pressing , as the rate of nanotechnology development and commercialization is rapidly escalating .

