the samoan archipelago , a series of sparsely populated islands in the south pacific , is located about 2,300 miles southwest of hawaii .

the area is divided into two parts: western samoa , formerly british and now independent ; and american samoa , a cluster of about half a dozen islands governed from pago pago on the island of tutuila .

the population of the american group , although rising rapidly , is estimated to be about 60,000 .

contacts between the samoan islands and the united states developed late in the 19 th century , but they were infrequent .

a coaling station was opened at pago pago , but only in the wake of the spanish - american war ( 1898 ) did the american presence become permanent .

in 1900 , president william mckinley "directed the navy to assume responsibility for eastern ( thereafter , american ) samoa. .

his directive remained in effect until 1951 , when the naval station was closed and jurisdiction was transferred to the u.s. department of the interior .

during the middle 1950s , an insular constitutional government was developed ; in 1960 , a constitution was formally approved .

the islands are mountainous , the climate tropical .

there is little land suitable for commercial agriculture .

fruits and vegetables , along with various root crops , are grown locally and consumed largely by the families of the growers .

more diverse products are imported .

the harbor at pago pago provided , during earlier periods , a naval base , but now it appears to be especially notable as a tuna port .

although some tourism has developed over the years , the relative isolation of american samoa has rendered the islands a somewhat exotic destination .

fish processing is samoa's single primary private - sector industry .

under the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , the insular minimum wage has been fixed by the secretary of labor through a special industry committee ( sic ) .

in early 2007 , the rate for the tuna canneries was $3.26 per hour ; the federal rate , $5.15 per hour .

then , in late may , congress adopted a new minimum wage standard: to escalate to $7.25 per hour over several years .

at the same time , the sic system was abolished and the insular rate was raised , though in more extended steps , until it might coincide with the federal rate .

in 1938 , congress enacted the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) — a measure designed to provide minimum wages and overtime pay , to limit child labor , and to restrict industrial homework .

although the act would seem to have applied to the states and the territories ( to puerto rico , the virgin islands , etc .

 ) , little thought appears to have been given to how that act might be applied to jurisdictions that were , in significant ways , economically different from the u.s. mainland .

shortly after its passage , the act was modified .

in response to industry complaints , puerto rico and the virgin islands were exempted from the full force of the act ( 1940 ) , being placed under a special industry committee ( sic ) structure .

thus , puerto rico and the virgin islands were set aside for special treatment under the flsa — a process that would continue , in part , for the next 50 years .

under section 8 of the original enactment , the department of labor ( dol ) was required , "from time to time," to convene an industry committee for each industry covered under the act and , through the committee , to "recommend" a rate ( or rates ) of wages that might be higher than those established by the act .

section 8 ( b ) states: the industry committee shall investigate conditions in the industry and the committee ... may hear such witnesses and receive such evidence as may be necessary or appropriate... .

the committee shall recommend to the administrator the highest minimum wage rates for the industry which it determines , having due regard to economic and competitive conditions , will not substantially curtail employment in the industry .

 ( emphasis added. ) .

rates the committee could recommend were not to exceed the statutory standard ( 40 cents per hour ) .

the administrator was admonished to "consider among other relevant factors ... competitive conditions as affected by transportation , living , and production costs...." discretion rested with the administrator .

taking into account the special economic circumstances existing in american samoa , congress opted to follow the puerto rican example .

on october 1956 , the first special industry committee ( sic ) notice was published in the federal register .

on february 25 , 1986 , labor secretary william brock appointed a new special industry committee ( sic ) no .

17 .

the instructions to the committee appear to have been consistent with prior committees in use since 1956 .

a new committee was promptly appointed and the process recommenced ; but , unspoken , there was a cautionary note .

reasonableness , in terms of a minimum wage , rested with the congress .

the powers of a special industry committee were now limited by what congress would accept .

in march of 1990 , labor secretary elizabeth dole announced the appointment of sic no .

19 .

but , a new complication arose — and the timing of the committee's work was deferred .

throughout most of the united states , the minimum wage is a floor — the lowest wage that can legally be paid to covered workers .

in american samoa , the minimum wage tends to represent both a floor and a ceiling — though some rates do go up a few cents beyond the minimum .

it appears that most fish processing workers in samoa are paid at or near the minimum wage .

through now fifty years ( 1956-2007 ) , american samoa had been under the special industry committee structure .

during the early years , that option included puerto rico and the virgin islands .

however , during the late 1980s and into the 1990s , puerto rico and the virgin islands graduated to a full minimum wage leaving only american samoa under the sic umbrella .

where the two caribbean territories have special characteristics that have allowed for the gradual elevation to a full minimum wage , american samoa is in a somewhat different position .

samoa evidences no serious or sustained movement into an industrial world with a diversified economy .

american samoa is isolated: 2,300 miles southwest of hawaii .

the population , though modest by mainland standards , has been expanding: perhaps , now , to about 60,000 or a little above .

distances render major tourism unlikely .

there may be some market for handicrafts , but hardly enough to sustain even native / resident workers under current marketing arrangements .

in spite of a relatively high level of samoan unemployment ( somewhere in the teens during recent years ) , workers often arrive from western samoa ( a former british colony , now independent ) to engage in fish canning and to replace those workers who migrate to the states .

there would seem to be little interest in trade unionization and , it appears , the territory offers little reward for national labor federations .

in the early 1950s , the department of the interior sought a tenant for a vacant fish processing plant at pago pago .

the search seems to have been difficult — but van camp sea foods took up the challenge .

soon , the firm was confronted with payment of a federal minimum wage .

in order to sustain its insular existence , van camp sought two concessions from the congress .

first , the minimum wage for the island should be overturned , placing responsibility in the hands of a special industry committee under the secretary of labor ( as had been done for puerto rico and the virgin islands ) .

second , it sought immunity from past underpayment of the minimum wage in samoa .

in each case , congress concurred .

gradually , the tuna industry has come to dominate the island's private sector as the primary employer .

for workers in the canneries , there would seem little option but to take jobs at whatever wages the companies chose to pay ( assuming that the sic and the congress would agree ) .

a second option , less desirable by insular standards , would have been to migrate to the states or elsewhere .

with the first dispatch of a sic to the islands in 1957 , the native economy was assessed and a minimum wage was assigned — to be updated every year or two .

at first , cannery workers were to be paid 38 cents an hour .

petroleum workers earned 45 cents an hour ; shipping , 40 cents ; and miscellaneous workers , 35 cents .

the upward movement was slow until , in 1986 , sic no .

17 determined that the federal minimum wage ( $3.35 per hour ) could be instituted without endangering employment .

however , under pressure from the canneries and the insular government , the judgment of sic no .

17 was overturned and congress urged reestablishment of a lower rate .

what some may have seen as a further setback occurred in 1990 when congress enacted legislation reducing the level of evidence required in order for an employer to affirm his or her inability to meet a minimum wage payroll .

further , in 1992 , legislation was introduced that would have increased the insular minimum , over time , to the full federal minimum rate .

but , with industry in full opposition , the bill was not adopted .

since that time , little new has developed .

in 2001 , sic no .

24 visited the islands and raised the wage for fish cannery workers from $3.20 to $3.26 .

no further increases in that category of work , it seems , have been instituted , though committees were dispatched in 2003 and 2005 and would have met in 2007 .

other rates of pay for insular workers have remained similarly low .

in 1992 , john r. fraser of dol explained that there is "concern that the industry [tuna] might respond to a large increase [in the minimum wage] by shifting production to lower - cost areas" and , for that reason , "the department opposed" legislation to provide equality with the general federal rate .

robert w. hetzler of starkist was more blunt .

were the tuna industry to disappear , "the entire samoan economy will collapse , resulting in massive social welfare costs to the government of american samoa and the united states. .

there is , he stated , "simply no replacement industry" and "...no way to recover the cost increases in the market - place. .

that rationale , however justified by insular economic conditions , may not satisfy the workers in tuna and in other industries .

"[m]y district," observed delegate faleomavaega during hearings in 1992 , "is the only jurisdiction where the american flag flies and federal minimum wage law applies , yet our people ... are told they must be satisfied with the substandard wages set by the department of labor's industry committees. .

on may 15 , 2007 , labor secretary elaine chao announced appointment of a new special industry committee to meet in pago pago in mid - june .

but , the work of the committee was interrupted by congressional action .

in late may 2007 , congress adopted ( and the president signed ) the "u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act" ( h.r .

2206 , p.l .

110-28 ) .

under the act , the sic system was abolished and a new insular minimum wage was mandated — to be raised each year in fifty - cent increments until the new federal minimum rate , however specified , might be reached .

