increasing delinquency and default rates on subprime mortgages in 2007 and 2008 , along with liquidity problems in other financial sectors , have led some to call on the federal government to intervene in the mortgage market .

the administration and the mortgage industry have developed an approach called hope now that works with borrowers with subprime mortgages facing interest rate increases and increasing payments who could be helped with a combination of counseling and either an interest rate freeze or a new mortgage .

critics of the plan believe that hope now is doing too little , too slowly to help those in need today and those who will face interest rate increases over the next few years .

foreclosure is costly for the lender , the borrower , and owners of neighboring property .

efforts to reduce foreclosures could very well be in the interest of all three affected parties .

in foreclosure the lender is unlikely to recover the outstanding balance on the mortgage and the cost of foreclosure .

the borrower is likely to lose any equity in the home , incur additional costs , and suffer credit impairment .

a large number of vacant homes in a neighborhood can reduce the value of occupied homes .

this spillover from the borrower and mortgage holder of the vacant homes to the neighbors is an example of what economists term an externality and provides a possible economic rationale for government intervention .

some analysts and journalists have drawn a parallel between the delinquency and default problems facing homeowners with subprime mortgages and distressed homeowners during the great depression .

the home owners' loan corporation ( holc ) was created in 1933 to refinance homeowners' mortgages .

this report analyzes holc , the continental illinois failure and government reaction in 1984 , the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s , and the 1989 brady plan for bonds from developing countries .

one of the first issues that congress may choose to consider when contemplating an intervention is which home owners should be included in the plan .

when there is a limited amount of aid , how should it be divided ? .

at the one extreme , if assistance goes to only a few , those who obtain it may receive more assistance than is necessary or some in identical situations could be excluded .

at the other extreme , if the assistance goes to a large number , there is a risk of spreading the help too thinly to be of assistance , or those who do not need help may receive it .

in short , who "deserves" to be helped ? .

for example , should owners of rental property be assisted or only present owners ? .

should vacation and other second homes be included ? .

should persons with two homes who are trying to sell one be aided ? .

should owners of any type of housing be helped or just owners of single - family housing ? .

if only one group , such as owners with subprime mortgages , is to be helped , should this group be further divided ? .

for example , should those current on their mortgages be assisted ? .

should those who are behind on their payments be aided ? .

what about those whose mortgage interest rates will reset in the future ? .

should borrowers with certain types of mortgages be excluded ? .

for example , should those with no - or low - documentation loans be excluded ? .

should an owner who made false or fraudulent statements to obtain the mortgage be aided ? .

does it matter if the mortgage was obtained to purchase a home as opposed to refinancing the home ? .

if refinancings are to be included , should there be a limit to the amount of cash equity that the borrower extracted from the house ? .

finally , should there be a cutoff date ? .

if there should , should it be a "date certain" or when a certain objective measure is reached ? .

one response is the hope now , which is available to homeowners through free telephone consultations with a hud - approved credit counselor .

its financial assistance is offered only to owner - occupied housing financed by subprime mortgages where the owners are current in their payments , but are not likely to be able to make payments after the mortgage resets .

some of the homeowners accepted by the program will have their mortgage interest rates frozen .

others will be helped to refinance with the federal housing administration ( fha ) .

homeowners who are delinquent on their mortgage payments may be eligible to refinance in the fhasecure program .

economists and others worry that any government intervention in market outcomes could lead to the expectation of future intervention .

this expectation , called moral hazard , could lead to riskier decisions in the future as home buyers ( both those helped and those who did not require aid in the current case ) take more risk than they might otherwise do in the expectation that the government will assist them in the future .

in turn , this could lead to resources being used in a riskier way than would have occurred without the intervention .

insurance policies usually include deductibles and co - pays to limit moral hazard and to discourage excessive use .

the rationale for such standard practices is that because the policy holder would bear part of the financial loss , he or she will exert greater prudence .

in mortgage finance , delinquency occurs when a payment on a loan is overdue .

default occurs when a borrower has failed to meet any of the terms of a mortgage contract , including timely payment .

foreclosure occurs when the lender files to seize the house ( collateral ) because the borrower is in default .

foreclosure procedures vary from state to state .

foreclosure is a costly process: one widely cited study estimates that the total cost to a lender of foreclosure , including lost interest , legal fees , and the cost of disposing of the house , is $58,759 , and takes an average of 18 months .

a more recent report by the staff of the joint economic committee ( jec ) estimated the direct loss of property value at $53,493 , and the loss of neighborhood property value at an additional $24,163 .

the jec estimated that each foreclosure would reduce property tax collections by $692 .

the jec estimate did not include legal costs and interest foregone during foreclosure .

a federal reserve bank of chicago report cited an estimate that a lender loses more than $50,000 per foreclosure .

as long as home prices were rising , lenders and borrowers had less need to worry about the ability of the borrower to make payments after a mortgage reset because the mortgage would be refinanced before the reset , and the borrower would profit from the price appreciation .

if a borrower could not make the mortgage payments , house price appreciation made certain that the lender was paid and the borrower might also make a profit .

one reaction to this was the popularity of no - documentation or low - documentation mortgages in which borrowers supplied little or no information about their financial situations .

another response was the extension of subprime mortgages to borrowers with impaired credit histories .

all of these mortgages depended heavily upon home price appreciation to provide repayment in case of foreclosure .

where home prices stop appreciating rapidly , the collateral represented by the home can be insufficient to liquidate the debt without a loss to the lender .

the federal government has intervened in the past to modify market outcomes .

in keeping with the current debate on the subprime mortgage actions , this section analyzes in greater detail those previous government actions that directly affected individuals and those that are most relevant to the current discussion on assisting homeowners .

this report examines four government market interventions: ( 1 ) the home owner loan corporation ( holc ) of 1933 ; ( 2 ) continental illinois in 1994 ; ( 3 ) the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s ; and ( 4 ) brady bonds in 1989 .

holc is included because it has been widely mentioned as a possible model for government action .

continental illinois , in 1984 , is included because the bank failed to properly underwrite loans , and because the federal reserve and the federal deposit insurance corporation led assistance efforts .

the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s is included because the problems were closely connected to the financing of homes .

brady bonds are discussed in part because previous attempts to solve the international financial distress failed and also because the comparison between earlier attempts and then - u.s. treasury secretary nicholas f. brady's proposal might be useful .

on february 23 , 2009 , representative john conyers introduced h.r .

1106 , helping families save their homes act of 2009 .

it was referred to the committees on financial services , judiciary , and veterans affairs .

the bill would allow judges to modify mortgages on primary residences as part of bankruptcy proceedings ; authorize the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to pay a lender the outstanding balance of a va - guaranteed mortgage that is modified in bankruptcy ; make certain agreements between mortgage servicers and investors requiring bankruptcy losses to exceed a specified amount unenforceable as contrary to public policy ; provide a safe harbor for certain loan modifications and workouts ; modify the hope for homeowners program ; and require lenders in the fha insurance program to meet new standards .

if congress were to consider some intervention to aid homeowners , there are a number of questions for its consideration: who should be helped ? .

should there be an income limit ? .

should it be limited to owner - occupied housing ? .

what should be the tax treatment of the assistance ? .

who should administer the program ? .

what should happen if foreclosure becomes necessary ? .

what should be the government's continuing role ? .

should the program have a fixed life ? .

what restrictions , if any , should be placed on the ability of homeowners that receive assistance to sell their homes in the future ? .

what if the sale is at a profit ? .

what if the sale is at a loss ? .

if the government makes a financial contribution , how much should it be and how should it be financed ? .

one of the lessons from these four instances of government intervention is that those in financial difficulty are frequently reluctant to acknowledge the existence or severity of the problem .

on the other hand , in these four cases , recognition that substantial losses had occurred was a key to beginning the recovery process .

the question remaining was how the losses could be paid for at the least cost .

most government market interventions have used the emergency medicine principal of triage to divide those into distress into three groups: those who cannot be helped with the resources available , those who will recover ( or at least survive ) without any help , and those who will recover only with immediate assistance .

the difficulty is in determining to which category the affected persons or institutions should be assigned .

holc and brady bonds involved negotiations between the borrower and the organizations involved in the refinancing .

not every distressed borrower was willing or able to meet the terms of the assistance effort .

it is probably unrealistic to expect that any plan could keep all subprime borrowers in their homes .

for example , some borrowers will become unemployed and not have the income to make even reduced mortgage payments .

even a moratorium on foreclosures would prevent loss of homes only while the moratorium lasts .

the holc experience was that some of those who could be helped would not contact the holc .

it was necessary for holc to reach out to borrowers who became delinquent and to develop personalized plans to modify the mortgage so that it could be repaid eventually .

many of the largest mortgage lenders and associations such as those represented by hope now are urging delinquent homeowners to talk with their lenders and credit counselors .

hope now , also , is dividing callers into three categories trying to work quickly with the easiest situations first so that those who require more extensive help can get the resources needed .

economists use the phrase "moral hazard" to represent the change in behavior due to insuring risks .

purchasing insurance probably makes some individuals more likely to take risks than would be prudent without the financial safety net .

economists who worry about moral hazard are concerned that a government intervention in a market outcome also encourages individuals and companies to pay less attention to risk in the future in the expectation that the government will intervene again .

they worry that in the case of a government intervention to help homeowners , the possibility of a repeat of the intervention could encourage some lenders to lend more than they would , absent the history of government action .

it is possible that homeowners who are helped and others who see the intervention occur also could react this way .

