an estimate of the quantity and type of offset projects that might be available in a cap - and - trade system would provide for a more informed debate over the design elements of a cap - and - trade system .

 ( see text box below , "what is a cap - and - trade system ? " ) .

an offset is a measurable reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of ghg emissions from a source not covered by an emission reduction program .

from a climate change perspective , the location of the reduction , avoidance , or sequestration does not matter: a ton of co 2 ( or its equivalent in another ghg ) reduced in the united states and a ton sequestered in another nation would have the same result on the atmospheric concentration of ghgs .

if a cap - and - trade program includes offsets , covered sources would have to submit offsets ( in lieu of emission allowances ) to meet compliance obligations .

offset projects vary by the quantity of emission credits they could generate and the implementation complexity they present .

in general , agriculture and forestry activities offer the most potential , but these projects often pose multiple implementation challenges .

these contrasting attributes may create a tension for policymakers , who might want to include the offset projects that provide the most emission reduction opportunities , while minimizing the use of offset projects that pose more implementation complications , or have the potential to be invalid .

if congress enacts a greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission reduction program , such as a cap - and - trade system , the treatment of offsets would be a critical design element .

economic models of cap - and - trade legislation have generally demonstrated that different offset scenarios — for example , unlimited offsets versus no offsets allowed — lead to significant variances in program costs .

however , offsets have fueled considerable debate , primarily for the concern that illegitimate offsets could undermine the ultimate objective of a cap - and - trade program: emission reduction .

how many offsets would be available as a compliance option if congress enacted a cap - and - trade program ? .

although economic models have generated estimates of offsets developed and used in a cap - and - trade system , the estimates are rife with uncertainty .

this report examines the multiple variables that help shape offset supply .

it is difficult to estimate the supply of offsets that might be available in a cap - and - trade system , because the supply is determined by many variables , including policy choices .

figure 1 illustrates the various inputs and variables that would affect the potential supply of offsets in a cap - and - trade program .

these factors — mitigation potential , policy choices , economic factors , emission allowance price , and other factors — are each discussed below .

as figure 1 indicates , the factors do not act in isolation , but interact in a complex manner .

mitigation potential is not synonymous with offset supply potential ( figure 1 ) .

some of the activities included in mitigation potential estimates would likely not qualify as offsets in a cap - and - trade system .

a striking example is biofuel production , which has been projected by some studies to play a substantial role in ghg mitigation in later years .

by placing a price on carbon , a cap - and - trade program is expected to increase biofuel and biomass production .

if a power plant substitutes a carbon - intensive fuel ( eg , coal ) with a less carbon - intensive fuel ( eg , biomass , such as switchgrass ) , the plant's ghg emissions would decrease .

these emission reductions would be counted directly by the power plant .

the increased biofuel use would mitigate ghg emissions , but would not count as an offset in a cap - and - trade program , because the reductions ( from the fuel substitution ) would be made directly by covered sources .

mitigation potential estimates are often used as inputs for economic models of cap - and - trade legislation .

for example , epa's 2009 mitigation potential estimates were used in the epa and energy information administration's ( eia ) analyses of h.r .

2454 .

both of these analyses generated estimates of the number and type of offsets that would be used by covered sources for compliance purposes .

however , these offset supply estimates are imperfect , because the underlying data — mitigation potential estimates — contain considerable uncertainty .

modelers derive estimates of mitigation potential by assigning a price for ghg emissions and sequestration .

under the widely used forest and agriculture sector optimization model ( fasom ) , for example , "landowners would receive annual payments for increasing sequestration and reducing emissions relative to their base case ( additionality ) , but face the cost of having to make payments for increasing emissions or reducing sequestration. .

as with all models , the mitigation potential simulations include numerous assumptions , including behavioral responses to economic incentives and disincentives .

for example , actors ( eg , farmers ) are assumed to have "perfect foresight. .

perfect foresight assumes that "agents , when making decisions that allocate resources over time ( eg , investments ) , know with certainty the consequences of those actions in present and future time periods. .

epa recognizes that this assumption , which the agency states is used by most of the climate economic modeling community , does not reflect reality .

the use of this assumption likely yields an overestimation of mitigation potential: in reality , market participants make imperfect judgments and leave some financial opportunities on the table .

mitigation potential models must necessarily include certain technical assumptions , such as sequestration rates of various activities .

different models often use different underlying assumptions to generate results .

indeed , there is often disagreement within the modeling community , particularly for forestry sequestration simulations , over the use of various modeling inputs .

in addition to the above limitations — which are generally inherent to some degree with all economic modeling — a critical factor for agriculture and forestry mitigation opportunities is land availability .

more projects would become economically competitive as the emission allowance price rises .

at certain price levels , one mitigation activity may replace another .

for example , agricultural soil sequestration projects ( eg , conservation tillage practices ) are expected to present cost - effective opportunities at relatively low prices .

as the allowance price rises , afforestation projects are expected to become ( 1 ) cost effective in more places and ( 2 ) more cost effective than ongoing soil sequestration activities .

thus , lands that once generated soil sequestration , while growing traditional commodities , may be replaced with afforestation projects ( tree farms ) .

other activities — preservation , recreation , fuel production — may compete for limited land resources .

some activities may preclude options for resource use , such as traditional crop production or afforestation .

in other cases , more than one practice that reduces or sequesters co 2 may be possible .

for example , conservation tillage may be conducted in concert with biofuel production .

it is very difficult for most modeling tools to keep track of these competing or compatible activities , although some models may have the capability to account for some of these interactions .

thus , different analyses will produce varying results .

over the past decade , several studies , including reports from epa ( 2005 and 2009 ) and usda ( 2004 ) , have produced estimates of mitigation potential from agriculture and forestry activities .

the estimates from these studies vary , in some cases considerably .

for example , table 1 lists the different results between epa's 2005 and 2009 models .

as the table indicates , the estimates of mitigation potential from the agriculture and forestry sectors decreased substantially in the 2009 model .

in particular , estimates of agricultural soil sequestration activities decreased by 100% ( or almost 100% ) at several price scenarios .

the explanation for these varied estimates is complex and beyond the scope of this report: for a comprehensive discussion of these estimates , see crs report r40236 , estimates of carbon mitigation potential from agricultural and forestry activities , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

in short , the different estimates reflect different modeling assumptions , such as emission / sequestration baselines ( or business - as - usual scenarios ) .

the dramatic differences between the 2005 and 2009 estimates ( table 1 ) highlight the uncertainty that pervades mitigation estimates .

regardless , both models demonstrate the influence of price .

and both models indicate relative differences between the project types , with forestry projects providing much of the potential , particularly at higher price scenarios .

other potential mitigation activities — for example , methane abatement from landfills or the natural gas sector — are generally considered less complicated in terms of measurement than agriculture and forestry projects .

in addition , these types of mitigation projects are typically not subject to competition for land resources .

however , these estimates are only mitigation potential , not potential offset supply .

other factors , identified in figure 1 and discussed below , would likely constrain or exclude their development as offsets .

for instance , some of the activities identified below would be covered under the cap of some legislative proposals .

several of the mitigation activities in table 2 are projected to occur at $0 / mtco 2 - e. epa states that these figures "represent mitigation options that are already cost - effective given the costs and benefits considered ( and are sometimes referred to as "no - regret" options ) yet have not been implemented because of the existence of nonmonetary barriers. .

these are discussed below in " other factors . .

the fact that parties are not acting in the most economically efficient manner at $0 / mtco 2 - e , calls into question the estimates for higher prices and further demonstrates the uncertainty contained in mitigation potential estimates .

policy decisions from congress , u.s. states , and foreign governments would directly and indirectly affect the supply of offsets in a cap - and - trade program .

the primary factor would be the design of the cap - and - trade system .

other policies would also help shape the pool of offsets that could be used for compliance purposes .

these policy choices are discussed below .

programmatic design elements could affect offset supply in several ways , from the overall structure of the cap ( eg , which sources are covered ) to specific logistical details ( eg , monitoring and measuring protocols ) , including which agency or agencies would be responsible for developing the logistical details .

another critical element would be the program's use of set - aside allowances .

the wider the scope of the cap , the smaller the offset universe .

in other words , as more source categories are subject to the cap , the fewer the number of uncapped sources , thus the number of eligible offset project types decreases .

similarly , h.r .

2454 would set emission performance standards for ch 4 emissions from landfills and coal mines , reducing the opportunities for offsets from these categories .

policymakers may choose to restrict the types and locations ( domestic versus international ) of offsets eligible for use by a regulated entity .

biological sequestration generally offers the most potential , but these projects present substantial challenges .

in some legislative proposals , the project types allowed are not specified in the text , but would be subsequently determined by an implementing agency .

in addition , the degree to which international offsets are allowed would have considerable impact on domestic offsets .

the protocol established for measuring and verifying offsets would affect supply .

a more stringent protocol would likely reduce supply .

offsets that are questionable — for instance , in terms of their additionality — would likely be excluded or discounted ( also reducing supply ) .

additionality determinations ( i.e. , would the project have happened anyway ) typically require some subjectivity in the decision process .

a protocol with more constraints could remove some of the subjectivity , which , if left in place , could lead to an influx of questionable offsets .

some protocols may include more conservative parameters for measuring tons of co 2 sequestered for a particular project type .

for example , one protocol may stipulate that carbon saturation for a given plant or tree species occurs in a shorter time frame , thus fewer offsets would be produced through the project .

moreover , the stringency of the protocols would likely affect the costs of developing , implementing , and verifying an offset project .

these costs might be described as transaction costs .

for example , a protocol that required independent , third - party verification would entail higher costs for offset projects .

if transaction costs increase , the number of cost - effective offset projects would decrease .

the proposed ( and enacted ) systems of measurement and verification vary .

in many cases , legislative proposals direct various agencies to develop the protocols .

in these cases , the level of protocol stringency would be uncertain at the bill's passage .

if a cap - and - trade program provides set - aside allowances for specific activities , these activities would impact the potential supply of offsets .

recent cap - and - trade proposals would give emission allowances ( set - asides ) to non - covered entities to promote various objectives , including biological sequestration .

set - aside allowances are taken from within the cap , so if the set - aside allowances do not lead to further emission reductions , abatement , or sequestration , the cap remains intact .

indeed , one strategy for policymakers is to allot set - asides for activities whose emission reductions , abatement , or sequestration may carry more uncertainty than other potential offset activities .

however , a project that receives a set - aside cannot also qualify as an offset .

thus , set - aside allowances would reduce the pool of offsets available for compliance with the cap .

as other nations or u.s. states establish emission controls or climate - related policies , the pool of offsets would shrink .

international offsets , particularly in the developing nations , are projected in models to provide numerous opportunities for compliance .

however , these projections assume that these nations are decades away from requiring ghg emission reductions or other regulations ( eg , technology standards ) that would exclude these projects as offsets .

climate - related policies in u.s. states may also affect offset supply .

a number of states have taken actions that directly address ghg emissions .

for example , 23 states have joined 1 of the 3 regional partnerships that would require ghg ( or just co 2 ) emission reductions .

a state or regional emissions cap might cover more sources than a federal program , thus disqualifying emissions from these sources as potential offset opportunities .

however , it is uncertain how these state actions would interact — for example , whether or not they would be pre - empted — with a federal cap - and - trade program .

regardless of whether state and regional emission caps are subsumed into a federal cap - and - trade program , other state policies could play a role .

for example , california recently developed methane emission performance standards for landfills .

methane captured from california landfills in response to this standard would not be available to qualify as offsets in a federal program .

policies not directly related to a cap - and - trade program could also affect the potential supply of offsets .

a comprehensive review of policies that could affect offset supply is beyond the scope of this report .

however , several federal policy options stand out .

as mentioned above , congress has enacted energy legislation requiring certain levels of biofuel use in transportation sector .

this policy affects the amount of land potentially available for agriculture and forestry offset projects .

if enacted by congress , a federal renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) or a renewable electricity standard ( res ) would affect offset supply .

such a federal standard would stimulate the production of biomass for electricity generation .

as discussed above , biomass for electricity generation would not qualify as an offset , but would instead compete with other offset projects for land resources .

the potential supply of offsets would ultimately be affected by how the economy responds to a federal cap - and - trade program .

such a complex analysis is beyond the scope of this report .

a critical factor is the development and market penetration of low - and / or zero - carbon technologies .

these technologies could lower the costs of the cap - and - trade program .

federal policies — for example , funding or tax incentives — could stimulate these technologies .

if these technologies are available earlier than predicted ( by models ) , the " emission allowance price " ( discussed below ) would likely decrease , making fewer offset projects cost effective .

the supply and type of offsets available would largely depend on the emission allowance price in a cap - and - trade system .

the market price — sometimes referred to as the price of carbon — of a tradeable emission allowance would be influenced by several factors , discussed above .

the central factor would be the structure of the emission reduction program , particularly the program's scope ( which sources are covered ) and stringency ( the amount and timing of required emission reductions ) .

in addition to the core structural design of the cap - and - trade program , the allowance price would be dependent on the program's treatment of offsets: which types would be allowed ; whether international offsets could be used ; whether covered sources would be limited ( eg , as a percentage of their allowance submission ) in their use of offsets .

as mentioned above , multiple analyses indicate that different offset treatments yield a substantial range in emission allowance prices .

the supply of offsets would fluctuate as the allowance price changes .

if the allowance price is relatively low — that is , $1 to $5 / mtco 2 - e — only the "low - hanging fruit" projects would be financially viable .

if the allowance price is higher , more offset projects would become economically competitive .

it is impossible to predict with confidence what an allowance price would be in a cap - and - trade system .

although multiple studies have provided — through economic modeling — estimates of allowance prices under cap - and - trade proposals , the results vary considerably among studies .

for more information on these issues , see crs report r40809 , climate change: costs and benefits of the cap - and - trade provisions of h.r .

2454 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

an epa study stated that "other non - price factors , such as social acceptance , tend to inhibit mitigation option installation in many sectors. .

for example , farmers engaged in dairy operations for many generations may be hesitant to convert their land to forests , even if this would be the most profitable use of the land .

in addition , institutional factors have been observed in the forestry sector , which was initially expected to play a much larger role in the cdm .

a report from the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) stated that although the forestry sector can make a "very significant contribution to a low - cost mitigation portfolio ... this opportunity is being lost in the current institutional context and lack of political will to implement and has resulted in only a small portion of this potential being realized at present. .

information dissemination may play a role .

many of the emission abatement and sequestration opportunities , particularly in the agricultural sectors , may be widely dispersed and under the control of relatively small operations ( eg , family farms ) .

similarly , many of the agriculture and forestry offset projects may present technical challenges , depending on requirements to measure emissions and verify projects .

to generate offsets at these locations , parties would need to know that opportunities exist and are financially viable ( based on the carbon price ) .

in addition , the smaller operations may need technical support in order to initiate , measure , and verify the projects .

in addition , transaction costs may impact offset development .

the definition of transaction costs can vary widely , but in general transaction costs would likely include ( 1 ) administrative costs , such as project registration or document preparation ( eg , project petitions ) needed for compliance ; and ( 2 ) measuring , monitoring , and verifying costs .

transaction costs would likely involve upfront , one - time costs to get the project up and running as well as annual or periodic costs to assure the project is performing as intended .

different offset project types could have radically different transaction costs .

these differences could affect the types and quantity of offsets developed in a cap - and - trade system .

for example , agricultural soil sequestration projects would likely require annual monitoring , possibly at several sites , depending on the size of the project .

in contrast , afforestation might need only periodic monitoring , perhaps every five years , to assure that carbon sequestration is occurring .

in addition , afforestation carbon is above ground and can be estimated rather simply , with measurements of tree height and diameter .

soil carbon would likely require soil samples to be taken and analyzed , with the number of samples depending on the heterogeneity of the soils on the site .

