the earth's surface has warmed by 1.1 o to 1.5 o fahrenheit since the industrial revolution and precipitation has increased over the past century , although some regions have become wetter while some have become drier .

increases in ocean temperatures , altered wind patterns , extreme weather events , melting glaciers and sea ice , and timing of seasons have also been observed .

the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) in 2007 declared that "[w]arming of the climate system is unequivocal...." and that most of the observed change since the 1970s is likely due to greenhouse gases emitted as a result of human activities .

experts project that if greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions are not abated well below current levels , the earth's climate will warm further — to levels never experienced by human civilizations .

if , and as , the climate moves further from its present state , it will reconfigure the patterns to which current human and ecological systems are adapted , and the risk of abrupt changes will increase .

understanding of the magnitude , causes , and implications of climate change continues to grow .

but alongside efforts to further that understanding , a sense of urgency is spurring many international , national , regional , and local policymakers , industry leaders , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and citizens to mobilize toward more concrete actions .

concern about poorly understood but potentially catastrophic impacts of human - induced climate change drives the impetus to identify , evaluate , and initiate concrete policy actions to address human activities — such as the emissions of ghgs , land use changes , and forestry practices — believed to contribute to climate change .

in parallel , growing attention is being given to characterizing and supporting adaptations to changes already observed or expected future changes .

domestic actions to address climate change are moving independently across many fronts .

in the 110 th congress , numerous bills have been proposed to address climate change research and policy ; one bill ( s. 2191 ) that would cap and reduce greenhouse gas emissions was reported by the senate committee on environment and public works and the senate agreed on june 2 , 2008 to consider the bill ( now s. 3036 ) .

the supreme court in 2007 ruled that the administration must consider regulating greenhouse gases from motor vehicles as air pollutants , and president george w. bush in 2008 proposed a qualified national goal for u.s. greenhouse gas emissions to peak by 2025 and then decline .

states and localities have moved forward with their own plans and regulations in lieu of a strong national framework .

primary concerns are the costs , which could reach trillions of dollars over coming decades , depending on policy choices ; the distribution of those costs ; and the effectiveness of policies , with the knowledge that u.s. greenhouse gas reductions would achieve success only if sufficient international cooperation can be achieved as well .

debate internationally has revived over how nations may commit to mitigation , adaptation , and technology actions beyond 2012 , the end of the current commitment period of the kyoto protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate change .

negotiations are aiming to produce a post - 2012 decision by the end of 2009 .

u.s. domestic policy development could influence and support international cooperation or introduce impediments , depending on how the interplay is managed .

the stakes are potentially high: the effectiveness of mitigating human - induced climate change depends on action by all major emitters , while the costs of delay , deferral or ineffectiveness have been projected by some analysts to reach many trillions of dollars over coming decades .

this report does not discuss or analyze current legislative proposals .

rather , it introduces the reader to fundamentals of the climate change issue .

part one summarizes current understandings and controversies concerning the science , economics , international cooperation , and other aspects of the climate change policy problem .

part two is a brief update on the status of domestic and international policies .

part three outlines the policy toolbox seen as being available to policymakers to address the challenge as they define the emerging legislative agenda .

the stage for upcoming policy deliberations is set by the existing frameworks internationally and domestically .

the developing countries now contribute the major , and most rapidly increasing , share of ghg emissions globally .

effectively abating climate change would require ghg reductions in all major countries .

additionally , some industries fear adverse trade impacts if their competitors in other countries do not have similar requirements to reduce ghg emissions .

in the united states , these issues , along with concerns about u.s. leadership and sovereignty , figure into the debate over long - term ghg concentration targets and near - term emission controls .

legislative actions would be superimposed on existing federal programs and a patchwork of state and local policies to reduce a part of u.s. ghg emissions .

one legislative challenge would be to create a coherent strategy from the current components .

with growing consensus on climate change science and pressures from interest groups , many legislators are deliberating whether and how to address climate change .

some may prefer to continue to employ the existing set of research and voluntary programs .

available for others who are considering additional actions is an assortment of policy tools that they see as stimulating further reductions of ghg emissions and reducing risks to the economy , specific populations , and natural systems .

part three of this report identifies a variety of policy tools potentially affecting these objectives: regulatory , including market - based , tools to reduce ghgs ; distribution of potential revenues from ghg programs ; non - regulatory tools that help markets work more efficiently ; tools to stimulate technological change ; options to ease the economic transition to a lower ghg economy ; instruments to encourage international actions ; and tools to stimulate adaptation to climate change .

the following sections summarize some potentially applicable instruments in each of these categories that have been proposed or used in the past .

many of these tools are complementary , and proponents often contend that they would produce results more efficiently when carefully matched than any one alone .

with the current flurry of activity to address ghg emissions at local , state , and international levels , as well as the introduction of numerous ghg reduction bills in the 110 th congress , it seems likely that members of congress will have to decide whether the time is appropriate to legislate a climate strategy , and what forms legislation should take .

in considering the alternatives , policy makers may wish to answer for themselves such questions as whether the risks of human - induced climate change are sufficiently certain to call for policy actions to mitigate the causes and / or adapt to perceived inevitable change ; how a domestic policy package can be designed that balances the risks of climate change with costs that are accepted as reasonable and fairly distributed ; how domestic policy would interact with international negotiations to avoid unacceptable climate risks while distributing the effort equitably among countries and sectors ; and when and how to promote appropriate adaptation by private and public decision - makers to the uncertain climate ahead .

reports for members of congress , providing more detailed information on topics introduced in this report , can be found on the crs website , on the climate change issues in focus pages , or by calling 707-5700 .

