the united states plays a critical role in global markets for both feed grains and oilseeds .

the united states is the world's leading producer and exporter of both corn and soybeans .

in 2007 the united states had 42% and 63% shares , respectively , of world corn production and trade , and 32% and 41% shares of world soybean production and trade .

as a result of this dominant role , unexpected changes in u.s. production for either corn or soybeans , such as those stemming from the midwest floods of 2008 , can have a major impact on both u.s. and global commodity markets .

during the first half of 2008 , u.s. and world agricultural markets for most grains and oilseeds experienced tight supplies and record high prices .

the high prices provided a tantalizing incentive for u.s. farmers as they prepared to plant their crops this past spring .

in contrast , the dramatic , unexpectedly sharp price increases of the past year have raised costs for livestock feeders and agricultural processors , evoked considerable concern about consumer food - price inflation and international food aid availability , and sparked a global debate—referred to as the "food versus fuel" debate—about the increasing policy trend of dedicating commercial agricultural crops to biofuels production , particularly corn used for ethanol .

against this backdrop of producer anticipation and consumer angst , substantial new concerns emerged by late june about potential weather - and flood - related production losses to this year's u.s. corn and soybean crops .

widespread , good growing conditions have persisted since the floods adding to the uncertainty over crop production prospects .

on august 12 , 2008 , usda released the first survey - based forecast of corn and soybean production for 2008 .

according to usda's forecast , u.s. farmers will produce the second largest corn crop on record—12.3 billion bushels—up about 5% from the previous month's forecast , but down over 6% from the 2007 record crop .

usda's soybean production forecast of nearly 3 billion bushels is unchanged from the july forecast , but up 15% from 2007 .

these production forecasts reflect three factors .

first , flood - related acreage losses appear to be substantially less than initially projected .

second , nearly ideal growing conditions that have persisted across the corn belt since late june have contributed to sharp increases in usda's yield outlook for corn , thus , offsetting flood - related area losses .

third , despite a 17.6% increase in planted acreage in 2008 , soybean production is flat due to a diminished yield outlook—largely due to the lateness of the crop's planting and development , as well as dry conditions in the delta , the southeast , and the northern plains .

usda's august crop production forecast appear to have calmed much of the market concern regarding crop losses due to flooding .

however , a large portion of the 2008 corn and soybean crops were planted late and , as of early august , remain substantially behind historical development rates .

as of august 11 , usda estimates that 30% of corn had reached the dough stage of development compared with the 5-year average of 50% , while only 6% had dented compared with an average of 16% the past five years .

similarly , 60% of soybean plants had set pods compared with the 5-year average of 75% .

as a result , market analysts suggest that weather problems could still emerge—such as an early freeze—that could lower yield and production prospects , especially in the more northerly regions where crop development remains behind normal .

flood - related crop damage assessments generally are made by county and state officials in the affected regions .

however , a rough approximation of flood - damaged acres can be obtained by comparing the implied state - level abandonment rates from usda's august forecasts with the recent eight - year average abandonment rates .

if one attributes any change from the 8-year average entirely to the flood , then the data suggest that about 889,000 acres planted to corn and intended for harvest were lost in iowa ( 453,000 ) , illinois ( 236,000 ) , indiana ( 102,000 ) , and missouri ( 99,000 ) —see table 1 .

this "lost" area estimate represents about 1% of the 87.0 million acres planted to corn in 2008 .

however , projected below - average abandonment rates throughout the remainder of the corn belt , particularly in nebraska , kansas , south dakota , ohio , and in lower - yielding non - corn belt states more than offset the lost acres .

applying usda august yield forecasts to the area - loss calculations suggests that the four major flood - affected states of iowa ( 77.5 million bushels ) , illinois ( 40.6 ) , indiana ( 15.8 ) , and missouri ( 14.4 ) , cumulatively account for 148.2 million bushels of "potentially" lost production .

this "lost" production estimate represents 1.2% of the 12.3 billion bushel crop estimate announced by usda .

applying the same abandonment rate methodology to soybeans suggests that projected area loss related to bad weather and flooding amounts to nearly 400,000 acres in the corn belt , partially offset by 184,000 acres of below - normal abandonment in non - corn belt states ( table 2 ) .

this "lost" area estimate represents about 0.2% of the 74.8 million acres planted to soybeans in 2008 .

applying usda august yield forecasts to the area - loss calculations suggests that for soybeans there are six major flood - affected states that cumulatively account for 63 million bushels of "potentially" lost soybean production: iowa ( 19.1 million bushels ) , illinois ( 19.0 ) , indiana ( 12.5 ) , missouri ( 8.8 ) wisconsin ( 2.4 ) , and minnesota ( 1.3 ) .

this "lost" production estimate represents 2.1% of the estimated 3 billion bushel crop .

as mentioned earlier , the united states and world markets have experienced tight supplies and record high prices during the first half of 2008 .

most long - term forecasts project prices for feed grains and oilseeds—as well as those crops that compete for area with feed grains and oilseeds—to remain at significantly higher levels than experienced during the recent 1998-2006 period .

the main factors behind higher long - term prices are projections for a steady rise in global population , accompanied by steady income growth in the world's developing economies , which combine to sustain growth in demand for livestock products and the feedstuffs ( eg , coarse grains and protein meals ) needed to produce those products .

in addition , the outlook for increased demand for agricultural feedstocks to meet large increases in government biofuel - usage policies , particularly in the united states and the european union ( eu ) , suggest that demand will increase strongly over the coming decade for corn ( the primary feedstock for u.s. ethanol production ) , and vegetable oils ( the primary feedstock for biodiesel production in the united states and the eu ) .

these long - run forecasts assume normal crop growing conditions and successful harvests .

as a result , any deviation from normal growing conditions can be expected to have negative market repercussions and drive prices higher .

the potential weather - and flood - related production losses to this year's u.s. corn and soybean crops were unwelcome news to the market and , likely to contribute to higher commodity prices in june .

because the united states plays a dominant role in global corn and soybean markets , u.s. price changes transmit directly to the international marketplace .

in summary , good growing conditions during july and early august of 2008 appear to have moderated initial concerns over potential flood - related crop losses .

however , a large portion of the 2008 corn and soybean crops were planted late and , as of early august , remain substantially behind historical development rates .

as a result , market analysts suggest that weather problems such as an early freeze could still emerge to lower yield and production prospects .

such concerns are likely contribute to volatile commodity prices , thereby , maintaining pressure on policymakers over concerns about consumer food price inflation , international food aid availability , and the soundness of policy that dedicates commercial agricultural crops to biofuels production , particularly corn used for ethanol .

