as congress continues the debate on an appropriate response to the climate change issue , multiple bills have been introduced to begin reducing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

of these , s. 2191 ( the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2008 ) has received particular attention .

introduced by senator lieberman , s. 2191 was ordered reported by the senate committee on environment and public works on december 5 , 2007 .

numerous analyses have been done on its impacts , and as of april 2008 , six studies had been released .

the most comprehensive analysis has been conducted by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

the report is entitled: epa analysis of the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2008: s. 2191 in 110 th congress ( march 14 , 2008 ) .

the analysis employs a suite of models and basecases , along with some useful sensitivity analyses .

this report will focus on three of the models , two basecases , and sensitivity analysis as appropriate .

the first model is adage: a computable general equilibrium ( cge ) model developed by rti international .

the case employing the reference basecase is designated epa / adage - ref in this report , while the case employing the high technology basecase is designated epa / adage - tech .

the second model is igem: a cge model developed by dale jorgenson associates .

the case employing the reference basecase is designated epa / igem - ref in this report , while the case employing the high technology basecase is designated epa / igem - tech .

the third model is ipm: a dynamic , deterministic linear programming model of the u.s. electric power sector developed by icf resources .

the case employing the ipm model is designated epa / ipm in this report .

a second analysis has been conducted by the energy information administration ( eia ) .

the report is entitled energy market and economic impacts of s. 2191 , the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2007 ( april 2008 ) .

the analysis employs eia's nems model: a macroeconomic forecasting model with extensive energy technology detail .

in addition to conducting a "core" analysis of s. 2191 using its preliminary 2008 annual energy outlook ( aeo ) baseline , eia also conducts some useful sensitivity analyses that focus on the upside risk of increased energy prices under s. 2191 which are discussed as appropriate .

the core s. 2191 analysis is designated eia / nems in this report .

a third analysis has been conducted by the massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) joint program on the science and policy of global change .

the report is an appendix to a more comprehensive analysis of cap - and - trade programs released in 2007 .

the appendix is titled: appendix d: analysis of the cap and trade features of the lieberman - warner climate security act ( s. 2191 ) .

the appendix employs mit's eppa cge model and presents some useful sensitivity analyses of s. 2191 's offset and carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) bonus allowance provisions .

the case that includes s. 2191 's 15% international offset and ccs subsidies provisions is designated mit / eppa in this report .

a fourth analysis has been conducted for the clean air task force ( catf ) by onlocation .

the report is titled the lieberman - warner climate security act — s. 2191 : a summary of modeling results from the national energy modeling system ( february 2008 ) .

employing eia's nems model , the catf analysis is designated catf / nems in this report .

a fifth analysis has been conducted for the american council for capital formation ( accf ) and national association of manufacturers ( nam ) by science applications international corporation .

the report is entitled analysis of the lieberman - warner climate sec urity act ( s. 2191 ) using the national energy modeling system ( nems ) .

employing nems , accf / nam employs two basic cases: ( 1 ) a high cost case using the most constrained and high cost assumptions of any of the analyses presented here ( designated as accf / nam / nems - high ) and ( 2 ) a low cost case using the second most constrained and high cost assumptions of any of the analyses presented here ( designated as accf / nam / nems - low ) .

a sixth analysis has been conducted for the national mining association ( nma ) by cra international .

the report is entitled economic analysis of the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2007 using cra ' s mrn - neem model ( april 8 , 2008 ) .

the analysis employs cra's mrn - neem macroeconomic model with extensive electric power sector detail .

the case employing the nma analysis is designated nma / cra .

it should be noted that several of the studies examined in this report are published as presentations with limited documentation , making comparative analysis difficult .

each presentation has selected features or impacts it is particularly interested in highlighting .

the more comprehensive analyses are the work by epa , eia , and mit .

in order to increase the comparability of the various cases examined here , crs has converted all publicly available data presented by the cases to 2005 dollars ( where appropriate ) and interpolated missing data where possible .

likewise , where studies have stated they used specific projections as a base case ( such as eia ' s annual energy outlook 2007 or preliminary 2008 projections ) , crs has assumed those assumptions have not been altered except as specifically stated by the study .

this analysis considers the bill as ordered reported by the senate committee on environment and public works , incorporating the proposed deficit reduction amendment — s. 3036 is identical to that version , including the deficit amendment .

other proposed amendments are likely if the bill moves to the floor , and these amendments , if adopted , could affect the costs and benefits of the overall bill .

s. 2191 , the lieberman - warner climate security act of 2008 , was introduced october 18 , 2007 , by senator lieberman .

on december 5 , 2007 , the senate committee on environment and public works ordered reported an amended version of the bill that would establish a mandatory cap - and - trade system to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from most sectors of the economy .

as ordered reported , s. 2191 's emissions cap is estimated by its sponsors to require a 71% reduction from 2005 levels by 2050 from covered entities ( estimated by the sponsors to account for 87% of total u.s. greenhouse gas emissions ) .

overall , the sponsors estimate that s. 2191 would reduce total u.s. greenhouse gas emissions by up to 66% from 2005 levels by 2050 .

s. 2191 would establish an absolute cap on the emissions from covered sectors and would allow trading of emissions permits ( " allowances " ) among covered and non - covered entities .

the bill achieves its broad coverage through an upstream compliance mandate on petroleum , natural gas , and fluorinated gas producers and importers , and a downstream mandate on coal consumers , such as electric generators .

specifically , the bill would limit greenhouse gas emissions from all petroleum producers / importers , all natural gas processors , all facilities that use more than 5,000 tons of coal per year , and entities that produce or import more than 10,000 tons annually ( carbon dioxide equivalent ) of fluorinated gases and other greenhouse gases .

s. 2191 does not have a "safety valve" — an alternative compliance option that permits covered entities to pay an excess emissions fee instead of reducing emissions .

instead , the bill creates a carbon market efficiency board with authority to temporarily adjust the availability of allowances through borrowing and other techniques ; however , it is a zero - sum game .

allowances borrowed must be repaid , so the emissions cap is maintained .

the bill limits the availability of domestic offsets to 15% of the allowance requirement , with allowances bought in an eligible international allowance market also limited to 15% .

both percentages may be increased by the carbon market efficiency board if market conditions suggest such action .

the bill would permit banking of allowances .

for each year 2012 through 2050 , the bill specifies the total number of allowances available , then explicitly states the percentage of those allowances that will go to covered and non - covered sectors , as well as the share that will be auctioned .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

over time , an increasing share of the allowances are auctioned , while the allowances to covered sectors decrease to zero .

auction proceeds are allocated for various purposes , including technology development and deployment , transition assistance , adaptation , and program administration .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

under a proposed amendment to make the bill revenue neutral , a percentage of allowances ( starting at 6.1% , increasing to 15.99% ) would be auctioned off - the - top for deficit reduction ( "deficit reduction fund" ) .

after the deficit reduction allowances are allocated , the rest of the allowances ( "remainder allowances" ) are allocated according to the bill as reported .

for example , in 2012 , 6.1% of the total number of allowances are auctioned for deficit reduction , and an additional 21.5% of the "remainder allowances" are auctioned for program management , technology deployment , adaptation , and other purposes .

in addition to the cap - and - trade program , s. 2191 has other key provisions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .

title vi imposes an "international reserve allowance" requirement on certain "covered" imported goods as a prerequisite for entry into the country .

unlike importers of covered fuels that create greenhouse gases when used ( which are directly controlled as covered facilities under s. 2191 ) , title vi would affect certain bulk goods manufactured in processes that generate greenhouse gases ( e.g .

iron , paper , etc. ) .

that would not be allowed into the country if the allowance requirement were not met .

the amount and allocation of international reserve allowances would be determined by epa , and a separate allowance trading system could be established ( international reserve allowances could not be used for domestic compliance ) .

title viii on carbon sequestration requires: ( 1 ) epa to amend regulations under the safe drinking water act to allow commercial - scale underground injection of carbon dioxide for sequestration , and to monitor such activity to reduce adverse impacts from such injection ; ( 2 ) the department of the interior to assess u.s. capacity for geological sequestration ; ( 3 ) the department of energy to assess the feasibility of co 2 pipelines ; and ( 4 ) epa to establish a task force to study the issues related to federal assumption of liability for sequestration sites .

title ix permits the president to temporarily adjust or waive any regulations promulgated under the bill if a "national security emergency exists," and it is in the "paramount interest of the united states" to modify the requirements in response to that emergency .

in addition to the limits under the cap - and - trade program , title x requires epa to establish a program limiting u.s. consumption of hydrofluorocarbons under a separate hfc allowance program .

title xi amends the clean air act in three ways: ( 1 ) it requires epa to establish a program to limit emissions of greenhouse gases not covered under the program ; ( 2 ) it limits the sale and use of certain motor vehicle air conditioning fluids ; and ( 3 ) it establishes a low carbon fuel standard ( lcfs ) requiring per - unit - energy reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from transportation fuels .

the potential for noise is greater in estimating the costs of a ghg program than the simple three driver illustration presented above .

in its analysis of s. 2191 , epa presents eight pages of bullets identifying various limitations on its modeling exercise and four pages of additional "qualitative" considerations .

this is a good indicator of the modeling complexity in attempting to estimate the impact of a greenhouse gas reduction bill .

these modeling limitations reflect the inherent complexity of such strategies that cannot be quantified or predicted .

because of the economic complexities and interactions noted above , analysts have generally chosen to focus on estimating the macro - economic effects of proposals , such as gdp impacts .

there are two components of macro - economic cost measures: ( 1 ) the direct abatement ( or compliance ) cost of a greenhouse gas reduction program , and ( 2 ) the general equilibrium effects of a greenhouse gas reduction program ( i.e. , the interactions of the direct abatement costs with the rest of the economy ) .

the most common measure presented is gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

gdp measures the total value of goods and services produced within a nation's borders .

although it is commonly used as a measure of quality of life , this application is problematic .

generally , it includes only those items for which there is a value defined in a market , and does not take into account some activities that have economic value , but no market valuation ( eg , leisure time , environmental quality , etc. ) .

gdp is intended to be a measure of economic activity , not quality of life .

a second measure sometimes presented is consumption effects ( sometimes called welfare effects ) .

unfortunately , the models do not measure consumption or welfare effects in a consistent fashion ( the primary advantage of measuring gdp ) .

for example , the mit / eppa analysis presents "welfare effects" in terms of changes in aggregate market consumption plus leisure .

measured as "equivalent variation," the change in welfare represents the amount of income needed to compensate for the change .

in contrast , the eia / nems model presents "real consumption impacts" in terms of consumer expenditures .

this makes comparisons difficult and lessens the utility of the measure .

for example , when analyzing proposed legislation , the "welfare effects" of legislation under the mit / eppa are usually less than the gdp effects , while the "real consumption impacts" under eia / nems are usually greater than the gdp effects on a percentage basis .

in addition , like gdp , none of the definitions of consumption or welfare currently employed quantify any environmental effects .

a third measure generally presented is allowance prices .

these generally reflect to some degree the aggregate marginal cost of the program as estimated by the models .

marginal cost is the cost of reducing the last ton ( and , therefore , the most expensive ) of greenhouse gases required by the program at a specific point in time .

marginal costs are very useful to affected entities in choosing what reduction strategy would be the most cost - effective in achieving their assigned reduction requirement .

they are not an average cost and therefore cannot be simply multiplied by the greenhouse gases reduced to estimate total compliance cost .

they also need to be put into the context of the overall reduction achieved at the given point and time being examined .

however , allowance prices in most analyses are actually different from marginal costs because of program provisions , such as banking .

banking activity reflects the assumed foresight of affected entities to the likelihood of increasing allowance prices ( in real terms ) as the cap tightens .

as indicated by the experience with the so 2 program , entities will bank substantial allowances early and use them later as the program's requirements tighten .

this results in allowance prices being higher than marginal costs in the early years of the program , and lower in later years .

for example , the nma / cra international analysis of s. 2191 has a 2050 allowance price of about $352 under "no banking" assumptions , but an allowance price of about $195 with banking .

in contrast , 2015 allowance prices are estimated at $51 for the "banking" scenario , but only $38 under the no banking scenario .

this ability to time - shift reduction requirements and compliance costs means that allowance price projections reflect the assumed foresight of affected entities as much as they do actual marginal costs .

in presenting cost measures , most analyses over - emphasize aggregate welfare indicators , such as gdp .

as illustrated above , aggregate , macroeconomic cost results for s. 2191 fall into the noise of uncertainty about future conditions .

in addition , aggregate macroeconomic measures reduce the transparency of the analyses' compliance strategies , and as a result , make them easier to dismiss .

for example , figure 1 below shows a 1997 scatter - plot by world resources institute ( wri ) of 162 predicted impacts estimates from 16 different economic models of the u.s. economy as a result of a co 2 abatement program .

as indicated , the vast majority of estimates fall with a range of 0% - 4% of gdp , regardless of the reduction requirement .

over - emphasis on gdp or other aggregate cost measures can obscure fundamental technological , economic , or behavioral insights the analyses may have in helping policymakers craft legislation .

instead , the analysis becomes a " black box " exercise with little enlightenment function .

this "fog" is inherent when analysts choose to include the general equilibrium effects of a program in their cost measure — a fog that can limit the explanatory value of the analysis .

while supporting use of aggregate welfare cost measures , mit notes: ge [general equilibrium] effects can stem from interactions with pre - existing distortions ( eg , taxes ) , from externally induced terms - of - trade effects , from the fact that the domestic policy itself creates terms - of - trade effects , and from other rigidities in the economy .

many aspects of model structure produce ge effects that are not easy to separately measure because of the inherent interactions in the economy .

generally , the cases examined here have not chosen to separate the two components of macro - economic cost measures: ( 1 ) the direct abatement ( or compliance ) cost of a greenhouse gas reduction program , and ( 2 ) the general equilibrium effects of a greenhouse gas reduction program ( i.e. , the interactions of the direct abatement costs with the rest of the economy ) .

the availability of compliance cost estimates would allow policymakers to put current greenhouse gas reduction proposals in the context of other environmental initiatives — be they acid rain or toxic air pollutants — and , indeed , to the overall environmental agenda , and greatly increase the transparency of the analyses' insights .

it would also help relieve confusion between compliance costs , average costs ( per ton reduced ) , and the other commonly presented costs , such as allowance prices .

it is argued that an aggregate macroeconomic cost measure provides a more complete view of the economic impact of proposed legislation , and helps identity potential unintended economic effects of compliance strategies .

this may be true , particularly if , for example , auction revenues are being recycled via a reformed tax code .

however , as indicated here , aggregated macroeconomic cost measures , such as gdp , can also be interpreted to merely show that the united states has a massive economy that can absorb substantial shocks with limited long - term effect .

this report examines six studies that project the costs of s. 2191 to 2030 or 2050 .

it is difficult ( and some would consider it unwise ) to project costs up to the year 2030 , much less beyond .

the already tenuous assumption that current regulatory standards will remain constant becomes more unrealistic , and other unforeseen events ( such as technological breakthroughs ) loom as critical issues which cannot be modeled .

hence , long - term cost projections are at best speculative , and should be viewed with attentive skepticism .

in the words of the late dr. lincoln moses , the first administrator of the energy information administration: "there are no facts about the future. .

models cannot predict the future , but they can indicate the sensitivity of a program's provisions to varying economic , technological , and behavioral assumptions that may assist policymakers in designing a greenhouse gas reduction strategy .

the various cases examined here do provide some important insights on the costs and benefits of s. 2191 and its many provisions .

first , if enacted , the ultimate cost of s. 2191 would be determined by the response of the economy to the technological challenges presented by the bill .

the bill provides numerous price , research and development , deployment , and regulatory incentives for technology innovation .

the potential for new technology to reduce the costs of s. 2191 is not fully analyzed by any of the cases examined , nor can it be .

the process of technology development and dissemination is not sufficiently understood at the current time for models to replicate with any long - term confidence .

in the same vein , it is difficult to determine whether the various incentives provided by s. 2191 are directed in the most optimal manner .

second , in some ways , the interplay between nuclear power , renewables , natural gas , and coal - fired capacity with ccs among the cases is a proxy for the need for a low - carbon source of electric generating capacity in the mid - to long - term .

a considerable amount of low - carbon generation will have to be built under s. 2191 in order to meet the reduction requirement .

the cases presented here do not agree on the amount of new generating capacity necessary under s. 2191 or the mix of fuels and technologies that would be employed .

the estimated amount of capacity constructed depends on the cases' assumptions about the need for new capacity and replacement / retirement of existing capacity under s. 2191 , along with consumer demand response to the rising prices and incentives contained in s. 2191 .

third , the cases suggest that the ccs bonus allowance allocation under s. 2191 is effective in encouraging deployment of ccs , accelerating development by 5-10 years .

however , the cases disagree on whether the bonus amount provided by s. 2191 is sufficient , or needs to be extended additional years .

fourth , the cases generally indicate that offsets could be a valuable tool for covered entities not only to potentially reduce costs , but perhaps more importantly , to buy time to further develop new , more efficient technologies .

the availability of offsets could be complemented by the bill's provisions permitting banking , allowing companies more time to develop long - term investment and strategic plans , and to pursue technology development .

cost could be lowered further by allowing greater availability of offsets and international credits and with a broader definition of eligible international credits .

a more direct path for permitting international credits from mechanisms such as the cdm would also reduce one of the more important cost uncertainties revealed by the cases' varying interpretations of international credit eligibility requirements and their projected price .

fifth , the carbon market efficiency board could have an important effect on the cost of the program through its power to increase the availability of offsets and international credits .

the cases generally do not consider the board in their analyses , however , one can infer from the cases' results that the most important power that the board may have is the ability to increase the availability of domestic offsets and international credits ( although not the authority to change the eligibility requirements for domestic offsets and international credits ) .

in this sense , the board's powers could mesh with the previous insight about the importance of offsets and banking to the cost - effectiveness of s. 2191 .

however , the board is primarily designed to deal with short - term volatility due to episodic events in the allowance market and has only short - term powers .

whether it could coordinate a longer term strategy , if necessary , with its proposed authority is not known .

sixth , the low carbon fuel standard could significantly raise fuel prices and limit supply .

the effects will depend on what fuels are included in the lcfs , the level of emissions reductions achieved by alternatives , and the ability of suppliers to produce those alternatives .

if plug - in hybrid vehicles or large amounts of cellulosic biofuel are available early , or if certain fuels such as aviation fuel are excluded from the mandate , the costs could be lower .

only one case provided any analysis of the lcfs .

seventh , s. 2191 ' s climate - related environmental benefit is best considered in a global context and the desire to engage the developing world in the reduction effort .

it is in this context that the united states and other developed countries agreed both to reduce their own emissions to help stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and to take the lead in reducing greenhouse gases when they ratified the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

this global scope raises two issues for s. 2191 : ( 1 ) whether s. 2191 ' s greenhouse gas reduction program and other provisions would be considered sufficiently credible by developing countries so that schemes for including them in future international agreements become more likely , and ( 2 ) whether s. 2191 ' s reductions meet u.s. commitments to stabilization under the unfccc and occur in a timely fashion so that global stabilization may occur at an acceptable level .

