congress debates the appropriate level of spending and revenues in every fiscal year through the budget and appropriations process .

if resulting policy decisions , along with prevailing economic conditions , lead to levels of government spending which exceed revenue collection , the government will incur a budget deficit .

when a deficit occurs , how to finance the resulting debt and the long term implications of rising debt levels becomes a concern for congress and the president .

the president is required by statute to report essential information about government debt in the annual budget submission to congress .

data on the levels of federal debt are often reported in three categories: debt held by the public , debt held by federal government accounts ( intragovernmental ) , and gross ( total ) federal debt .

debt held by the public is the total amount the federal government has borrowed from the public and remains outstanding .

this measure is generally considered to be the most relevant in macro - economic terms , because it is the amount of debt sold in credit markets .

typically , changes in debt held by the public closely correspond to each fiscal year's unified budget surplus or deficit .

intragovernmental debt is the amount owed by the federal government to other federal agencies , and to be paid by the department of the treasury .

this amount largely consists of money contained in trust funds , such as social security , that has been invested in federal securities as required by law .

gross federal debt is composed of debt held by the public and intragovernmental debt .

factors influencing movements in debt include spending levels , revenue collections , and economic growth .

in most years , debt held by the public has increased on a nominal basis .

nominal measures of debt , however , do not control for inflation .

as long as the economy grows faster than the debt , the debt will become less burdensome relative to the economy as a whole .

observing historical trends in federal debt levels can illustrate how budget policy and the economy affect the debt outlook and illustrate the reasons why large changes in debt levels occurred .

the recent economic slowdown has led to growing concern over increasing debt levels and resulted in questions about the future fiscal health of the country .

ultimately , there are many implications to consider when setting policy initiatives and agendas with regard to federal debt .

this report will define the measures of debt , discuss the reasons why debt levels change , and use historical examples to illustrate the factors causing debt movements over the last seven decades .

recent policies that have affected the budgetary outlook and the debt will also be discussed .

finally , this report will examine the long - term u.s. debt outlook and implications of rising federal debt levels .

in nearly every year since the establishment of the country , the government has accumulated debt .

world war ii ( wwii ) represented a new era in debt levels and the role of the united states in the global economy .

this peak in debt levels is used as the starting point to show how federal debt levels have changed over the last seven decades .

spending levels ( outlays ) , revenue collections ( receipts ) , and economic growth affect the federal debt .

debt levels increase or decrease due to changes in outlays and receipts , which are influenced by economic conditions , demographic trends , and legislative action .

though movements in debt can be defined in a number of ways , these factors will be used in this report to identify changes in debt levels .

in order to make an appropriate comparison over time , outlays , receipts , and debt will be measured as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

gross debt as a percentage of gdp reached unprecedented levels in the 1940s due to wwii , when the size of the debt exceeded the size of the economy .

these levels have not been seen before or since in the united states .

after the war ended , federal debt fell in nearly every year , as a percentage of gdp , for the next three decades as a result of strong economic growth during most of the period .

after years of declining debt , the trend reversed in the 1980s and debt as a percentage of gdp began rising .

this upward trend continued for almost two decades as debt as a percentage of gdp grew to match the levels of the 1950s .

between 1998 and 2001 , federal debt as a percentage of gdp began declining once again , as a result of budget surpluses .

the federal budget returned to deficit in 2002 and debt as a percentage of gdp also rose .

current projections forecast debt to continue to rise for the foreseeable future .

figure 1 depicts gross debt and debt held by the public as a percentage of gdp between 1940 and 2009 .

the gap between the line depicting gross federal debt and debt held by the public represents intragovernmental debt .

figure 1 also includes recessionary periods marked by shaded bars , in order to provide an illustration of how the economy affected debt movements .

this will be discussed in greater detail throughout the report .

as a percentage of gdp , gross debt reached its peak in 1946 ( 121.7% ) .

the minimum level was reached in 1981 ( 32.5% ) .

in 2009 , gross debt as a percentage of gdp reached 83.4% and debt held by the public as a percentage of gdp reached 53.0% .

these levels of debt as percentages of gdp had not been seen since 1950 and 1955 , respectively .

intragovernmental debt holdings as a percentage of gdp have increased steadily since 1984 as evidenced by the widening gap between the lines depicting gross debt and debt held by the public .

this indicates that the amount of money held in the trust funds and other government accounts is increasing .

the future implications of this will be discussed towards the end of this report .

changes in debt cannot always be anticipated .

some policy choices lead to immediate upward movements in debt .

others , however , are expected to result in larger increases at some point in the future , relative to the time period of enactment .

the economy , through its effects on revenues and outlays , has also played a significant role in debt movements .

however , the effects of strong or weak gdp growth have not always resulted in predictable movements in debt levels .

in some instances , strong gdp growth was outweighed by increases in spending or decreases in tax revenues , causing debt as a percentage of gdp to increase instead of decrease .

at other times , a strong economic performance led to declines in debt as a percentage of gdp .

large debt increases in earlier decades were focused around wars or other defense related activities .

this was followed by a long period of steady economic growth , which generally exceeded budget deficits and resulted in declining levels of federal debt as a percentage of gdp .

beginning in the early 1980s and for the better part of two decades , debt as a percentage of gdp rose steadily , largely due to policy choices that increased spending and several recessions .

following a brief period of declining debt as a percentage of gdp in the late 1990s , it has risen again .

most recently , federal financial interventions , used to combat the recession and alleviate financial market instability , heightened concerns about increasing debt levels .

current projections show increasing levels of debt in the future , largely due to high levels of entitlement spending .

historical examples will illustrate how some of the major changes in debt over the last seven decades have been affected by outlays , receipts , gdp growth , and economic interactions during specific periods .

these periods were chosen for one of two reasons: 1 ) changes in debt held by the public as a percentage of gdp were relatively large or 2 ) anticipated large changes in debt levels did not materialize due to economic conditions or other factors .

changes in the gross debt do not always track closely with budget surpluses or deficits because gross debt includes debt held by the public and intragovernmental debt .

intragovernmental debt is the amount owed by the federal government to other federal agencies , to be paid by the department of the treasury .

intragovernmental debt , required by law to be held in the form of treasury securities , consists , in large part , of money contained in trust funds .

the largest of these trust funds include the social security , medicare , and the civil service retirement and disability trust funds .

why is it important to examine this measure of debt ? .

when the trust funds run surpluses , they receive ious in the form of treasury securities , as required by law .

these surplus funds are then used to finance other government spending .

in 1983 , major reforms to the social security program were recommended by the greenspan commission to stave off impending trust fund insolvency .

these reforms led to increases in payroll tax collections , among other changes .

since these changes were made , the level of surplus in the social security trust fund has been rising and the treasury has been borrowing from it to finance other types of spending , thereby increasing intragovernmental debt .

in 1982 , intragovernmental debt as a percentage of gdp reached its lowest level , at 6.6% of gdp .

since that time , intragovernmental debt has been rising and totaled 30.4% of gdp in 2009 .

increases in gross debt as a percentage of gdp as a result of intragovernmental debt are a significant concern over the long run .

when the trust funds begin to owe more in benefits than what they collect in payroll taxes , they will eventually begin to redeem treasury securities in order to pay the benefits owed .

this will result in additional strains on the budget as money from general revenues will be needed to fund these benefits or treasury will have to borrow additional debt from the public .

in addition , the funds from the trust fund surpluses currently being used by the government to fund other programs will no longer be available , putting strain on the funding for these programs .

over the long - term , high levels of debt can have a significant impact on future federal spending and revenue decisions and the economy .

in order to keep high debt levels from causing substantial harm to the economy , spending cuts , tax increases , or both , will be necessary .

high interest rates , lower rates of domestic investment , and a larger trade deficit could also affect the economy if debt levels remain elevated .

long terms projections of debt held by the public show it rising from 53.0% of gdp in 2009 to 90% of gdp by 2020 under the president's fy2011 budget .

by 2035 this level could rise to 185% of gdp , under certain policy conditions – a level which would likely have severe effects on the economy .

cbo calculates a measure called the fiscal gap in order to quantify the reductions in spending and revenues necessary to maintain the same level of debt at the end of a given period as at the beginning .

under current policy , significant increases in debt held by the public are projected , largely due to increased spending for certain mandatory programs .

in june 2010 , cbo projected that a permanent and immediate combination of spending cuts and revenue increases amounting to 6.9% of gdp will be necessary in order to maintain the present level of debt ( as a percentage of gdp ) 50 years from now .

this amount is significant because outlays and revenues have each historically amounted to about 20% of gdp .

enacting this change amounts to roughly a one - third cut in spending or a one - third increase in revenue collection or some combination of spending cuts and tax increases in order to maintain the current debt to gdp ratio .

if prompt actions are not taken , the magnitude of changes required in the future would be greater .

in addition to the impact on federal spending and revenue collection , high levels of debt could also reduce domestic investment .

when the economy is weak , deficit spending ( and analogous increases in federal debt levels ) may be used to stimulate demand and raise output .

eventually , however , as the economy recovers and credit markets tighten , high levels of federal government borrowing can push up interest rates .

high interest rates on government borrowing will also affect interest rates on private investment since movements between the two are linked .

interest rates that are elevated increase the costs of financing new investment in plant and equipment and may cause businesses to shift away from investment and towards consumption .

lower levels of investment may ultimately diminish economic output in the long run .

over the longer run , as the amount of foreign holdings of u.s. assets increases , a greater share of u.s. income will flow abroad in the form of interest , dividend , and rent payments .

while this outflow does not necessarily mean a decline in u.s. living standards , it may mean that future living standards will not be as high as they would have been if a greater share of domestic investment had been financed by borrowing at home instead of abroad .

the higher interest rates may also have an effect on the trade balance .

because of the increased domestic borrowing associated with the rising federal debt , firms that sell a significant share of their production abroad and those that compete directly with foreign firms selling in the united states , experience a drop in the demand for their goods and services .

this is due to the effect of higher interest rates on dollar - denominated assets , which eventually lead to an increased demand for dollars and a higher price of the dollar relative to other currencies , other things being equal .

higher interest rates make dollar - denominated assets more attractive to foreign investors due to the relatively high rates of return .

foreign investors , in order to buy the higher yielding u.s. securities , must first buy dollars with which to pay for them , thereby pushing up the price of the dollar in terms of other currencies .

the resulting increase in the exchange value of the dollar has two mutually reinforcing effects on the trade deficit .

first , the relative price of imports falls because it takes fewer dollars to bring the same quantity of goods and services into the u.s. from abroad .

lower prices for imported goods means , other things being equal , that u.s. consumers buy more goods and services produced abroad .

this results in an increase in imports .

second , the relative price of u.s. - produced goods and services rises for foreigners because the amount of foreign currency required to buy a given quantity of u.s. exports rises .

because u.s. exports are more expensive , they tend to decline .

in other words , as imports increase and exports decline , the trade deficit becomes larger .

annual policy decisions on spending and revenue affect debt levels .

spending and revenues are also influenced by economic growth and gdp .

as it has over the past decades , the united states will continue to face fiscal challenges .

balancing the budget and controlling the growth of debt would require less spending , increases in revenue collections , faster than average economic growth , or a combination of these things .

taking no action to reduce the projected growth in the debt may potentially lead to insolvency at some time in the future .

appendix a .

government debt in other industrialized countries the united states is not the only country whose central government has issued a significant amount of debt .

as the figures in table a - 1 indicate , the united states is far from having the largest government debt .

of the countries shown , seven had a higher gross debt - to - gdp ratio in 2009 than the united states .

however , high debt levels are already causing problems .

several of the countries shown in table a - 1 are facing significant debt crises which either led to significant increases in government debt or can be attributed , in part , to high levels of government debt .

iceland's banking system collapsed as a result of the global financial crisis .

as a result , the country's treasury was forced to intervene to stabilize the banking sector .

in greece , large levels of external debt and attempts to obscure true deficit figures created concern over whether or not greece would be able to borrow sufficient funds to cover maturing debt and interest payments in 2010 .

this led to negative shifts in investor confidence and concerns that the crisis may spread to other european countries and the u.s. given the highly integrated nature of the world's financial system .

appendix b .

budget and debt figures , 1940-200 .

