diplomacy is the art and practice of conducting negotiations between representatives of groups or states .

it usually refers to international diplomacy , the conduct of international relations through professional diplomats with regard to issues of treaties , trade , war and peace , economics and culture .

according to senator hagel , "diplomacy is not a weakness ... but rather an essential tool in world affairs using it where possible to ratchet down the pressure of conflict and increase the leverage of strength. .

going back to benjamin franklin , america's first diplomat , and thomas jefferson , america's first secretary of state , the united states has engaged in diplomacy to represent america and further its interests around the world .

according to the henry l. stimson center , "since 1945 , the united states has conducted its foreign relations in the context of a world that practiced what can be called classic diplomacy .

it was a world in which government - to - government relations were the principal activity .

a world in which ambassadors and embassies were often a nation's only venue for expressing its national interests .

a world in which heads of state met to discuss the great questions of the day .

it was a world , in short , in which nations were more sovereign and independent actors than today's environment allows them to be on the cusp of the 21 st century. .

many viewed the first term of the george w. bush administration as not engaging in diplomacy often enough or as a first line of action in implementing its foreign policy .

the administration gained the reputation in some quarters as conducting "cowboy diplomacy" or having a "go - it - alone" approach to international relations .

the bush administration has responded to its critics by saying that the world is a different place since september 11 th , and traditional diplomacy may not always be the right strategy .

diplomacy became a more visible option in december 2006 when the iraq study group highlighted diplomacy in its recommendations and urged the administration to launch a comprehensive "new diplomatic offensive" to deal with the problems of iraq and the region .

in early 2007 , secretary rice seemed to shift the administration's iraq policy when she stated in testimony that the administration would engage in talks with syria and iran .

as transformational diplomacy continues to be implemented , congress may opt to consider the implications it has for future funding requests , changes to the foreign service system and its representation of u.s. interests around the world , the nature of the u.s. foreign assistance program , the reconstruction and stabilization initiative , and ultimately how the proposal in its totality addresses u.s. interests .

at issue is how the united states adjusts its diplomacy to address foreign policy demands for the 21 st century .

many foreign affairs experts believe that the international system is undergoing a momentous transition affecting its very nature .

for indicators of this change , they point to the end of the bipolar world of the cold war , the changing nature of the nation state on which the existing international system is based , the rise of new national power relationships , as well as the growth in the number and the role of non - state participants in the international arena .

these experts also note the impact that the changes in worldwide communications , due to advances in technology , have had on international relations .

for the united states to continue to lead in this world , they argue , it will have to make adjustments to how it operates and relates within the changing system and the new , intense political aspirations causing these changes .

even before the united states entered the 21 st century , however , foreign affairs officials and experts were calling for reforms of the foreign affairs infrastructure , foreign assistance and public diplomacy programs , as well as the need to address the changing roles between the department of state ( state ) and the department of defense ( dod ) in foreign affairs .

according to then secretary of state , madeleine albright in 1999 , the past decade has witnessed a transformation of the world political situation... .

challenges such as transnational law enforcement , global terrorism , democracy building , protection of the environment , refugee issues , and access to global markets and energy sources now compete with traditional security and political issues for policymakers' attention .

these changes demand that we reexamine the nature and basic structure of our overseas presence .

on january 18 , 2006 , in a speech at georgetown university in washington , d.c. , secretary rice outlined her vision for diplomacy that she referred to as "transformational diplomacy. .

according to secretary rice , the objective of transformational diplomacy is to "work with our many partners around the world to build and sustain democratic , well - governed states that will respond to the needs of their people and conduct themselves responsibly in the international system. .

her proposal included moving people and positions from washington , d.c. , and europe to "strategic countries ; " it also created a new position of director of foreign assistance and changed u.s. foreign policy emphasis away from relations among governments to one of supporting changes within countries .

the administration did not request new authority from congress for these changes , but used existing authority .

in 2007 , the administration sought legislative authority ( s. 613 / h.r .

1084 ) to authorize funding and personnel issues for some aspects of the plan .

congress did not take up the legislation , so it is likely to be considered in 2008 .

implementing the transformational diplomacy proposal includes significant changes to the very culture and view of diplomacy , as well as the structure of the foreign affairs institutions in washington and abroad ; to diplomats' post assignments and their roles at the post ; and to the tools of diplomacy , including reconstruction and stabilization efforts , foreign assistance , and public diplomacy programs .

fully instituting transformational diplomacy is expected to take years , beyond the bush administration's second term .

many view a shake up of u.s. diplomacy and foreign aid mechanisms as necessary in this era of transboundary issues and actors .

retired ambassador robert p. finn said , "secretary rice ... outlined a vision for a refocusing of united states diplomatic efforts to make them conform to the realities of politics and population in the twenty - first century... .

her admirable vision for making our diplomats be in touch with the real world , both physically and virtually , is an inescapable imperative. .

likewise , the american foreign service association , while expressing concern for certain aspects , stated , "the american foreign service association strongly supports secretary of state rice's proposals to adapt the foreign service and the foreign affairs institutions to meet the foreign policy challenges of the new world that began to come into being...." there have also been important criticisms of specific aspects of the transformational diplomacy plan and how it is being carried out .

observers believe that many of the criticisms could have been avoided if there had been greater transparency as well as inclusion of diplomats , congress , and other stakeholders in the planning stages .

transformational diplomacy is about the nature of political regimes in other countries , and it promotes the united states "working with partners to build and sustain democratic , well - governed , responsible states that will respond to the needs of their people. .

the views of other nations then become important as to whether sovereign governments accept this agenda of the united states .

for instance , will other governments take issue with secretary rice's january 2006 speech on transformational diplomacy in which she stated that u.s. diplomats will be "helping foreign citizens to promote democracy building , fight corruption , start businesses , improve healthcare , and reform education ? .

will other governments allow the expansion of u.s. representation to american presence posts around their countries ? .

and how receptive will people in other countries be to the new u.s. initiatives ? .

the following are examples of international reactions to the administration's transformational diplomacy plan .

the state department intends to increase u.s. representation through the global repositioning initiative in three of these countries , china , indonesia , and malaysia .

except for needed appropriations , congressional involvement in the implementation of the transformational diplomacy proposal appears to some observers to have been minimal .

changes were made under existing authorities , and no legislation or new authority was requested from congress .

in 2007 , at the state department's request , congress considered but did not move forward , bills to authorize the full implementation of the civilian response corps in the "reconstruction and stabilization civilian management act of 2007 ( s. 613 / h.r .

1084 ) . .

as the proposal continues to be implemented , increased transformational diplomacy - related appropriations may be requested .

congress may also exercise its oversight responsibilities to monitor the effect that transformational diplomacy has on achieving foreign policy goals , maintaining a top quality foreign service , and providing the best possible representation around the world .

some areas of consideration may include the following: foreign service personnel and security issues — reports of personnel shortfalls at the department of state , because of the staffing effects of iraq , afghanistan , and the new transformational diplomacy proposal , and the lack of authority to expand the number of positions may need to be addressed in future appropriations and authorizations .

concern about adequate security may also need to be monitored as foreign service personnel are regularly posted to more difficult and dangerous assignments .

monitoring the impact of transformational diplomacy on foreign service morale , recruitment , and attrition may be required to maintain a strong and effective diplomatic representation of america overseas in the future .

funding — while the 110 th congress passed the fy2007 continuing appropriations ( p.l .

110-5 ) , which included funding for the department of state , no fy2007 money was provided specifically to implement transformational diplomacy as requested by the administration .

instead , funds were reprogrammed from other accounts within state to handle early implementation .

in order to implement transformational diplomacy changes in fy2008 , the department of state is requesting a total of $124.8 million: $20.8 million for training , $14.6 million for reconstruction and stabilization , $39.9 million for global repositioning , $34.5 million for foreign service modernization , and $15 million for public diplomacy .

through the appropriation and authorization process , congress will likely provide oversight and funding for the plan .

foreign assistance in the future — the administration's foreign assistance reform proposals appear to some as already being amended by congress .

the administration requested an increase in economic support funds ( esf ) and a decrease in development assistance ( da ) funds in fy2008 .

according to the house appropriations committee's summary , the house shifted $365 million in requested esf and international disaster and famine assistance ( idfa ) accounts to the da account to "reassert the role of usaid as the primary development agency of the u.s .

government. .

the enacted law ( p.l .

110-161 ) did not include the shift in funds .

the future of the reconstruction and stabilization initiative — congress may consider whether to codify the existence s / crs by adding its authorization to the state department basic authorities act of 1956 , and to increase s / crs authority to lead and coordinate a government - wide response to international reconstruction and stabilization .

further , there continues to be a question of providing an authorization and funding for a conflict response fund .

some supporters have suggested that such a fund might be created as a no - year revolving fund similar to the emergency refugee migration assistance ( erma ) fund .

also , the state department requested authorizing legislation for the crc .

the future of transformational diplomacy — while many foreign policy experts generally agree that the world has changed and diplomacy must change with it , experts and foreign governments have raised concerns about specific aspects of the administration's proposal .

secretary rice said that "transforming our diplomacy and transforming the state department is the work of a generation. .

if transformational diplomacy is perceived as negatively affecting u.s. interests around the world , the next administration may rethink or replace it .

it is unclear how flexible the plan is and how difficult , in terms of financial and human resource costs , this plan may be to adjust or replace .

transformational diplomacy still does not address state's organizational structure , which was never fully reorganized when the u.s. foreign policy mechanism was reformed , merging new functions into the department .

some , including the former house speaker , newt gingrich , have said the department is "broken" and needs to be overhauled .

state and defense departments' roles in some activities , and division of labor between the two , continue to be unclear .

according to former usaid administrator , andrew natsios , "if state doesn't become more operational , it's going to be overwhelmed by the defense department. .

retired ambassador prudence bushnell said: "to implement transformational diplomacy you need a clear chain of command and accountability .

this is lacking .

we don't seem to have settled the role of the military and the role of the career diplomat. .

appendix a. transformational diplomacy and global repositioning appendix b .

foreign assistance framework ( prepared by the department of state ) .

