the bush administration released the budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2009 on february 4 , 2008 .

the full set of budget documents ( budget , appendix , analytical perspectives , historical tables , as well as several other supplemental budget documents ) contains detailed budget information , including estimates of the budget without the proposed policy changes ( known as "current service baseline" estimates ) , historical budget data , detailed budget authority , outlay and receipt data , selected analysis of specific budget - related topics , and the administration's economic forecast .

the budget documents outline the administration's policy proposals and expectations from fy2008 through fy2013 .

the documents also discuss long - term fiscal issues facing the nation and provide historical data on previously enacted appropriations , past outlays and revenues , and other budget items .

the administration foresees a steady improvement of the federal government's fiscal position , including a surplus of $29 billion in fy2013 , the last year projected , although the fy2013 on - budget deficit , which excludes social security surpluses , is projected at $201 billion .

administration projections omit all costs of wars in afghanistan and iraq beyond fy2008 aside from a $70 billion supplemental request .

federal deficits are projected to rise rapidly after fy2020 .

major administration proposals include extensions of the expiring tax cuts , limited increases in domestic discretionary spending , and halting the expanding reach of the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) for calendar 2008 , but not for later years .

medicare and medicaid are expected to grow more slowly than in recent years .

the congressional budget process , which includes the annual budget resolution and appropriations bills , begins once the administration submits its budget to congress .

as congress deliberates over the budget , the administration often revises its proposals as it interacts with members of congress and as national and international economic conditions change .

on march 7 , 2008 , the house and senate budget committees reported budget resolutions ( s.con.res .

70 and h.con.res .

312 ) .

the house passed its budget resolution on march 13 by a 212 to 207 vote , and the senate passed its version in the early hours of march 14 by a 51 to 44 vote .

in each chamber , a large number of amendments were considered before adoption to budget resolutions .

both resolutions include a one - year alternative minimum tax ( amt ) fix .

the house agreed to an amended version of s.con.res .

70 on may 14 without objection , which laid the groundwork for a conference committee .

the budget conference report , h.rept .

110-659 , was filed on may 20 .

the next day , the house cleared the way for consideration of the conference agreement by passing h.res .

1214 .

on june 4 , 2008 , the senate passed the s.con.res .

70 conference report on a 48-45 vote , and the house passed it the next day on a 214-210 vote .

house passage of the fy2009 budget resolution automatically passed and transmitted to the senate legislation ( h.j.res .

92 ) to raise the debt limit .

 table 1 contains budget estimates for fy2009 from cbo , the administration ( the office of management and budget , omb ) , and congress ( house and senate budget committees ) .

estimated budget totals can vary due to differing underlying economic , technical , and budget - estimating assumptions and techniques , as well as differences in policy assumptions .

minor differences in underlying assumptions , which may generate small short - term discrepancies , can produce wide divergences in projected long - term budget paths .

budget estimates issued by the president , cbo , congress , or by others , should be expected to change as new data arrive or as economic conditions change .

the economic slowdown caused by financial turmoil and rising commodity prices that started in the third quarter of 2007 has continued to affect budget estimates and projections .

early in 2008 , cbo predicted that economic growth would slow in calendar year 2008 and recover in 2009 .

the president's budget acknowledged economic challenges , but predicted strong growth in both 2008 and 2009 .

over the course of 2008 , the economy weakened according to many measures such as employment , although other measures such as economic growth and household consumption did not slow as much as some had expected .

as a result of the deepening of the economic slowdown , omb and cbo in summer 2008 adjusted forecasts of revenues downwards and outlays upwards .

cbo's september 2008 baseline estimate for fy2009 revenues ( $2.817 trillion ) was $97 billion below its january figure ( $2.720 trillion ) , while the september baseline estimate for outlays ( $3.158 trillion ) was $143 billion above the january estimate ( $3.015 trillion ) .

on march 7 , 2008 , the house and senate budget committees reported budget resolutions ( s.con.res .

70 and h.con.res .

312 ) .

the house passed an amended version of its budget resolution on march 13 by a 212 to 207 vote , and the senate approved its version , also including amendments , in the early hours of march 14 by a 51 to 44 vote .

in both chambers , a large number of amendments were considered .

both budget resolutions included a one - year fix for the amt in tax year 2008 .

the house resolution included reconciliation instructions that would offset the cost of the amt fix , while the senate resolution omitted offsets for the amt fix .

according to media reports , the house resolution contained $25.4 billion more ( including cap adjustments and advance funding ) in non - emergency discretionary budget authority than the $991.6 billion figure requested by the president for fy2009 .

the senate budget resolution called for $21.8 billion in non - emergency discretionary budget authority above the level requested by the president .

the senate version presumes the key 2001 and 2003 tax cuts , including the 10% tax bracket and the child tax credit , would be extended beyond their scheduled 2010 expiration date .

the senate resolution also included a $35 billion economic stimulus package .

approval of house and senate budget resolutions cleared the way for negotiations for a conference agreement .

after several weeks of negotiation between house and senate budget committees , the house agreed to an amended version of s.con.res .

70 on may 14 without objection , paving the way for a conference committee .

the conference report ( h.rept .

110-659 ) was filed on may 20 , and on the next day , the house approved h.res .

1214 , passed on a 220 to 199 vote , clearing the way for consideration of the conference agreement .

the administration's budget proposed fy2009 outlays of $3,107 billion , about $92 billion above the cbo baseline .

both the administration and cbo have issued projections of future federal outlays .

in addition , the budget resolutions passed by house and senate budget committees , which reflect congress's priorities , specify future paths for spending and revenues .

table 2 summarizes these projections .

deficits occur when congress and the president enact policies that cause federal spending to exceed federal receipts .

deficits increase government debt held by the public , generally increasing net interest payments .

surpluses occur when federal receipts exceed outlays , which reduces federal debt held by the public .

this can , in turn , reduce net interest payments .

many economists believe that running surpluses when economic growth is strong and deficits when the economy is weak helps dampen macroeconomic fluctuations .

the federal government last ran a surplus in fy2001 , which amounted to $128 billion or 1.3% of gdp .

long - term cbo and omb projections both show substantial increases in budget deficits in the years after fy2020 .

these deficits result from a projected gap between rising federal outlays and revenues .

the growth of health care spending , as well as demographic changes , plays an important part of those fiscal trends .

table 6 summarizes administration and cbo projections of total federal deficits and surpluses .

the fy2007 total deficit , $162 billion , was well below the administration's estimate in the fy2008 budget .

omb , cbo , and gao agree that over a longer time period , one beginning in this decade and lasting far into the century , the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable .

the nation's aging population , combined with rising costs per beneficiary for health care that seem likely to continue rising faster than per capita gdp , raises spending in federal programs for the elderly to such an extent that the government faces constantly rising deficits and a compounding federal debt burden .

cbo has concluded that "under any plausible scenario , the federal budget is on an unsustainable path. .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , approximately its current share , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid .

a former cbo acting director stated that , "by 2030 ... spending for those programs [medicare , social security , and medicaid] is projected to reach roughly 15 percent of gdp... .

if that increase happened... , the rest of the budget would have to be cut by more than half" to keep overall spending close to 20% of gdp .

a cbo report on the long - term fiscal outlook concluded that over the next half - century , the united states will confront the challenge of conducting its fiscal policy in the face of the retirement of the baby - boom generation... .

under current policies , the aging of the population is likely to combine with rapidly rising health care costs to create an ever - growing demand for resources to finance federal spending for mandatory programs , such as medicare , medicaid , and social security... .

attaining fiscal stability in the coming decades will probably require substantial reductions in the projected growth of spending and perhaps also a sizable increase in taxes as a share of the economy .

the administration indicated similar concerns about the outlook for the budget over the long term in the president's fy2009 budget .

the current structure of the federal government's major entitlement programs will place a growing and unsustainable burden on the budget in the long - term.... by 2050 , spending on these three entitlement programs [social security , medicare , and medicaid] is projected to be more than 15 percent of gdp , or more than twice as large as spending on all other programs combined , excluding interest on the public debt .

the social security , medicare , and medicaid programs present different challenges to the long - term fiscal position of the federal government .

estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between social security ( oasdi ) outlays and social security revenues as a proportion of long - term gdp are generally much smaller than estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between medicare ( hi , part b , and part d ) outlays and revenues .

these long - term estimates of fiscal imbalances are especially sensitive to changes in assumptions regarding productivity growth and interest rates .

some analysts willing to make more felicitous assumptions about productivity growth present a more optimistic long - term outlook for social security .

spending projections for medicare and medicaid are sensitive to changes in medical inflation .

in past years , many projections that medical inflation would slow have turned out to be overly optimistic .

unexpected events , such as the hurricanes in 2005 or an economic downturn , can change the short - term budget outlook .

the interplay of policy , demographics , and medical care costs , however , will in large part determine the long - term budget outlook .

the retirement of the baby boom generation , which will rapidly expand the population eligible for federal programs serving the elderly , along with continuing increases in health care costs , will put enormous pressure on the federal budget .

without policy changes , these programs could overwhelm the rest of the budget .

not only will the programs themselves be stressed , but their growth could easily limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or new needs as well as overwhelm the economy's ability to provide the resources needed for the expanded programs .

