because of questions about the security of sensitive personal information , this report provides an overview of federal information security and data breach notification laws that are applicable to certain entities that collect , maintain , own , possess , or license sensitive personal information .

information security laws are designed to protect personally identifiable information or sensitive personal information from compromise , and from unauthorized disclosure , acquisition , access , or other situations where unauthorized persons have access or potential access to personally identifiable information for unauthorized purposes .

data breach notification laws typically require covered entities to implement a breach notification policy , and include requirements for incident reporting and handling and external breach notification .

a data breach occurs when there is a loss or theft of , or other unauthorized access to , data containing sensitive personal information that results in the potential compromise of the confidentiality or integrity of data .

data breach notification laws typically cover "personally identifiable information" or "individually identifiable information. .

no single federal law or regulation governs the security of all types of sensitive personal information .

determining which federal law , regulation , and guidance is applicable depends in part on the entity or sector that collected the information , and the type of information collected and regulated .

under federal law certain sectors are legally obligated to protect certain types of sensitive personal information .

these obligations were created , in large part , when federal privacy legislation was enacted in the credit , financial services , health care , government , securities , and internet sectors .

federal regulations were issued to require certain entities to implement information security programs and provide breach notice to affected persons .

for example , there are federal information security requirements applicable to all federal government agencies ( fisma ) and a federal information security law applicable to a sole federal department ( veterans affairs ) .

in the private sector , different laws apply to private sector entities engaged in different businesses .

this is what is commonly referred to as a sectoral approach to the protection of personal information .

some critics say that current laws focus too closely on industry - specific uses of information , like credit reports or medical data , rather than on protecting the privacy of individuals .

others believe the sectoral approach to the protection of personal information reflects not only variations in the types of information collected ( eg , government , private sector , health , financial , etc .

 ) , but also differences in the regulatory framework for particular sectors .

others advocate a national standard for entities that maintain personal information in order to harmonize legal obligations .

others distinguish between private data held by the government and private data held by others , and advocate a higher duty of care for governments with respect to sensitive personal information in the u.s. public sector and to data breaches .

in the absence of a comprehensive federal data breach notification law , the majority of states have passed bills or introduced legislation to require businesses and / or government agencies to notify persons affected by breaches involving their sensitive personal information , and in some cases to implement information security programs to protect the security , confidentiality , and integrity of data .

as of december 9 , 2009 , 45 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands have enacted legislation requiring notification of security breaches involving personal information .

several states have reportedly considered legislation to hold retailers liable for third party companies' costs arising from data breaches ( california , connecticut , illinois , massachusetts , minnesota , new jersey , texas , and wisconsin ) .

many states provide a safe harbor for an entity that is regulated by state or federal law and maintains procedures pursuant to such laws , rules , regulations , or guidelines .

reportedly 29 states impose similar duties for the public and private sectors , 14 states do not , and oklahoma's law applies only to the public sector .

numerous data breaches and computer intrusions have been disclosed by the nation's largest data brokers , retailers , educational institutions , government agencies , health care entities , financial institutions , and internet businesses .

the privacy rights clearinghouse chronicles and reports that over 345 million records containing sensitive personal information were involved in security breaches in the u.s. since january 2005 .

from february 2005 to december 2006 , 100 million personal records were reportedly lost or exposed .

in 2006 the personal data of 26.5 million veterans was breached when a va employee's hard drive was stolen from his home .

in 2007 the retailer tjx companies revealed that 46.2 million credit and debit cards may have been compromised during the breach of its computer network by unauthorized individuals .

in 2008 the hannaford supermarket chain revealed that approximately 4 million debit and credit card numbers were compromised when hannaford's computer systems were illegally accessed while the cards were being authorized for purchase .

there were 1,800 reported cases of fraud connected to the computer intrusion .

in 2009 , personal information from health net on almost half a million connecticut residents , and 1.5 million patients nationally ( including patients in arizona , new jersey , and new york ) was breached .

the information had been compressed , but not encrypted .

data breaches involving sensitive personal information may result in identity theft and financial crimes ( eg , credit card fraud , phone or utilities fraud , bank fraud , mortgage fraud , employment - related fraud , government documents or benefits fraud , loan fraud , and health - care fraud ) .

identity theft involves the misuse of any identifying information , which could include name , ssn , account number , password , or other information linked to an individual , to commit a violation of federal or state law .

according to the federal trade commission , identity theft is the most common complaint from consumers in all 50 states , and accounts for over 35% of the total number of complaints the identity theft data clearinghouse received for calendar years 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 .

in calendar year 2006 , of the 674,354 complaints received , 246,035 or 36% were identity theft complaints .

with continued media reports of data security breaches , concerns about new cases of identity theft are widespread .

these public disclosures have heightened interest in the security of sensitive personal information ; security of computer systems ; applicability of federal laws to the protection of sensitive personal information ; adequacy of enforcement tools available to law enforcement officials and federal regulators ; business and regulation of data brokers ; liability of retailers , credit card issuers , payment processors , banks , and furnishers of credit reports for costs arising from data breaches ; remedies available to individuals whose personal information was accessed without authorization ; prosecution of identity theft crimes related to data breaches ; and criminal liability of persons responsible for unauthorized access to computer systems .

the following report describes information security and data breach notification requirements included in the privacy act , the federal information security management act , office of management and budget guidance , the veterans affairs information security act , the health insurance portability and accountability act , the health information technology for economic and clinical health act , the gramm - leach - bliley act , the federal trade commission act , and the fair credit reporting act .

the payment card industry has also issued security standards and reporting requirements for organizations that handle bank cards .

the payment card industry data security standard ( pci dss ) is an industry regulation developed by visa , mastercard , and other bank card distributors .

it requires organizations that handle bank cards to conform to security standards and follow certain leveled requirements for testing and reporting .

the core of the pci dss is a group of principles and accompanying requirements designed to build and maintain a secure network , protect cardholder data , maintain a vulnerability management program , implement strong access control measures , monitor and test networks , and maintain an information security policy .

pci dss went into effect december 31 , 2006 .

on october 1 , 2008 , the pci security standards council ( pci ssc ) announced general availability of version 1.2 of the pci dss that does not introduce any new major requirements to the existing standard , but does change some practices .

entities that fail to comply with pci dss face fines and increases in the rates that the credit card companies charge for transactions , and potentially can have their authorization to process payment cards revoked .

legislation has been passed in the texas house mandating compliance with the pci dss standard .

