current world oil reserves are estimated at 1.292 trillion barrels .

the middle east accounts for 58% of world oil reserves , and the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) accounts for 70% .

the middle east also leads in reserve growth and undiscovered potential , according to the energy information administration ( eia ) .

the united states' total oil reserves are estimated at 22.7 billion barrels , a scant 1.8% of the world's total ( see appendix a ) .

u.s. crude oil production is expected to fall from 5.4 million barrels per day ( mbd ) in 2004 to 4.6 mbd in 2030 , while demand edges up at just over 1% annually .

net imports of petroleum are estimated by the eia to increase from 12.1 mbd ( 58% of u.s. consumption ) to 17.2 mbd ( 62% of u.s. consumption ) over the same time period .

when it comes to future reliable oil supplies , canadian oil sands will likely account for a larger share of u.s. oil imports .

oil sands account for about 46% of canada's total oil production , and oil sand production is increasing as conventional oil production declines .

since 2004 , when a substantial portion of canada's oil sands were deemed economic , canada has been ranked second behind saudi arabia in oil reserves .

canadian crude oil exports were about 1.82 million barrels per day in 2006 , of which 1.8 mbd or 99% went to the united states .

canadian crude oil accounts for about 18% of u.s. net imports and about 12% of all u.s. crude oil supply .

an infrastructure to produce oil , upgrade , refine , and transport it from canadian oil sand reserves to the united states is already in place .

oil sands production is expected to rise from its current level of 1.2 ( mbd ) to 2.8 mbd by 2015 .

however , infrastructure expansions and skilled labor are necessary to significantly increase the flow of oil from canada .

for example , many refineries are optimized to refine only specific types of crude oil and may not process bitumen from oil sands .

one issue likely to be contentious is the regulatory permitting of any new refinery capacity because of environmental concerns such as water pollution and emissions of greenhouse gases .

challenges such as higher energy costs , infrastructure requirements , and the environment , may slow the growth of the industry .

for example , high capital and energy input costs have made some projects less economically viable despite recent high oil prices .

canada ratified the kyoto protocol in 2002 , which bound canada to reducing its greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions significantly by 2012 but according to the government of canada they will not meet their kyoto air emission goals by 2012 .

the pembina institute reports that the oil sands industry accounts for the largest share of ghg emissions growth in canada .

major u.s. oil companies ( sunoco , exxon / mobil , conoco phillips , and chevron ) continue to make significant financial commitments to develop canada's oil sand resources .

taken together , these companies have already committed several billion dollars for oil sands , with some projects already operating , and others still in the planning stages .

many of these same firms , with the u.s. government , did a considerable amount of exploration and development on "tar sands" in the united states , conducting several pilot projects .

these u.s. pilot projects did not prove to be commercially viable for oil production and have since been abandoned .

because of the disappointing results in the united states and the expansive reserves in canada , the technical expertise and financial resources for oil sands development has shifted almost exclusively to canada and are likely to stay in canada for the foreseeable future .

however , with current oil prices above $60 per barrel and the possibility of sustained high prices , some oil sand experts want to re - evaluate the commercial prospects of u.s. oil sands , particularly in utah .

this crs report examines the oil sands resource base in the world , the history of oil sands development in the united states and canada , oil sand production , technology , development , and production costs , and the environmental and social impacts .

the role of government — including direct financial support , and tax and royalty incentives — is also assessed .

over 80% of the earth's technically recoverable natural bitumen ( oil sands ) lies in north america , according to the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) ( see appendix b ) .

canadian oil sands account for about 14% of world oil reserves and about 11% of the world's technically recoverable oil resources .

the federal government of canada classified the oil sands industry as a large industrial air pollution emitter ( i.e. , emitting over 8,000 tons co 2 / year ) and expects it to produce half of canada's growth in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions ( about 8% total ghg emissions ) by 2010 .

the oil sands industry has reduced its "emission intensity" by 29% between 1995-2004 while production was rising .

co 2 emissions have declined from 0.14 tons / bbl to about 0.08 tons / bbl or about 88 megatons since 1990 .

alberta's ghg goals of 238 megatons of co 2 in 2010 , and 218 megatons co 2 in 2020 are not expected to be met .

reducing air emissions is one of the most serious challenges facing the oil sands industry .

however , according to the pembina institute , a sustainable energy advocate , greenhouse gas emissions intensity ( co 2 / barrel ) from oil sands is three times as high as that from conventional oil production .

the industry believes if it can reduce energy use it can reduce its emissions .

as emissions per barrel of oil from oil sands decline overall , the canadian government projects that total ghg emissions will continue to rise through 2020 , attributing much of the increase to increased oil sands production .

water supply and waste water disposal are among the most serious concerns because of heavy use of water to extract bitumen from the sands .

for an oil sands mining operation , about 2-3 barrels of water are used from the athabasca river for each barrel of bitumen produced ; but when recycled produced water is included , 0.5 barrels of "make - up" water is required , according to the alberta department of energy .

oil sands projects currently divert 150 million cubic meters of water annually from the athabasca river but are approved to use up to 350 million cubic meters .

concerns , however , arise over the inadequate flow of the river to maintain a healthy ecosystem and meet future needs of the oil sands industry .

additionally , mining operations impact freshwater aquifers by drawing down water to prevent pit flooding .

the freshwater used for in - situ operations is needed to generate steam , separate bitumen from the sand , hydrotransport the bitumen slurry , and upgrade the bitumen to a light crude .

for sagd operations , 90-95% of all the water used is recycled .

since some water is lost in the treatment process , additional freshwater is needed .

to minimize the use of new freshwater supplies , sagd operators use saline water from deeper underground aquifers .

the use of saline water , however , generates huge volumes of solid waste which has posed serious disposal problems .

wastewater tailings ( a bitumen , sand , silt , and fine clay particles slurry ) also known as "fluid fine tailings" are disposed in large ponds until the residue is used to fill mined - out pits .

seepage from the disposal ponds can result from erosion , breaching , and foundation creep .

the principal environmental threat is the migration of tails to a groundwater system and leaks that might contaminate the soil and surface water .

the tailings are expected to reach 1 billion cubic meters by 2020 .

impounding the tailings will continue to be an issue even after efforts are made to use alternative extraction technology that minimizes the amount of tails .

tailings management criteria were established by the alberta energy and utilities board / canadian environmental assessment agency in june 2005 .

ongoing extensive research by the canadian oil sands network for research and development ( conrad ) is focused on the consolidation of wastewater tailings , detoxifying tailings water ponds , and reprocessing tailings .

some r&d progress is being made in the areas of the cleanup and reclamation of tailings using bioremediation and electrocoagulation .

the national research council of canada ( nrc ) is conducting research to treat wastewater tailings and recover their byproduct residual bitumen , heavy metals , and amorphous solids ( fertilizers ) .

a pilot project is underway to clean and sort tailings , and recover metals such as aluminum and titanium .

surface disturbance is another major issue .

the oil sands industry practice leaves land in its disturbed state and left to revegetate naturally .

operators , however , are responsible over the long term to restore the land to its previous potential .

under an alberta energy utility board directive ( aeub ) , alberta's upstream oil and gas reclamation and remediation program has expanded industry liability for reclaiming sites .

the directive requires a "site - specific liability assessment" that would estimate the costs to abandon or reclaim a site .

the government of alberta's department of the environment established a "regional sustainable development strategy" whose purpose is , among other things , to "ensure" implementation of management strategies that address regional cumulative environmental impacts .

the oil sands industry is regulated under the environmental protection and enhancement act , water act , and public lands act .

oil sands development proposals are reviewed by aeub , alberta environment , and the alberta sustainable resource development at the provincial level .

review at the federal level may also occur .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) describes u.s. oil sands ( along with oil shale and other unconventional fuels ) as a strategically important domestic resource "that should be developed to reduce the growing dependence of the united states on politically and economically unstable sources of foreign oil imports. .

the provision also requires that a leasing program for oil sands r&d be established .

given u.s. oil sands' strategic importance , but limited commercial success as discussed above , what level of federal investment is appropriate to reach u.s. energy policy goals ? .

while an estimated 11 billion barrels of u.s. oil sands may be significant if it were economic , it represents a small share of the potentially recoverable resource base of unconventional fuels ( eg , 800 billion barrels of potentially recoverable oil from oil shale and another 20 billion barrels of recoverable heavy oil ) .

where is the best return on the r&d dollar invested for increased domestic energy supply and what are the long - term prospects for commercial application of unconventional fuels technology ? .

another important consideration to look at is where the oil industry is investing its capital and r&d for oil sands projects .

in light of the environmental and social problems associated with oil sands development , eg , water requirements , toxic tailings , carbon dioxide emissions , and skilled labor shortages , and given the fact that canada has 175 billion barrels of reserves and a total of over 300 billion barrels of potentially recoverable oil sands ( an attractive investment under current conditions demonstrated by the billions of dollars already committed to canadian development ) , the smaller u.s. oil sands base may not be a very attractive investment in the near - term .

u.s. refinery and pipeline expansions are needed to accommodate canadian oil sands developments .

those expansions will have environmental impacts , but the new infrastructure could strengthen the flow of oil from canadian oil sands .

this expanded capacity will likely lead to even greater investment in canada .

whether u.s. oil sands are developed , congress will continue to be faced with regulatory matters .

oil imports from oil sands are likely to increase from canada and the permitting of new or expanded oil refineries will continue to be an issue because of the need to balance concerns over the environment on one hand and energy security on the other .

because capital requirements for oil sands development has been enormous and risky , government involvement was seen as being essential in canada , particularly during sustained periods of low oil prices .

this private sector / government partnership in r&d , equity ownership , and public policy initiatives over the last 100 years has opened the way for the current expansion of the oil sands industry in alberta .

ongoing r&d efforts by the public and private sectors , sustained high oil prices , and favorable tax and royalty treatment are likely to continue to attract the increasing capital expenditures needed for growth in canada's oil sands industry .

planned pipeline and refinery expansions and new upgrading capacity are underway to accommodate the increased volumes of oil sands production in canada .

u.s. markets will continue to be a major growth area for oil production from canadian oil sands .

currently , about 5% of the total oil refined in the united states is from canada's oil sands .

even though prospects for canadian oil sands appear favorable , factors such as water availability , waste water disposal , air emissions , high natural gas costs , insufficient skilled labor , and infrastructure demands may slow the pace of expansion .

prospects for commercial development of u.s. oil sands are uncertain at best because of the huge capital investment required and the relatively small and fragmented resource base .

the task force on strategic unconventional fuels reported that oil sands comprise only about 0.6% of u.s. solid and liquid fuel resources , while oil shale accounts for nearly 25% of the total resource base .

appendix a .

estimated world oil resources appendix b .

regional distribution of estimated technically recoverable heavy oil and natural bitume .

