on september 5 , department of transportation ( dot ) secretary mary peters announced that the highway trust fund faced a shortfall as soon as october 2008 , due to lower than expected revenues in 2008 , and called on congress to immediately pass legislation transferring general fund revenues to the trust fund , a step that the administration had previously opposed .

on july 10 , the senate committee on appropriations approved s. 3261 , the fy2009 thud appropriations bill , and ordered it to be reported .

the committee recommended $109.4 billion in funding , $6.6 billion more than the amount requested by the administration .

on june 20 , 2008 , the house committee on appropriations , subcommittee on transportation hud ( thud ) marked up an unnumbered draft fy2009 thud appropriations bill .

the date of a full committee markup is unknown , and no bill has yet been reported .

according to the subcommittee's press release , the bill would increase funding for a number of housing and transportation programs over the president's request , including the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , housing for the elderly and disabled , public housing ( including hope vi ) , amtrak , the federal transit administration , and grants to airports .

on february 5 , 2008 , the administration submitted its budget request for fy2009 to congress .

the budget request for both dot and hud represented a reduction in funding compared to the non - emergency funding enacted for those agencies in fy2008 .

congress faces a difficult challenge in the fy2009 appropriations process .

the nation is facing a variety of economic challenges — including a general slowdown in the economy , record high oil prices , and a decline in housing values .

the budget deficit for fy2008 is expected to be around $400 billion .

the president presented a constrained budget to congress — the thud request represented no net increase over the fy2008 level ( excluding fy2008 emergency appropriations ) — and threatened to veto any appropriations bills that exceed the requested level of funding .

citing last year's appropriations experience , when some in congress contended that the president refused to negotiate with congress over the final level of fy2008 appropriations , congressional leaders have been cited in press reports indicating that congress may not pass many — if any — regular appropriations bills before the end of the 2008 calendar year .

instead , reports indicate that congress will pass one or more continuing resolutions to keep the government operating after the end of fy2008 , and complete the fy2009 appropriations process in calendar year 2009 , when it will be dealing with a new administration .

the economic and political context within which the fy2009 transportation appropriations process is taking place is tumultuous .

the significant rise in the price of fuel for cars , trucks , and commercial jets is having a major impact on components of the transportation industry .

the commercial passenger aviation industry is projecting a loss of several billion dollars , and is cutting the number of flights offered and even eliminating some routes , reducing and in some cases eliminating air connections to some communities .

legislation reauthorizing the faa's programs and activities continues to be debated in congress .

the authorization of the taxes and fees that support the airport and airway trust fund — the primary source of funding for federal aviation programs — was scheduled to lapse at the end of fy2007 ; these taxes and fees have been kept in force through a series of short - term authorization extensions .

at the same time , there is widespread concern about the condition of the nation's infrastructure , a significant component of which is transportation infrastructure .

the collapse of an interstate highway bridge in minnesota in august 2007 created concern over the conditions of the nation's bridges .

portions of the interstate highway system are reaching the end of their projected 50-year lifespan .

these factors , combined with concern over growing levels of traffic congestion , have led to calls for significant increases in spending on transportation infrastructure .

the national surface transportation policy and revenue study commission has recommended that the federal surface transportation program be extensively restructured , and that surface transportation investment from all sources be more than doubled from its present level to $225 billion annually .

while some in congress are calling for greater levels of federal spending on transportation infrastructure , the primary source of federal highway funding , the highway account of the highway trust fund , is projected to run short of money before the end of fy2009 .

this was foreseen in safetea - lu , which called for a multi - billion dollar rescission of contract authority at the end of september 2009 to balance the account .

but rising gas prices have led consumers to reduce their consumption of fuel , which is reducing the revenues coming in to the highway account .

congress is considering legislation that would provide money from the general fund to the highway account in order to forestall the highway account deficit in fy2009 .

most of the funding for the activities of the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) comes from discretionary appropriations provided each year in the annual appropriations acts enacted by congress .

hud's programs are primarily designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs .

these include several programs of rental assistance for the poor , elderly , and / or disabled .

three rental assistance programs — public housing , section 8 vouchers , and section 8 project - based rental assistance — account for the majority of the department's non - emergency funding ( more than 75% in fy2008 ) .

two flexible block grant programs , home and community development block grants , help communities finance a variety of housing and community development activities designed to serve low - income families .

other , more specialized , block grants help communities meet the needs of homeless persons , including those with aids .

in recent years , hud has also focused more attention on efforts to increase the homeownership rates for lower - income and minority households , with programs providing funding for downpayment assistance and housing counseling .

hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) insures mortgages made by lenders to lower - income home buyers , many with below - average credit records , and to developers of multifamily rental buildings containing relatively affordable units .

fha collects fees from insured borrowers , which are used to sustain the insurance fund and offset its administrative costs .

surplus fha fees have been used to offset the cost of the hud budget .

hud's budget is comprised of several types of funding .

regular , annual appropriations fund the activities of the department .

offsetting collections and receipts ( such as those from fha ) and rescissions of unobligated balances from prior years' funding offset the cost to congress of the appropriations .

in some years , congress also provides emergency appropriations ( such as in response to disasters ) through hud .

the total of appropriations , offsetting receipts and collections , rescissions , and emergency appropriations determine hud's net budget authority .

this section of the report provides an overview of fy2009 funding for hud .

it is largely summarized from a more detailed report , crs report rl34504 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2009 appropriations .

readers seeking an expanded discussion of hud funding issues , including an overview of recent trends , should see crs report rl34504 .

 table 5 presents the president's fy2009 budget request for hud compared to the prior year's enacted budget authority and the senate appropriations committee - reported funding levels .

 ( housing appropriations subcommittee - passed figures are not currently publicly available and are therefore not included in table 5 . ) .

four totals are given in table 5 : "budget authority provided" and "available budget authority," both including and excluding emergency appropriations .

total budget authority provided includes current year appropriations , plus advance appropriations provided in the current fiscal year for use in the next fiscal year ; total available budget authority includes current year appropriations , plus advance appropriations provided in the prior fiscal year for use in the current fiscal year .

congress is scored by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) for the amount of available budget authority in an appropriations bill ; however , the appropriations committees' documents often discuss budget authority provided .

the president's fy2009 budget requested $39,075 million , a less than 4% increase in total , regular ( non - emergency ) budget authority for hud .

following recent trends , the requested increase in budget authority is largely driven by declines in the amount available for rescission ( 88% decline from fy2008 ) and projected to be available in offsetting receipts ( 23% decline from fy2008 ) .

the fy2009 request for regular ( non - emergency ) appropriations — which is the amount available for hud's programs and activities — represents a slight decline ( 1.4% ) from fy2008 .

the following section of the report provides a summary of key issues in hud's fy2009 budget .

for a more detailed examination , readers should see crs report rl34504 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2009 appropriations .

the tenant - based rental assistance account funds the section 8 housing choice voucher program .

the section 8 voucher program funds rental assistance for low - income families that they can use to reduce their housing costs in the private market .

the program is funded by hud , but administered at the local level by quasi - governmental local public housing authorities ( phas ) .

this account funds the annual renewal of the roughly 2 million vouchers authorized by congress , as well as their associated administrative costs , and , in some years , new vouchers .

 ( for more information on the section 8 voucher program , see crs report rl32284 , an overview of the section 8 housing programs and crs report rl34002 , section 8 housing choice voucher program: issues and reform proposals in the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the tenant - based rental assistance account is the largest in hud's budget .

in recent years , it has also been the source of the most contention in hud's budget .

primarily , attention has been focused on whether the amount of funding provided for voucher renewals is sufficient to fund all of the vouchers authorized by congress and / or in use by families , and how that renewal funding is to be allocated to phas .

 ( while there is a statutory formula for allocating voucher funds to phas , it has been overridden in recent years by formulas adopted by congress in the appropriations acts. ) .

the amount available for voucher renewals each year is made up of two parts: current year appropriations , and advance appropriations provided in the prior year that become available in the current year .

for fy2009 , the president requested $11,881 million in current year funding for voucher renewals as well as $4,000 million in advance appropriations for use in fy2010 .

this request represents a decrease from the $12,233 million in current year funding provided in fy2008 and a decrease from the $4,158 million in advance appropriations provided in fy2008 for use in fy2009 .

combined , the president's request would result in $16,039 million in available budget authority for fy2009 ( current year funding plus prior year advance ) and $15,881 million in budget authority provided for fy2009 ( current year funding plus advance for subsequent year ) .

this represents an increase from the $15,703 million available in fy2008 , but a decrease from the $16,391 million provided in fy2008 .

hud's fy2009 budget documents estimate that the amount of funding requested would be sufficient to renew all of the vouchers in use .

 ( for a more detailed discussion , see crs report rl34504 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2009 appropriations . ) .

the president's fy2009 budget also requested that congress change the way that it provides renewal funding to phas .

specifically , it requested that phas be provided funding based on the amount of funding they received in the previous year .

this would be a change from the fy2008 funding formula , which funded phas based on their costs and voucher usage ( referred to as utilization ) over the prior year .

this debate — over whether to fund phas based on the budget they received in the prior year or based on their expenses — has gone back and forth since fy2003 .

for a detailed discussion of this issue , see crs report rl33929 , recent changes to the section 8 voucher renewal funding formula .

finally , the president's budget requested $39 million to fund new incremental vouchers for elderly and disabled families who were displaced by the 2005 hurricanes and whose fema - funded rental assistance will be ending in march 2009 .

the budget also requested $75 million for new incremental vouchers for homeless veterans .

the combined total for new vouchers ( $114 million ) would be less than the amount provided in fy2008 ( $125 million ) .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , would provide $12,503 million in current year funding for the tenant - based rental assistance account and $4,200 million in advance appropriations for use in fy2010 .

s. 3261 would also rescind $800 million from the advance appropriation provided in fy2008 for use in fy2009 .

combined , the senate bill would result in $15,861 million in available budget authority for fy2009 ( current year funding plus prior year advance , less rescission ) and $16,703 million in budget authority provided for fy2009 ( current year funding plus advance for subsequent year ) .

this represents an increase from the $15,703 million available in fy2008 and an increase from the $16,391 million provided in fy2008 .

it represents a decrease from the $16,309 million in available budget authority requested by the president for fy2009 , but an increase from the $15,881 billion in budget authority that would be provided by the president's fy2009 budget request .

s. 3261 would allocate renewal funding using a formula similar to the one in place in fy2008 , rather than the formula requested by the president .

it also includes $134 million in funding for new incremental vouchers , more than requested by the president and provided in fy2008 .

the project - based rental assistance account provides funding to renew , amend , and cover administrative expenses for the more than one million rental assistance contracts between private property owners and hud .

these contracts allow low - income tenants that live in the assisted properties to pay reduced rents .

the program under which these contracts are authorized is commonly referred to as project - based section 8 .

in july 2007 , hud stopped making payments to property owners with project - based contracts .

due to a change in interpretation regarding how hud was to provide renewal funding , hud determined it did not have sufficient funding to meet its contractual obligations .

a negotiation with the office of management and budget , and revisions to the contract language between hud and property owners , allowed hud to resume payments ( including retroactive payments ) .

however , this "shortfall" raised concerns among some members of congress — several committees held hearings on the topic — and industry groups representing property owners .

for fy2009 , the president's budget requested $7,000 million for the project - based rental assistance account , an increase from the $6,382 million provided in fy2008 .

further , the budget requested $400 million in advance appropriations to be provided in fy2009 for use in fy2010 .

if approved , it would be the first time an advance appropriation was to be used in this account .

hud's budget documents indicate that the department believes that its request ( $7,400 million ) would be sufficient to meet the department's contractual obligations ; industry groups contend that in order to "fully fund" its contractual obligations , hud would need another roughly $2,000 million in fy2009 .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , included $6,700 million in current year appropriations for the project - based rental assistance account ( less than the president's request ; more than fy2008 ) and $1,750 million in advance appropriations to become available in fy2010 ( more than four times the amount requested by the president ) .

the senate committee report ( s.rept .

110-415 ) noted that the increased funding would not be sufficient to fund all contracts for 12 months , but would "restore some stability to the program by allowing the department to enter into longer - term contracts with owners. .

for an expanded discussion of this issue , see crs report rl34504 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2009 appropriations .

each year since fy2003 , the president has requested no new funding for the hope vi public housing revitalization program .

in response , each year , congress has continued to fund the program .

up until fy2003 , the program was generally funded at just under $600 million , although in recent years its funding level has generally been around $100 million .

hud's congressional budget justifications criticize the program for a slow expenditure of grant funds and also note that phas are able to use their capital fund grants to leverage resources in much the same way hope vi grants are used to leverage additional resources , making hope vi less necessary .

proponents of hope vi cite the program's transformative effects on severely distressed communities .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , rejects the president's proposal to eliminate funding and would provide $100 million for hope vi in fy2009 .

the bill would also extend the statutory authorization for the program through the end of fy2009 ; it is currently slated to sunset at the end of fy2008 .

 ( for additional information , see crs report rl32236 , hope vi public housing revitalization program: background , funding , and issues . ) .

the community development fund ( cdf ) account funds the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , a formula grant to states and localities that funds community development activities .

in addition , the cdf has funded other community development - related programs in past years , including the economic development initiatives and neighborhood initiative demonstrations .

the president's fy2009 budget recommendation of $2,927 million for the formula portion of cdbg is $659 million ( 18.4% ) less than the $3,586 million appropriated for distribution to communities and states in fy2008 .

in addition , the president's fy2009 budget request stated that the administration would seek to reform the cdbg program during the 110 th congress by again offering congress a proposal that was first unveiled during the 109 th congress , namely , the community development block grant reform act .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , would provide $3,586 million for cdbg formula grants , more than the president's request and the same as the fy2008 funding level .

in addition to requesting reduced funding for cdbg formula grants , the administration's fy2009 budget proposed eliminating funding for several other community development related programs , including rural housing and economic development grants , community development block grant section 108 loan guarantees , and brownfields economic development initiatives .

the budget characterized these programs as duplicative of the activities funded by the cdbg formula grant program .

the president's budget also requested no new funding for the economic development initiatives ( edis ) and neighborhood initiatives ( nis ) demonstration programs — which congress has used to fund congressionally - directed projects in recent years — and asked that congress rescind the funding provided to these projects in fy2008 .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , would reject most of the president's proposals to eliminate funding for community and economic development programs .

it would fund rural housing and economic development grants , section 108 loan guarantees , and edi and ni earmarks .

however , s. 3261 would not provide any new funding for the brownfields economic development initiatives program .

the home investment partnerships program provides formula - based block grant funding to states , units of local government , indian tribes , and insular areas to fund affordable housing initiatives .

the president's fy2009 budget requested a $275 million increase in funding for home formula grants .

hud's congressional budget justifications identify the home program as key to the president's goal of increasing homeownership opportunities , especially for minorities .

they also cite the program's relatively strong rating from the office of management and budget's ( omb ) program assessment and rating tool evaluation .

according to hud's congressional budget justifications , omb found that the program "has a clear purpose , strong management , and can demonstrate results. .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , would provide $34 million more for home formula grants than the president's request .

formerly known together as housing for special populations , the section 202 housing for the elderly program and the section 811 housing for persons with disabilities program provide capital grants and ongoing project rental assistance contracts ( prac ) to developers of new subsidized housing for these populations .

in fy2009 , the administration's budget recommended reducing the overall funding level for the programs that provide housing and services for elderly households ( defined by hud as those with a head of household or spouse age 62 or older ) .

the president's request would cut funding for these programs by nearly $200 million , from $735 million in fy2008 , to $540 million in fy2009 .

the president's budget also proposed to reduce funding for the section 811 housing for persons with disabilities program in fy2009 to $160 million , down from $237 million in fy2008 .

s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , rejected the president's proposed funding cuts and would provide $765 million for section 202 and $250 million for section 811 .

the fha administers a variety of mortgage insurance programs that insure lenders against loss from loan defaults by borrowers .

through fha insurance , lenders make loans that otherwise may not be available , and enable borrowers to obtain loans for home purchase and home improvement , as well as for the purchase , repair , or construction of apartments , hospitals , and nursing homes .

the programs are administered through two program accounts: the mutual mortgage insurance / cooperative management housing insurance fund account ( mmi / cmhi ) and the general insurance / special risk insurance fund account ( gi / sri ) .

the mmi / cmhi fund provides insurance for home mortgages .

the gi / sri fund provides insurance for more risky home mortgages , for multifamily rental housing , and for an assortment of special - purpose loans such as hospitals and nursing homes .

 ( for more information , see crs report rs20530 , fha - insured home loans: an overview . ) .

in past years , receipts to the mmi fund have exceeded expenses , so the mmi fund did not need appropriations for a credit subsidy , and had excess receipts that were used to offset the cost of the hud budget .

the fy2009 budget estimates that , if no programmatic changes are made , the mmi fund would need either a credit subsidy or increases in insurance premiums to continue operation .

the budget proposes to permit fha to set insurance premiums based on the risk that the borrowers pose to the insurance fund , and it proposes to set the rate at a level that would avoid the need for subsidy appropriations .

barring the authority to establish risk - based premiums , the president's budget proposed that fha would use its existing authority to increase the insurance premiums charged to borrowers .

the budget assumes that the increased premiums coupled with legislative and programmatic changes would avoid the need for credit subsidy appropriations .

 ( for an expanded discussion , see crs report rl34504 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2009 appropriations . ) .

