since the end of the cold war , the economies of the united states and europe have experienced a period of accelerated integration interlinked by growing ties in trade , investment , and related employment .

today , despite the recent global economic upheaval , the united states and the 27-member european union ( eu ) continue to share a comprehensive , dynamic , and mutually beneficial economic partnership .

not only is the eu - u.s. commercial relationship , which advocates refer to as the transatlantic economy , the largest in the world , but for many practitioners in the transatlantic community it is also arguably the most important .

although hard hit by the current global economic downturn , the transatlantic economy continues to dominate the world economy by its sheer size and prosperity .

the combined population of the united states and eu now approaches 800 million people who generate over half the world's production and are responsible for $4.4 trillion in commercial exchanges annually .

transatlantic markets are among the most open in the world and are deeply integrated through investment flows , affiliate sales and related - party trade .

the transatlantic economy generates an estimated $4 trillion in commercial activity per year and accounts for close to 60% of global gdp and roughly 40% of world trade .

the united states and eu are each other's largest overall markets for a host of goods and services , ranging from agricultural products to high - tech goods and services .

large values of goods such as chemicals , transportation equipment , computers , and processed food as well as transportation and financial services are traded in record amounts .

more significant as the pillars of transatlantic commercial activity and the driving forces behind deepening transatlantic economic integration over the past decade have been foreign direct investment ( fdi ) and the interrelated activities of foreign affiliates .

in contrast to trade , mutual u.s. and european fdi results in "direct participation in each other's domestic economies. .

the fact that each side has a major ownership stake in the other's market may be the most distinctive aspect of the transatlantic economy .

at the end of 2007 , the total stock of two - way direct investment reached $2.7 trillion ( composed of $1.4 trillion of u.s. direct investment in eu countries and $1.3 trillion of eu direct investments in the united states ) , making u.s. and european companies the largest investors in each other's market .

roughly 47% of all u.s. foreign direct investment is located in europe , while eu member states supply 42% of global fdi in the united states .

european affiliate income in the u.s. reached $82 billion in 2007 while u.s. affiliate income in europe increased to $147 billion during that same period .

however , the global economic downturn has resulted in u.s. foreign affiliate income earned in europe peaking in 2007 and actually declining by 2% by mid - 2008 .

european affiliate earnings in the united states were reported to be flat in 2008 .

this massive amount of ownership of companies in each other's markets translates into billions of dollars of sales , profits , production , and expenditures on research and development .

in addition , an estimated 6-7 million americans are employed by european affiliates operating in the united states , and almost an equal number of eu citizens work for american companies in europe .

in the current global economic crisis , these figures have declined somewhat but will still constitute significant transatlantic economic and financial activity .

the combined weight of these two economic superpowers means that how the united states and eu manage their relationship and the difficult issues involving domestic regulations , competition policy , and foreign investment often helps determine how the rest of the world deals with similar issues .

as the figures might suggest , both the united states and eu have implemented policies that are receptive to expanding the commercial relationship .

in theory , both sides have appeared to acknowledge that there is nothing to gain from protectionist investment policies .

this theory is being tested in the current global financial environment as both sides of the atlantic have flirted with some forms of protectionist policies ( i.e. , "buy america" provisions included in the u.s. stimulus legislation ) .

leaders in both washington and brussels have cautioned and urged restraint in implementing such policies seeking to ensure that cooperation which could help one another emerge from the current crisis is not impeded in any manner .

the success of economic integration achieved thus far , however , does not guarantee that the transatlantic economies will continue to deepen .

the current global economic crisis has had a negative impact on the transatlantic economy .

regulatory irritants and barriers to greater commercial ties on both sides of the atlantic remain to be adequately addressed .

a key measure of the strength of the transatlantic relationship has been the ability of both sides to work with each other throughout the current financial storm in such a way that would permit further integration and would promote expanded regulatory cooperation , as both sides of the atlantic begin to experience an economic recovery .

this report is intended to serve as a companion piece to crs report rl34717 , transatlantic regulatory cooperation: background and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] , which provides an introduction and primer on the issue of transatlantic regulatory cooperation .

the main focus of this report is on ( 1 ) the creation of the transatlantic economic council ; ( 2 ) the role of legislatures in the regulatory process ; and ( 3 ) the transatlantic legislators' dialogue and its new role as an advisor to transatlantic regulatory efforts .

because many u.s. and european industries are already deeply integrated with each other and most tariffs are low , non - tariff and regulatory barriers are increasingly recognized as the most significant trade and investment impediments to the creation of a more integrated transatlantic market .

a recent study carried out at the request of the european parliament identifies non - tariff measures ( ntm ) in eu - us trade and investment that affect trade between the eu and the us , and estimates their economic impact .

ntms are all about regulations , from product - specific technical standards to economy - wide regulations that may hamper trade .

the purpose of the study was to estimate by how much regulatory differences increase the cost of doing business across the atlantic , and to assess what impact they have on economic welfare in both economies .

estimates in the study were derived from a number of assumptions and were based in part on perceptions from industry ; their translation into figures ; an element of judgment on how to measure the impact of the reduction of individual ntms and on whether and to what extent they can be reduced .

in june 2005 , a report issued by the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) estimated that certain structural reforms in both the united states and eu that included the reduction of competition - related regulations , tariff barriers , and restrictions on foreign direct investment could lead to permanent gains in gdp per capita on both sides of the atlantic of up to 3 to 3.5 percent .

however , some observers believe that while regulatory divergence does present an obstacle to trade , it does not automatically mean that the alignment of regulations in all sectors is possible or even desirable .

in addition to domestic regulations , non - tariff barriers consist of elements such as safety norms , differences in health , environmental or engineering standards , rules of origin , or labeling requirements .

such measures are due in part to different societal preferences and priorities , but also , to a significant degree , a lack of coordination or adequate information exchange between u.s. federal and state as well as eu and member state regulators and legislators on each side of the atlantic all of whom are subject to different legal mandates or engaged in different oversight procedures .

one problem in addressing these different perspectives is the fact that the united states and europe have very different regulatory processes and structures making attempts at regulatory convergence difficult .

there have been a number of previous attempts to reduce existing non - tariff and regulatory barriers to trade .

the aim of such efforts has been to reduce costs to businesses on both sides of the atlantic , improve consumer welfare , and facilitate higher levels of economic growth .

attempts to seek meaningful regulatory cooperation began in 1995 when u.s. and european leaders launched the new transatlantic agenda ( nta ) .

this initiative was designed to raise the u.s. - eu relationship to a new level of dialogue and decision - making in four areas including economic cooperation .

since then , the united states and the eu have launched several additional initiatives such as mutual recognition agreements ( 1997 ) , the positive economic agenda ( 2002 ) , the transatlantic economic partnership ( 2004 ) , and the transatlantic economic agenda ( 2005 ) which included the formation of the high level us - eu regulatory cooperation forum .

each of these projects has contributed in some way to achieving limited progress towards reducing regulatory burdens .

however , both european and u.s. companies heavily engaged in the transatlantic marketplace argue that the results have not proved materially significant .

for instance , there seems to have been some improvements in areas such as competition policy and financial services , but progress in other areas such as chemicals has not been accomplished .

in january 2007 , german chancellor angela merkel , upon assuming the rotating six - month presidency of the eu , proposed further liberalization of transatlantic trade and investment barriers by elevating the existing cooperation among u.s. and eu regulatory agencies .

building on the merkel initiative , the april 2007 u.s. - eu summit adopted a framework for advancing transatlantic economic integration .

the framework affirmed the importance of further deepening transatlantic economic integration , particularly through efforts to reduce or harmonize regulatory barriers to international trade and investment .

a new institutional structure , a transatlantic economic council ( tec ) , was established to advance the process of regulatory cooperation and barrier reduction by encouraging both u.s. and eu regulators to move forward on issues outlined in the framework .

the 2007 framework presented the tec with two priorities .

the first was to build upon the established sectoral dialogues which had been taking place between u.s. and european commission regulatory experts .

these dialogues have included issues involving pharmaceuticals , automobile safety , cosmetics , consumer product safety , food safety , energy efficiency , and medical devices .

the second priority was identified as the "lighthouse priority projects. .

these included a review of policies on intellectual property rights and piracy , secure ports and trade , financial markets , innovation and technology , and investment .

the creation of the tec was predicated on the premise that past efforts to achieve regulatory cooperation or convergence had been inadequate due to the technical nature of the work , the case - by - case , ad hoc approach , often assumed by regulatory agencies , and a lack of political leadership committed to having the regulators cooperate .

the tec is headed on both sides by ministerial - level appointees with cabinet rank .

given that the two tec leaders are cabinet - level appointees , the tec was intended to have the high - level political support that previous efforts at economic integration may have lacked .

many observers believed the tec , with its requirement to report annually to the u.s. - eu summit , would receive that support .

such clout , it was argued , was needed to persuade domestic regulators to yield some of their authorities or to better cooperate with their counterparts across the atlantic in harmonizing regulatory approaches .

after two years , however , there appears to be some concern among observers of the tec that certain structural weaknesses in the tec have limited its potential effectiveness .

a recent report co - authored by the atlantic council and the bertelsmann foundation has recommended that the united states appoint the vice president as the u.s. co - chair of the tec and that the eu place responsibility for the tec in the office of the eu president in an effort to upgrade the visibility and effectiveness of the tec .

the tec , in theory , is designed to enable u.s. and european regulators to anticipate and discuss potential differences in thinking about new regulations before they become actual obstacles to transatlantic commerce .

these efforts include a wide range of alternatives including dialogues and information exchanges among regulators , mutual recognition agreements , cost - benefit analysis , recommendations for voluntary principles , and proposals for binding agreements .

as part of its mandate , the tec is to accelerate ongoing efforts to reduce or harmonize regulatory barriers .

the tec was directed to accomplish this mandate , in part , by including broader participation of stakeholders , including for the first time , legislators , in the discussions and meetings .

in particular , the framework document instructed the tec to establish an "advisory group" that draws upon the heads of the "existing transatlantic dialogues" to provide input and guidance on priorities for pursuing transatlantic economic integration .

the existing transatlantic dialogues include the transatlantic legislators' dialogue tld , ( the u.s. congress - european parliament exchange ) , the transatlantic business dialogue ( tabd ) , and the transatlantic consumers dialogue ( tacd ) .

the tec meets twice annually and reports to the annual u.s. - eu summit on both achievements and areas where more progress is needed .

to date , the advisory group has met with the tec at each of the four tec meetings held as of october 2009 .

the first meeting of the tec took place on november 9 , 2007 , in washington , dc .

a second meeting was held on may 13 , 2008 , in brussels , and the third meeting took place on december 12 , 2008 , in washington .

for some observers , the results of these first meetings have been mixed .

at the first meeting , the tec agreed that in the field of financial accounting standards , both sides should pursue an agreement to accept the mutual recognition of each others accounting methods .

at the second meeting , the tec issued a joint statement affirming the commitment of both the united states and eu to promote open investment policies and to refrain from protectionist policies .

the third meeting , the last of the bush administration , reviewed the operation of the tec over its first 18 months and reaffirmed progress in areas such as investment and accounting standards , among others .

the tec also noted the importance of identifying issues suitable for tec consideration and the need to avoid having the tec agenda become too diffuse and unmanageable .

the third tec meeting convened in december 2008 as the global financial crisis began to have a significant impact on the transatlantic economy , highlighting for some the need for a stronger and more sustained transatlantic partnership .

the fourth meeting of the tec was held on october 27 , 2009 , in washington , dc .

this meeting , the first of the obama administration and at the end of the eu commission's five - year mandate , featured a significant deviation from previous meetings .

at the october meeting , the tec leadership met separately with each of the advisory groups , ostensibly to allow the u.s. side more time to explore how the tec can move forward in the future in an effective way .

however , with a new slate of eu commissioners scheduled to be considered by the eu parliament in late january 2010 there is some uncertainty about what the next commissioner assigned to co - lead the tec , karel degucht , would see as the eu's priorities and correspondingly how it might proceed in the future .

nevertheless , both sides committed the tec to working more closely on energy related issues , services trade , financial regulatory compensation , and intellectual property rights .

the tec also agreed to set its next meeting for march 2010 and to develop plans to address issues such as innovation , labeling , and nanotechnology at that session .

the difficulty of harmonizing regulatory activities or resolving disputes embedded in regulatory differences , however , was underscored at all three of the earlier tec meetings by the failure to resolve a long - standing dispute involving u.s. exports of poultry to the eu .

the outcomes of the four meetings thus far , while not seen as resolving any of the regulatory issues before the tec , have at least demonstrated that both sides remain committed to greater transatlantic economic integration and regulatory cooperation .

in january 2009 , the obama administration came into office seeking to address both u.s. economic challenges as well as the global financial crisis .

the administration appeared to have acknowledged the importance of the transatlantic economic partnership and the potential role of the tec when it relatively quickly designated michael froman , deputy director of the national economic council , as the administration's point man for the tec .

in february , mr. froman met with the u.s. director of the transatlantic business dialogue , a major stakeholder in the tec process , to discuss business issues and the future of the tec .

president obama also met with the eu leadership in prague in early april 2009 and acknowledged the importance of energizing transatlantic ties and better coordinating policies to resolve the global economic downturn .

nevertheless , it took almost eight months to convene the first formal meeting of the tec since the appointment of mr. froman .

for those advocates of the concept of a transatlantic marketplace free of artificial barriers and impediments to increased commercial and investment activity , the creation of the tec was seen as a necessary measure .

the goals and responsibilities established for the tec as outlined by the u.s. and eu leadership seem designed to achieve that objective .

according to some , the tec promised to break new ground by enabling regular communication and exchange of information at a higher level on a variety of issues .

for others , the tec may be at a crossroads when the central role as a forum for discussing strategic issues and a facilitator of renewed economic growth between the u.s. and europe , has to make a break from single - issue gridlock , such as the poultry dispute , that has bogged down the tec .

one question that is raised is why regulatory cooperation should be done just in the context of transatlantic relations .

some advocates point out that many of these regulatory issues , such as regulating financial services industries , are global in nature and apply to regions such as asia and latin america , as well as europe .

for many , this is a legitimate question and is answered by some who point out that as highly developed economic systems , both the united states and the eu , could set the global standards for future regulation in broad economic categories .

the dilemma for the tec , then , may continue to be the uncertainty over its role .

is the tec to be a dispute settlement body putting out fires in transatlantic trade or is it primarily designed to promote regulatory convergence ? .

this question has been given new relevance with the formation of the new eu commission .

under the new commission , responsibility for the tec has been shifted from the director general ( dg ) for enterprise and industry to dg for trade .

the tec also seems limited in its structure to deal with national interests or to overcome domestic political opposition to items on its agenda which is why some have suggested that the u.s. appoint a "sherpa" from the national security council and include the omb in coordinating u.s. positions .

whether the tec will prove a more successful entity for actually accomplishing a reduction in remaining transatlantic regulatory and non - tariff barriers to trade remains uncertain .

since it began nearly two decades ago , transatlantic regulatory cooperation has been mostly limited to the executive branches and regulatory bodies on both sides of the atlantic except when the u.s. congress has adopted legislation with significant regulatory impact such as was the case with passage of the sarbanes - oxley reform bill .

however , the idea of legislators assuming a more proactive role in transatlantic economic and regulatory cooperation is not a new issue .

at the 1995 launch of the new transatlantic agenda , the leaders of the united states and eu acknowledged that they "attached great importance to enhanced parliamentary links" and agreed to "consult with parliamentary leaders on both sides of the atlantic regarding consultation mechanisms , including building on existing institutions , to discuss matters related to our transatlantic partnership. .

for those interested in the transatlantic economic relationship , this broad mandate to include the legislators has resulted in an increased interest in the role the u.s. congress and the european parliament can or should play in regulatory cooperation and convergence .

in fact , the implementation of the eu's new lisbon treaty will give the european parliament more decision - making authority over trade related issues and possibly an enlarged role in regulatory decision making or oversight .

many representatives of congress and the european parliament have long argued for greater legislative participation in broader u.s. - eu relations including such matters and participation in the annual u.s. – eu summit process .

numerous pieces of legislation have been introduced and even passed in both congress and the parliament over the past seven years calling for enhanced dialogue and coordination between the congress and the european parliament in matters related to the transatlantic economic relationship .

in 2004 and 2005 , the european parliament passed resolutions supporting the completion of the transatlantic market by 2015 .

in 2006 the u.s. senate passed a similar resolution in s.res .

632 .

most observers of the tec process thus far maintain that the transatlantic business dialogue ( tabd ) and the transatlantic consumer dialogue ( tacd ) can and will support the tec process even as both organizations have been critical of certain aspects of transatlantic regulatory cooperation .

there is , however , uncertainty about the role of congress and its representative , the tld .

the tld is an inter - parliamentary entity , and as such , does not have , at this point , a mandate to formally represent congress as a whole or even the house separately .

until the tld and congress itself , have a better understanding of what is expected of it and how it will carry out its mandate as an advisor to the tec , doubts will remain .

some engaged in the transatlantic regulatory process have suggested that the tld as a whole , and the ustld specifically , be restructured in order to make it a more effective partner in the tec advisory role .

at the very least , this group believes the tld should be formally authorized and given a status slightly different than the other parliamentary groups in the congress .

there are several options which the tld , itself , could explore in an attempt to make it more responsive .

one option that would allow the tld to continue its broad mandate to address all transatlantic issues and at the same time fulfill its role as a tec advisor , may be for the u.s. and eu tld co - chairs to announce the creation of their own tld / tec working group or groups .

the co - chairs could appoint one u.s. and one eu member who have regularly attended the tld meetings to co - chair the group .

the co - chairs would recruit other regular tld participants or members of the appropriate committees of jurisdiction for the working group ( s ) .

in the case of the ustld , recruitment could also come from groups such as the eu caucus .

other than the co - chairs , the members of this group would not have to agree to join the tld on a regular basis but would work closely with other standing committee members , the tec , and the two other advisory partners , the tabd and the tacd .

the working group ( s ) would brief the tld co - chairs prior to any formal meeting of the tec .

the u.s. working group co - chair ( s ) could also attempt to reach out to colleagues in the senate to help provide senate input into this process .

the downside of this option may be the fact that recommendations to the tec would still come from an inter - parliamentary group that , while reflective of the views of their wider legislative bodies , would still not have a mandate to speak on behalf of those bodies .

a second option might involve the tld reaching out to the members of groups with similar interests , such as the transatlantic policy network ( tpn ) which includes members of both the house and senate .

the tpn , which is a mix of legislators and private sector representatives , already has a task force on the bi - lateral economic partnership .

the tld could invite that tpn task force to serve as an informal advisor to the tld .

the co - chairs of the tpn task force are members of congress and the european parliament and several of the tpn members have participated in past tld meetings .

much of the work of the bi - lateral economic task force mirrors the work of the tec with respect to regulatory reform .

the tpn task force would continue with its own independent work which could be shared with the tec , but periodically , the co - chairs and / or their staff could meet with the tld co - chairs and / or their staff to share ideas , information and recommendations .

a briefing for the tld co - chairs by the tpn task force could be arranged in advance of each tec meeting .

the tpn task force could also be invited to make a formal presentation to the regular tld meetings .

downsides of this option would again be the issue of a parliamentary group speaking for congress , whether the tpn would be willing to share its work with the tld , and the fact that the tpn task force may not include key committee chairmen who would be omitted from the process .

a third option could involve the chair and vice - chair of the ustld requesting that the house and senate leadership appoint a special bi - partisan , bi - cameral , "regulatory cooperation advisory group" to the tld .

this group would consist of the tld leadership plus representatives of the appropriate house and senate standing committees , including committee or subcommittee chairmen with jurisdiction over the issues identified as being of interest to the tec .

this advisory group and their committee staff would follow the work of the tec through the agencies these committees oversee .

periodic meetings between the tec staff and committee staff could take place to update the tec process .

once an agenda is clarified for an upcoming tec meeting , the tld chair and vice - chair could convene only those advisory group members whose issues were identified on the tec agenda .

such a leadership appointed advisory group would elevate the tec process and the tld role to a higher level to one that would now include the house and senate leadership as a stakeholder in the process .

the downsides to this option could include the potential conflict between the legislatures and the regulators over agenda setting , the potential for partisan conflict due to the make up of the advisory group to the tld , and disagreements over jurisdiction among the committees .

whether any of these options , or others are pursued , some observers of the tec process who support congressional participation in the advisory group believe the tec would receive a real boost if the obama administration sent a clear signal to the congressional leadership that the role of the congress in the transatlantic regulatory cooperation process was important and that a stronger representation from the congress through an enhanced tld participation in the tec advisory group would be welcome .

the fact that the october 2009 meeting of the tec did include a separate meeting , on the hill , between the tec leadership and the tld leadership may have been an opening move for such an administration strategy .

as the tec process attempts to move regulatory cooperation toward the ultimate goal of a well - functioning , unencumbered transatlantic marketplace , the role the congress will or should actually play has raised several questions among those participating in that process .

these issues have led many observers to believe that the tld , although never intended to be anything more than a mechanism for exchanging views among parliamentarians , currently welds little influence or authority as a transatlantic policy resource and in not a representative of congress' views on economic integration .

nevertheless , the decision to include an advisory group with representation from the transatlantic legislative communities , through the transatlantic legislators' dialogue , has been viewed by some as a real opportunity for the congress and parliament to assume a more direct role as a stakeholder in the long - term development and completion of the transatlantic marketplace .

despite some short - comings in the current structure of the ustld , all indications are that the current chair and vice chair , along with their counterpart eu chair , are fully committed to making the tld a more active partner in the tec process .

if the identified concerns with the tld , along with its responsibilities as a member of the tec advisory group are more fully addressed , the tld might become an organization capable of taking on a more substantive role in regulatory cooperation .

for many observers , this could lead the tld to become , over time , a more important stakeholder in regulatory cooperation and a voice for transatlantic relations in the congress .

in the near term , however , these observers believe the tld's role as a force for the promotion of greater transatlantic economic integration and regulatory cooperation , on behalf of the u.s. congress , will remain its greatest challenge .

