congress is considering policies to reduce u.s. emissions of greenhouse gases .

prominent among these policies are those promoting the capture and direct sequestration of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) from manmade sources such as electric power plants and manufacturing facilities .

carbon capture and sequestration is of great interest because potentially large amounts of co 2 produced by the industrial burning of fossil fuels could be sequestered .

although they are still under development , carbon capture technologies may be able to remove up to 95% of co 2 emitted from an electric power plant or other industrial source .

carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) is a three - part process involving a co 2 source facility , a long - term co 2 sequestration site , and an intermediate mode of co 2 transportation — typically pipelines .

some studies have been optimistic about pipeline requirements for co 2 sequestration .

they conclude that the pipeline technology is mature , and that most major co 2 sources in the united states are , or will be , located near likely sequestration sites , so that large investments in co 2 pipeline infrastructure will probably not be needed .

other studies express greater uncertainty about the required size and configuration of ccs pipeline networks .

a handful of regionally - focused studies have concluded that co 2 pipeline requirements for co 2 sources could be substantial , and thus present a greater challenge for ccs than is commonly presumed , at least in parts of the united states .

divergent views on co 2 pipeline requirements introduce significant uncertainty into overall ccs cost estimates and may complicate the federal role , if any , in co 2 pipeline regulation .

they are also a concern because uncertainty about co 2 pipeline requirements may impede near - term capital investment in electricity generation , with important implications for power plant owners seeking to reduce their co 2 emissions .

in the 110 th congress , there has been considerable debate on the capture and sequestration aspects of carbon sequestration , while there has been relatively less focus on transportation .

nonetheless , there is an increasing perception in congress that a national ccs program could require the construction of a substantial network of interstate co 2 pipelines .

the carbon dioxide pipeline study act of 2007 ( s. 2144 ) , introduced by senator norm coleman and nine cosponsors on october 4 , 2007 , would require the secretary of energy to study the feasibility of constructing and operating such a network of co 2 pipelines .

the america's climate security act of 2007 ( s. 2191 ) , introduced by senator joseph lieberman and nine cosponsors on october 18 , 2007 , and reported out of the senate environment and public works committee in amended form on december 5 , 2007 , contains similar provisions ( sec .

8003 ) .

the carbon capture and storage technology act of 2007 ( s. 2323 ) , introduced by senator john kerry and one cosponsor on november 7 , 2007 , would require carbon sequestration projects authorized by the act to evaluate the most cost - efficient ways to integrate co 2 sequestration , capture , and transportation ( sec .

3 ( b ) ( 5 ) ) .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) , signed by president bush , as amended , on december 19 , 2007 , requires the secretary of the interior to recommend legislation to clarify the appropriate framework for issuing co 2 pipeline rights - of - way on public land ( sec .

714 ( 7 ) ) .

this report examines key uncertainties in co 2 pipeline requirements for ccs by contrasting hypothetical pipeline scenarios in one region of the united states .

the report summarizes the key factors influencing co 2 pipeline configuration for major power plants in the region , and illustrates how the viability of different sequestration sites may lead to enormous differences in pipeline costs .

power plants , particularly coal - fired plants , are the most likely initial candidates for ccs because they are predominantly large , single - point sources , and they contribute approximately one - third of u.s. co 2 emissions from fossil fuels .

the report discusses the implications of uncertain co 2 pipeline requirements for ccs as they relate to evolving federal policies for carbon control .

infrastructure requirements and policy implications related to co 2 pipelines become clearer when considering what actual pipeline projects might look like .

this section outlines contrasting scenarios for hypothetical co 2 pipeline development in the region covered by the midwest regional carbon sequestration partnership ( mrcsp ) .

the mrcsp is one of seven regional partnerships of state agencies , universities , private companies , and non - governmental organizations established by the department of energy to assess ccs approaches .

the mrcsp serves as a good illustration of co 2 pipeline issues because it has a varied mix of co 2 sources and potential geologic sequestration sites , and because geologists have completed a number of focused studies relevant to ccs in this region .

the mrcsp pipeline scenarios , while only illustrative , nonetheless highlight several important policy considerations which may warrant congressional attention .

these include concerns about co 2 pipeline costs , siting challenges , pipeline and sequestration site relationships , and differences in sequestration potential among regions .

the socially and economically efficient development of the nation's public infrastructure is an important consideration for policymakers .

in the context of a national program for ccs , co 2 pipelines may be a major addition to this infrastructure .

yet there are many uncertainties about the cost and configuration of co 2 pipelines that would be needed to meet environmental goals within an emerging regulatory framework .

exactly who will pay for co 2 pipelines , and how , is beyond the scope of this report , but understanding ways to minimize the cost and environmental impact of this infrastructure may be of benefit to all .

in addition to specific questions about co 2 pipeline requirements , the scenarios in this report raise larger questions about the ultimate development and allocation of sequestration capacity under a national ccs policy .

how much individual companies may have to spend to transport their co 2 depends upon where it has to go .

however , even as viable sequestration reservoirs are being identified , it is unclear which co 2 source facilities will have access to them , under what time frame , and under what conditions .

while congress is beginning to turn its attention to these questions , it will likely require sustained attention and the input of many stakeholders to refine and address them .

given the potential size of a national co 2 pipeline network , many billions of dollars of capital investment may be affected by policy decisions made today .

