the debate over how to regulate offshore oil and gas drilling in the united states has generated public and congressional interest , especially in the context of the gulf oil spill .

much discussion has centered on existing and potential drilling operations along the outer continental shelf .

the debate has also reached specific regions within the united states , including the great lakes .

the question of whether to allow oil and gas drilling under the great lakes has been contested within states bordering the great lakes and in congress .

some opposed to drilling under the great lakes are concerned about the potential environmental , economic , and public health consequences of drilling .

they contend that drilling will raise the risks of oil spills , hazardous gas leaks , and pollution that may harm lakeside residents and the great lakes ecosystem .

proponents of drilling contend that the risks of oil spills and other accidents are extremely low due to new technologies , that drilling would not be environmentally harmful , and that it would lead to the generation of revenues , additional employment , and expanded domestic energy supplies .

obtaining permits for drilling under the great lakes has largely been banned by various state and federal laws .

a great lakes - wide ban may have initially been driven by the signing of a "statement of principle against oil drilling in the great lakes" by eight great lakes governors in 1985 .

all states viewed this non - binding agreement as prohibiting drilling for natural gas and oil in the lakes and , with the exception of michigan , as prohibiting directional drilling .

various states have enacted permanent or temporary bans against drilling .

the federal government became involved in banning drilling in the great lakes when the congress enacted a temporary ban on the federal and state issuance of permits for drilling under the great lakes in 2001 ( p.l .

107-66 ; title v , ยง503 ) , extended it in 2003 , and then again through 2007 .

some also proposed a permanent ban against drilling in or under the great lakes .

a permanent ban on issuing federal or state permits for new directional , slant , or offshore drilling in or under the great lakes was included in the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

section 386 specifically states that "no federal or state permit or lease shall be issued for new oil and gas slant , directional , or offshore drilling in or under one or more of the great lakes. .

the u.s. ban on drilling in the great lakes has generated controversy .

some contend that the decision of whether to drill in the great lakes should be made by each state bordering the lakes .

they view a federal ban on drilling in the great lakes as a violation of states' rights and suggest that a federal ban constitutes a "taking. .

some proponents of the ban contend that state laws are not uniform in permanently banning drilling in the lakes .

indeed , as described later in this report , some great lakes states have enacted permanent bans on providing new oil and gas drilling permits in state waters , other states have no bans , and some are considering permanent bans in pending legislation .

some in congress have expressed concern over canadian offshore drilling operations in lake erie .

the impact of a major spill or blowout could be harmful to the ecosystem and difficult to remediate .

offshore and directional drilling for gas under the canadian great lakes is allowed by the canadian government and by ontario , the only province that borders the great lakes .

directional drilling for oil is allowed under the canadian great lakes ; however , offshore drilling for oil is prohibited .

canadian directional drilling operations have not gone under u.s. waters of the great lakes .

this report provides background information on the history of drilling in the great lakes , current production statistics ( where available ) for u.s. and canadian wells , and a summary of some environmental and economic issues related to drilling .

a review of state laws regarding drilling in the great lakes and a discussion of state drilling laws and the implications of a federal ban on drilling also are given .

no offshore oil and gas drilling in the great lakes has occurred in u.s. waters .

several states have attempted to drill onshore for oil and gas under the great lakes , but operating wells exist only in michigan .

interest in modern oil and gas drilling in the great lakes is thought to have begun in the mid - 1950s , although some cite that lake erie's first offshore gas well was drilled in 1913 .

oil development in the mid - 1950s was encouraged in the state of ohio .

the ohio general assembly provided the policy framework to allow for the extraction of oil and gas from under lake erie , and leasing and production procedures were established by the ohio department of natural resources .

however , opposition to drilling in lake erie began in 1957 because of environmental concerns , and the program was abandoned by 1968 .

no offshore or onshore wells were drilled in lake erie in ohio state waters afterwards , and several temporary bans were placed on all types of drilling under lake erie in ohio , the latest one in 2003 .

in pennsylvania , there has been no history of oil or gas production under lake erie ; two onshore exploratory wells were drilled in 1957 but no commercial deposits were found .

in michigan , since 1979 , 13 onshore wells under the great lakes have been drilled ; six were reported dry , and seven are still in production ( one oil well and six natural gas wells ) .

five producing wells are under lake michigan and two wells are under lake huron .

all producers in michigan are employing directional drilling technology , which originates on land and drills underneath the lakes .

in michigan , no onshore or offshore drilling can take place under the great lakes , except by those who obtained leases and commenced drilling prior to april 5 , 2002 .

prior to that date , state law authorized removal of oil and gas under the great lakes if directional drilling was employed .

other great lakes states including illinois , indiana , minnesota , new york , and wisconsin have no history of significant oil and gas drilling under the great lakes .

in canada , 2,200 wells have been drilled in lake erie , of which 550 are producing .

canada began modern commercial production of natural gas in lake erie in the 1960s .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

this came after decades of exploration activity that began as early as 1913 .

offshore gas wells are permitted in the canadian great lakes , but offshore oil wells are prohibited .

if a gas well shows evidence of oil , it must be closed and plugged , according to canadian regulations .

directional oil and gas drilling is allowed under the canadian great lakes , and has been extensively done in lake erie .

in lake erie , annual natural gas extraction rose to 15.2 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) in 1985 and has since declined to about 10 bcf in 2000 .

oil production through directional drilling into lake erie has developed in ontario .

there are 100 wells to date at an average depth of 2,800ft and 2.2 miles horizontal offset ( i.e. , drill location to target reservoir ) .

table 1 provides statistics on u.s. oil and natural gas production in the great lakes , all of it in michigan state waters .

oil and gas production under the great lakes in michigan has been variable over the past few years .

the average annual production of natural gas under the great lakes in michigan from 2000 to 2009 has been approximately 1.1 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) , whereas oil production averaged 660 barrels annually over the same period with no production from the years 2005 to 2007 .

this annual average represents approximately 0.005% of national production of natural gas .

there are several potential consequences associated with oil and gas drilling in or near large waterbodies such as the great lakes .

possible negative effects include oil spills , discharge of contaminated drilling fluids , and effects of the "footprint" of the drilling infrastructure .

possible positive effects include increased revenues for the region and state , increased employment , and greater domestic energy production .

under ยง503 of the energy and water appropriations act ( ewa ) of 2002 ( p.l .

107-66 ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers was directed to conduct a study of the potential environmental effects of oil and gas drilling activity in the great lakes .

this report was completed in 2005 and contains a detailed discussion of the potential environmental effects of drilling under the great lakes .

this section will provide an overview of some of the potential consequences of drilling under the great lakes and provide data , where available , on unintended oil and gas releases into the great lakes .

congress has the authority to regulate the use of the great lakes , including the development of oil and gas , under the commerce clause of the constitution .

the repercussions of congressional action , however , depend to some extent upon the characterization of the regulated resource .

if the body of water constituting the great lakes and its underlying resources are state - owned , some forms of federal regulation could amount to a taking .

if these resources are federal property , a taking would not occur .

oil and gas drilling under the great lakes is opposed by many who contend that the potential environmental risks associated with drilling do not justify the potential economic gain .

proponents of drilling , however , contend that risks associated with drilling are not high due to advances in drilling technology and safety , and that drilling would provide jobs and income for the states where it is done .

congress has weighed in on these issues and enacted a permanent ban on the issuance of new federal or state leases or permits for oil and gas drilling in or under the great lakes .

this ban would only affect drilling in u.s. - controlled waters of the great lakes and would not affect canadian production .

