the following section describes each of the four options crs modeled .

it also provides the projected effects of the options on social security and ssi benefit levels and eligibility in 2042 , and the interaction between the two programs .

these four options were chosen to illustrate different approaches to mitigating poverty in a benefit cut scenario , allowing policymakers to see the potential pros and cons of generic options .

the details of each option could be modified or combined with other provisions .

this analysis does not cover potential transition issues nor the cost of the options modeled .

if one of the objectives of reforming social security were to mitigate the effect of possible benefit reductions on the elderly poor , targeting spending would become an important consideration .

one way to measure such targeting is to compare the estimated effects of potential policy options on the elderly poor vs. the elderly non - poor .

other ways of analyzing the targeting of an option include measuring the poverty gap and looking at the proportion of people who fall below a given percentage of the poverty threshold ( eg , 150% or 200% of poverty ) .

however , this report focuses on elderly people who are officially considered poor .

figure 7 shows the elderly poor , the target group for the modeled policy options .

for each option , it shows the proportion of individuals projected to gain income ( labeled "winners" ) , lose income ( labeled "losers" ) , or stay the same ( labeled "no change" ) .

the income measure shows the projected net change in income under each option , including both social security and ssi benefits , so these projections reflect the interaction between the two programs .

figure 8 shows the same measures for the non - poor elderly .

under option #1 , which would create a new minimum social security benefit at the poverty line , about two - thirds of the poor elderly ( 68% ) are projected to be unaffected .

there are several reasons poor individuals may not be affected: because they don't qualify for social security benefits , because they receive benefits based on another person's work record , or because they began to receive benefits before the option was implemented .

as shown in figure 7 , a projected 27% of the poor elderly would be winners , but most aren't projected to gain enough income to bring them out of poverty .

the remaining 5% of the elderly poor are projected to lose income under the option .

in nearly all cases , their increased social security benefits are projected to result in reduced ssi benefits or loss of ssi eligibility .

among the non - poor elderly , most ( 84% ) are projected not to be affected , as shown in figure 8 .

however , about 11% are projected gain income under the option and another 5% are projected to lose income , for the same reasons outlined above .

under option #2 , which would create a sliding - scale minimum benefit based on years of work , about nine out of ten of the poor elderly ( 89% ) are projected to be unaffected , for the same reasons mentioned in the previous option .

about 8% of the poor elderly are projected to be winners under the option , but most don't gain enough income to bring them out of poverty .

the remaining 3% of the elderly poor are projected to lose income under the option .

most of the individuals who lose income under the option would either have reduced ssi benefits or lose ssi eligibility .

among the non - poor elderly , most ( 91% ) are projected not to be affected , as shown in figure 8 .

however , about 5% are projected gain income under the option and another 4% are projected to lose income , for the same reasons outlined above .

under option #3 , which would raise the ssi federal benefit rates to the poverty line , about 63% of the poor elderly are projected to be unaffected , as shown in figure 7 .

this is roughly the same proportion of the poor elderly who live in families where no elderly member receives ssi under the option .

the remaining 37% of the poor elderly are projected to be winners under the option .

none of the elderly poor is projected to lose income .

among the non - poor elderly , most ( 96% ) are projected not to be affected , as shown in figure 8 .

about 4% are projected gain income under the option .

none of the non - poor elderly is projected to lose income .

under option #4 , which would raise ssi federal benefit rates to the poverty line and also liberalize eligibility , about 59% of the poor elderly are projected to be unaffected , as shown in figure 7 .

this is roughly the same proportion of the poor elderly who live in families where no elderly member receives ssi under the option .

the remaining 41% of the poor elderly are projected to be winners under the option none of the elderly poor is projected to lose income .

among the non - poor elderly , most ( 96% ) are projected not to be affected , as shown in figure 8 .

about 4% are projected gain income under the option .

none of the non - poor elderly is projected to lose income .

the ssi options analyzed in this report are better targeted toward the elderly poor than are the social security options .

among the elderly poor , the ssi options are projected to create more winners and no losers .

this is because ssi recipients , by definition , are mostly poor , so any changes to ssi would affect mostly poor people .

among the non - poor , the ssi options change the incomes of fewer people , and cause no one to lose income .

the social security options are projected to cause some people to lose income , especially poor people .

this is primarily because of the interaction between social security and ssi .

each additional dollar of social security benefits could reduce ssi recipients' benefits by one dollar ( or more , after factoring in state supplements ) , and could disqualify some recipients for ssi altogether .

in addition to considering benefit levels , poverty rates , and targeting , as examined above , policymakers examining the potential effects of social security reform on the elderly poor would likely consider other criteria when discussing policy changes to either social security or ssi .

the following section briefly summarizes some of these other criteria .

one important factor not explicitly addressed in this report is the cost of each option , which would vary substantially .

the dynasim model does not produce cost estimates , and current cost estimates for these options are not available from other sources .

one possible subject for discussion if policy changes are considered is the original purpose of the programs that could be modified .

for example , ssi was originally designed to benefit the poor and its strict income and asset limits restrict benefits to the poorest elderly .

as such , expanding ssi eligibility or benefits would effectively target additional spending toward the elderly poor .

social security , on the other hand , was not primarily intended to reduce poverty , but to replace the lost earnings of contributing workers of all income levels .

changing the social security benefit formula to mitigate the effects of changes on the elderly poor arguably would not target additional dollars as efficiently .

it also might complicate the balance between adequacy and equity in the social security program .

another possible subject for discussion is the potential scope of policy changes — factors such as program participation rates and eligibility restrictions .

social security participation among the elderly is nearly universal .

ssi has strict eligibility criteria and its participation rates are far lower .

as a result , changes to ssi would likely affect fewer of the elderly poor than would changes to social security .

some individuals prefer not to receive means - tested assistance and would not participate in ssi regardless of changes .

other individuals may not qualify even for a liberalized ssi program because of asset restrictions .

this would be a particular problem for people with retirement savings , as defined contribution retirement plans ( such as 401 ( k ) s and individual retirement accounts ) count toward ssi's asset test .

finally , another potential topic that could be discussed is the prevailing political and fiscal environment .

in recent years , major changes to social security and ssi have been rare .

for example , the last significant amendments to social security were in 1983 .

ssi's income disregards and asset tests have stayed the same since 1981 and 1989 , respectively , and are not indexed to inflation .

there are also fiscal constraints on additional spending .

the federal budget is currently in deficit and is projected to remain so in the future .

in addition , social security faces long - term solvency problems .

ultimately , future elderly poverty rates depend largely on how policymakers choose to address social security's looming solvency problems .

once those decisions are made , the tradeoffs between any options to mitigate the effects of potential benefit cuts would be judged based on their effectiveness , efficiency , cost , and on policymakers' judgments about a myriad of other factors .

this paper examines four possible policy options to reduce elderly poverty .

the projections in the paper were prepared using the urban institute's dynasim microsimulation model .

the dynasim model projects future social security and ssi benefits by using a mix of historical data and projections .

when interpreting the results of dynasim or any other model , it is important to note that projections are inherently imprecise ; the further into the future one looks , the wider the range of possible outcomes .

population the analysis focuses on all noninstitutionalized individuals who will be age 65 or older in 2042 , including those who do not receive social security and / or ssi benefits .

baseline all of the options in this paper are compared to a current law payable baseline , which assumes that current law benefits are cut across the board to balance social security's annual income and spending at the point of insolvency , currently projected to occur in 2041 .

this baseline illustrates how such options could work in a benefit - cut scenario .

some of the most commonly discussed solvency options are projected to result in poverty rates similar to the current law payable baseline in the year of analysis , as discussed above .

using a different baseline or different solvency option would lead to different results .

year of analysis this report focuses on the effects of policy changes in 2042 , the first full year of projected trust fund insolvency .

analyzing this year shows how various poverty - reduction options could mitigate the effects of an across - the - board cut to social security benefits at the projected point of insolvency , assuming no action was taken before then .

this reduction is assumed to bring annual cash - flow balance to the system , cutting benefits by about 25% in 2042 .

the figures and accompanying analysis are essentially a snapshot of the projected beneficiary population in this single year .

focusing on a different year would lead to different results .

it is also important to recall that initial social security benefits rise with wages over time , while ssi benefits and income limits as well as the poverty thresholds rise with prices .

since wages are projected to rise faster than prices over time , this means that in general , the projected prevalence of ssi receipt decreases each year under current law , as does the number of people in poverty .

start year for options all of the options in this report are assumed to be implemented in 2008 .

the year 2008 was chosen so that the analysis could rely as much as possible on near - term projections , which are more reliable than long - term projections .

in addition , choosing an earlier start year means that almost all of the elderly beneficiaries in the analysis year , 2042 , will be subject to the options .

measure of income many of the results presented in this paper focus on changes in income .

for the purposes of this paper , income includes social security benefits , ssi benefits , pension payments , earnings , and the annuitized value of financial assets .

in modeling these options , social security benefits were calculated before ssi benefits .

this sequence is intended to mimic program rules , in which ssi applicants must apply for all other benefits for which they may qualify before applying for ssi .

as a result , the interactions between social security and ssi benefits can be seen .

income is calculated on a per capita basis , which means that for married couples the income of both spouses is averaged together .

however , in showing poverty status , a measure of family income is used since the official poverty threshold is calculated on a family basis .

poverty thresholds in the u.s. , poverty is officially defined using the census bureau's poverty thresholds .

these thresholds reflect rough estimates of the amount of money individuals or families need per year to purchase a basket of goods and services deemed "minimally adequate," according to the living standards of the early 1960s , when the poverty thresholds were developed .

the thresholds are increased at the rate of inflation .

the 2007 annual poverty threshold was $9,944 for an elderly individual and $12,533 for an elderly couple .

a family is considered poor if its countable money income is less than the poverty threshold for its family type and size .

this report uses the official poverty thresholds appropriate for each individual's family type and size ( including the thresholds for elderly individuals and couples ) .

the thresholds are projected using the intermediate assumptions about future inflation from the 2005 social security trustees report .

behavioral changes this analysis assumes that no behavioral changes result from the modification of the social security or ssi benefit rules .

thus , policy changes will not automatically alter an individual's work patterns or age at benefit take - up .

however , it's likely that if policy changes were implemented , individuals' incentives and behavior could also change .

the model assumes that roughly two - thirds of individuals who qualify for ssi take up benefits .

for policies with liberalized eligibility criteria ( such as the ssi options analyzed in this report ) , the same proportion of qualifying individuals is assumed to take up benefits .

however , it is possible that a more generous ssi program would also change the proportion of qualifying individuals taking up benefits , which is not captured in these projections .

the analysis also assumes no changes in state policy as a result of policy changes at the federal level .

however , it is possible that federal policy changes in ssi could result in adjustments to state supplements , for example .

