horses and burros are thought to have been first brought to the americas by spanish explorers around 1500 .

those that escaped became the first wild horse herds in north america , with feral populations spreading throughout the southwest in the 16 th and 17 th centuries .

native americans incorporated horses and burros into their culture , and wild and domesticated populations spread throughout the west .

wild populations increased when animals escaped from , or were released from , ranching and mining activities in the 19 th and 20 th centuries .

at the turn of the 20 th century , an estimated 2 million wild horses may have lived on the range .

by the 1950s their population was thought to be fewer than 20,000 .

public concern developed over falling populations and instances of inhumane treatment by profiteers who captured and sold the animals for slaughter .

a protection movement culminated in the wild horse annie act of 1959 ( 18 u.s.c .

§47 ) and later in the wild free - roaming horses and burros act of 1971 ( hereinafter "the 1971 act" ) ( 16 u.s.c .

§§1331 et seq. ) .

the 1971 act seeks to preserve wild horses and burros on federal lands as "living symbols of the historic and pioneer spirit of the west. .

the law covers wild horses and burros on lands of the bureau of land management ( blm ) in the department of the interior and the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture , and assigns management responsibility to these agencies .

the animals are to be managed "to achieve and maintain a thriving natural ecological balance on the public lands," according to the 1971 act .

the law imposes criminal penalties for removing , converting to private use , killing , harassing , selling , or processing into commercial products wild horses and burros ( with some exceptions ) under federal jurisdiction unless given federal authority .

a nine - member wild horse and burro advisory board of private citizens advises the secretaries .

under the 1971 act , the agencies conduct inventories of horse and burro populations on federal land to determine appropriate management levels ( amls ) .

they are authorized to remove animals exceeding the range's carrying capacity to restore a natural ecological balance and to protect the range from deterioration associated with an overpopulation of wild horses and burros .

first , the agencies are to destroy old , sick , or lame animals by the most humane means available .

second , they are to remove healthy animals for private adoption .

blm takes the lead in gathering animals and holding adoptions for both agencies .

third , if adoption demand is insufficient , the remaining healthy animals are to be destroyed ; however , the agencies have not used this authority since 1982 .

the 108 th congress enacted changes to the 1971 act regarding wild horse and burro management on federal lands ( p.l .

108-447 , §142 ) to provide an additional tool for reducing wild horse and burro populations .

one change directed the agencies to sell , "without limitation," excess animals ( or their remains ) that are deemed too old ( more than 10 years old ) or otherwise unable to be adopted ( offered unsuccessfully at least three times ) .

proceeds are to be used for the blm wild horse and burro adoption program .

a second change removed a ban on the sale of wild horses and burros and their remains for processing into commercial products .

a third change removed criminal penalties for processing into commercial products the remains of a wild horse or burro , if it is sold under the new authority .

these changes have been supported as providing a cost - effective way of helping the agencies achieve aml , to improve the health of the animals , protect range resources , and restore a natural ecological balance on federal lands .

however , the changes have been opposed as potentially leading to the slaughter of healthy animals .

legislation in the 110 th and 111 th congresses had sought to repeal the sale authority and overturn the other 108 th congress changes .

such legislation has not been introduced in the 112 th congress as of december 2 , 2011 , although measures pertaining to horse slaughter and consumption more generally have been introduced .

blm has set the upper limit for aml for all wild horse and burro herds at 26,576 .

of the total , the aml for horses is 23,672 and the aml for burros is 2,904 .

the number of animals on blm lands significantly exceeds this figure ; there were an estimated 38,497 wild horses and burros ( 145% of aml ) on blm land as of february 28 , 2011 .

horses greatly outnumber burros on federal land .

the total of 38,497 includes 33,014 horses ( 86% ) and 5,483 burros ( 14% ) .

horses on the range exceeded the horse aml by 9,342 ( 39% ) , while burros on the range exceeded the burro aml by 2,579 ( 89% ) .

about half of all the animals are in nevada .

another 4,700 wild horses and burros were on 32 active territories ( fs management areas ) as of september 30 , 2010 .

thousands of additional animals — 41,874 as of september 2011 — are in agency holding facilities .

 ( see the section of this report entitled " holding in facilities ." ) .

paring the number of wild horses and burros to the national aml has eluded blm .

there were an estimated 28,500 wild horses and burros as of april 1 , 2007 .

this was the lowest level since the early 1970s and was the closest to aml since that time .

the possibility of achieving aml subsequently diminished , in part due to a reduced emphasis on removing animals from federal lands .

the number of wild horses and burros on the range subsequently increased by 9,997 animals ( 35% ) as of february 28 , 2011 .

wild horses and burros are managed in 179 herd management areas ( hmas ) in 10 western states , as shown in figure 1 .

blm had reached aml in 72% of the hmas that existed in 2006 , but there was a decline to 45% of hmas in 2011 .

likely reasons that have been cited include underestimates of populations on the range , the high population growth rate of horses and burros , a virtual absence of natural predators , inadequate funding , insufficient interest in adoptions and sales , little emphasis on fertility control , and poor program management .

currently , animals that are removed from the range are offered for adoption or sale or sent to holding facilities .

blm projected it would achieve aml in fewer hmas during fy2012 , based on the administration's request for funding for wild horse and burro management .

specifically , the agency expected to be at aml in 39% of hmas in 2012 .

congress has considered the extent to which funding for wild horse and burro management is appropriate for a number of sometimes conflicting goals: caring for wild horses and burros , reaching aml on the range , and reducing long - term budgetary needs , as discussed above .

congress also has provided guidance and direction to the agencies on managing wild horses and burros , and considered whether alternative authorities would be desirable .

currently ( as of december 2 , 2011 ) , legislation to amend the 1971 act has not been introduced in the 112 th congress .

legislation in the 111 th congress had sought to make many changes to wild horse and burro management .

specifically , h.r .

1018 had passed the house and was referred to a senate committee , while s. 1579 was introduced in the senate and referred to committee .

the bills sought to prohibit the slaughter of wild horses and burros , unless the animal is terminally ill or fatally injured , and to remove agency authority to sell excess wild horses and burros .

they would have limited the removal of wild horses and burros from the range to certain circumstances: ( 1 ) the immediate health or safety of the animals is threatened ; ( 2 ) the health and well - being of native plants or wildlife is threatened ; or ( 3 ) the secretary "has exhausted all practicable options" of maintaining the animals on the range , has determined that there is an "adoption demand" for the animals , and can "ensure humane treatment and care" through specified requirements .

other provisions were intended to expand the area available for wild horses and burros .

to the extent practicable , the acreage was not to be less than the acreage where the animals roamed in 1971 — 53.8 million acres ; currently , wild horses and burros roam on 31.6 million acres .

the prohibition on relocating wild horses and burros to public lands where they did not exist in 1971 would have been stricken .

the bills sought to facilitate the establishment of wild horse and burro sanctuaries or exclusive use areas , and to identify new rangelands for wild horses and burros , including on private lands .

they would have required an assessment of the effects of creating new ranges , sanctuaries , or exclusive use areas for wild horses and burros , including on range health , water quality , and threatened and endangered species .

still other provisions aimed to improve the methods for estimating animals on the range and determining amls .

the secretary was to employ the best scientific methods for estimating populations , develop a policy and standards for setting amls , and distribute standards so that the methodology for estimating populations and determining amls is consistent .

to reduce populations on the range , the secretary was to research , develop , and implement fertility control .

the secretary also was to maintain an inventory of wild horses and burros and update it every two years .

to promote wild horse and burro adoptions , the secretary was to take several actions .

they included implementation of creative and more aggressive marketing strategies , exploration of agreements with local and state organizations that use horses , provision of resources for screening and training potential adopters , and development of a program of economic incentives for adopters .

adopters would have been required to sign an attestation affirming that neither the adopted animals nor their remains would be sold or transferred for consideration for processing into commercial products .

wild horses and burros could not be held in short - term holding facilities for more than six months while awaiting disposition .

further , the bills would have required annual reports to the house and senate authorizing committees with information on animal populations , amls , acres of land for wild horses and burros , sanctuaries ( or exclusive use areas ) , and fertility control , among other topics .

the secretary also was to track the number of animals injured or killed during gathering and holding , and determine what information on treatment of animals held and adopted could be provided to the public .

