this report provides congress with official , unclassified , background data from u.s.government sources on transfers of conventional arms to developing nations by major suppliers forthe period 2000 through 2007 .

it also includes some data on worldwide supplier transactions .

itupdates and revises crs report rl34187 ( pdf ) , conventional arms transfers to developing nations,1999-2006 .

the data in this report provide a means for congress to identify existing supplier - purchaserrelationships in conventional weapons acquisitions .

use of these data can assist congress in itsoversight role of assessing whether the current nature of the international weapons trade affects u.s.national interests .

for most of recent american history , maintaining regional stability , and ensuringthe security of u.s. allies and friendly nations throughout the world , have been important elementsof u.s. foreign policy .

knowing the degree to which individual arms suppliers are making armstransfers to individual nations or regions provides congress with a context for evaluating policyquestions it may confront .

such policy questions may include , for example , whether or not tosupport specific u.s. arms sales to given countries or regions or to support or oppose such armstransfers by other nations .

the data in this report may also assist congress in evaluating whethermultilateral arms control arrangements or other u.s. foreign policy initiatives are being supportedor undermined by the actions of arms suppliers .

the principal focus of this report is the level of arms transfers by major weapons suppliersto nations in the developing world - - where most of the potential for the outbreak of regional militaryconflicts currently exists .

for decades , during the height of the cold war , providing conventionalweapons to friendly states was an instrument of foreign policy utilized by the united states and itsallies .

this was equally true for the soviet union and its allies .

the underlying rationale for u.s.arms transfer policy then was to help ensure that friendly states were not placed at risk through amilitary disadvantage created by arms transfers by the soviet union or its allies .

following the coldwar's end , u.s. arms transfer policy has been based on assisting friendly and allied nations indeveloping and maintaining their ability to deal with regional security threats and concerns .

the data in this report illustrate how global patterns of conventional arms transfers havechanged in the post - cold war and post - persian gulf war years .

relationships between armssuppliers and recipients continue to evolve in response to changing political , military , and economiccircumstances .

where before the principal motivation for arms sales by foreign suppliers might havebeen to support a foreign policy objective , today that motivation may be based as much on economicconsiderations as those of foreign or national security policy .

the developing world continues to be the primary focus of foreign arms sales activity byconventional weapons suppliers .

during the period of this report , 2000-2007 , conventional armstransfer agreements ( which represent orders for future delivery ) to developing nations comprised66.6% of the value of all international arms transfer agreements .

the portion of agreements withdeveloping countries constituted 67.7% of all agreements globally from 2004-2007 .

in 2007 , armstransfer agreements with developing countries accounted for 70.5% of the value of all suchagreements globally .

deliveries of conventional arms to developing nations , from 2004-2007,constituted 64.7% of all international arms deliveries .

in 2007 , arms deliveries to developing nationsconstituted 55.6% of the value of all such arms deliveries worldwide .

the data in this new report supersede all data published in previous editions .

since thesenew data for 2000-2007 reflect potentially significant updates to and revisions in the underlyingdatabases utilized for this report , only the data in this most recent edition should be used .

the dataare expressed in u.s. dollars for the calendar years indicated , and adjusted for inflation ( see boxnotes on page 3 ) .

u.s. commercially licensed arms export delivery values are excluded ( see box noteon page 20 ) .

also excluded are arms transfers by any supplier to subnational groups .

the definitionof developing nations , as used in this report , and the specific classes of items included in its valuestotals are found in box notes on page 3 .

the report's table of contents provides a detailed listing anddescription of the various data tables to guide the reader to specific items of interest .

tables 1 through 1j present data on arms transfer agreements with developing nations bymajor suppliers from 2000-2007 .

these data show the most recent trends in arms contract activityby major suppliers .

delivery data , which reflect implementation of sales decisions taken earlier , areshown in tables 2 through 2j .

tables 8 , 8a , 8b , 8c , and 8d provide data on worldwide armstransfer agreements from 2000-2007 , while tables 9 , 9a , 9b , 9c , and 9d provide data on worldwide arms deliveries during this period .

to use these data regarding agreements for purposesother than assessing general trends in seller / buyer activity is to risk drawing conclusions that can bereadily invalidated by future events - - precise values and comparisons , for example , may change dueto cancellations or modifications of major arms transfer agreements .

these data sets reflect the comparative magnitude of arms transactions by arms supplierswith recipient nations expressed in constant dollar terms , unless otherwise noted .

illustrative pie andbar charts are provided in this section to give the relative market share of individual arms suppliersglobally , to the developing world and to specific regions .

figure 1 provides the value of worldwidearms transfer agreements for 2000-2003 , 2004-2007 , and 2007 , and the suppliers' share of suchagreements with the developing world .

figure 2 provides the value of worldwide arms deliveriesfor 2000-2003 , 2004-2007 , and 2007 , and the suppliers' share of such deliveries with the developingworld .

specific content of other individual data tables is described below .

table 1 shows the annual current dollar values of arms transfer agreements to developingnations by major suppliers from 2000-2007 .

this table provides the data from which tables 1a ( constant dollars ) and table 1b ( supplier percentages ) are derived .

regional arms transfer agreements , 2000-2007 table 1c gives the values of arms transfer agreements between suppliers and individualregions of the developing world for the periods 2000-2003 and 2004-2007 .

these values areexpressed in current u.s. dollars .

 ( 10 ) table 1d , derived from table 1c , gives the percentagedistribution of each supplier's agreement values within the regions for the two time periods .

table1e , also derived from table 1c , illustrates what percentage share of each developing world region'stotal arms transfer agreements was held by specific suppliers during the years 2000-2003 and2004-2007 .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations , 2000-2007: leadingsuppliers compared table 1f gives the values of arms transfer agreements with the developing nations from2000-2007 by the top eleven suppliers .

the table ranks these suppliers on the basis of the total current dollar values of their respective agreements with the developing world for each of threeperiods - - 2000-2003 , 2004-2007 , and 2000-2007 .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations in 2007: leadingsuppliers compared table 1g ranks and gives for 2007 the values of arms transfer agreements with developingnations of the top eleven suppliers in current u.s. dollars .

arms transfer agreements with near east 2000-2007: suppliers andrecipients table 1h gives the values of arms transfer agreements with the near east nations bysuppliers or categories of suppliers for the periods 2000-2003 and 2004-2007 .

these values areexpressed in current u.s. dollars .

they are a subset of the data contained in table 1 and table 1c .

arms transfers to developing nations , 2000-2007: agreements withleading recipients table 1i gives the values of arms transfer agreements made by the top ten recipients of armsin the developing world from 2000-2007 with all suppliers collectively .

the table ranks recipientson the basis of the total current dollar values of their respective agreements with all suppliers foreach of three periods - - 2000-2003 , 2004-2007 , and 2000-2007 .

arms transfers to developing nations in 2007: agreements with leadingrecipients table 1j names the top ten developing world recipients of arms transfer agreements in 2007 .

the table ranks these recipients on the basis of the total current dollar values of their respectiveagreements with all suppliers in 2007 .

developing nations arms delivery values table 2 shows the annual current dollar values of arms deliveries ( items actually transferred ) to developing nations by major suppliers from 2000-2007 .

the utility of these particular data is thatthey reflect transfers that have occurred .

they provide the data from which tables 2a ( constantdollars ) and table 2b ( supplier percentages ) are derived .

regional arms delivery values , 2000-2007 table 2c gives the values of arms deliveries by suppliers to individual regions of thedeveloping world for the periods 2000-2003 and 2004-2007 .

these values are expressed in current u.s. dollars .

 ( 11 ) table2d , derived from table 2c , gives the percentage distribution of each supplier's deliveries valueswithin the regions for the two time periods .

table 2e , also derived from table 2c , illustrates whatpercentage share of each developing world region's total arms delivery values was held by specificsuppliers during the years 2000-2003 and 2004-2007 .

arms deliveries to developing nations , 2000-2007: leading supplierscompared table 2f gives the values of arms deliveries to developing nations from 2000-2007 by thetop eleven suppliers .

the table ranks these suppliers on the basis of the total current dollar valuesof their respective deliveries to the developing world for each of three periods - - 2000-2003,2004-2007 , and 2000-2007 .

arms deliveries to developing nations in 2007: leading supplierscompared table 2g ranks and gives for 2007 the values of arms deliveries to developing nations of thetop ten suppliers in current u.s. dollars .

arms deliveries to near east , 2000-2007: suppliers andrecipients table 2h gives the values of arms delivered to near east nations by suppliers or categoriesof suppliers for the periods 2000-2003 and 2004-2007 .

these values are expressed in current u.s.dollars .

they are a subset of the data contained in table 2 and table 2c .

arms deliveries to developing nations , 2000-2007: the leadingrecipients table 2i gives the values of arms deliveries made to the top ten recipients of arms in thedeveloping world from 2000-2007 by all suppliers collectively .

the table ranks recipients on thebasis of the total current dollar values of their respective deliveries from all suppliers for each ofthree periods - - 2000-2003 , 2004-2007 , and 2000-2007 .

arms transfers to developing nations in 2007: agreements with leadingrecipients table 2j names the top ten developing world recipients of arms transfer agreements in 2007 .

the table ranks these recipients on the basis of the total current dollar values of their respectiveagreements with all suppliers in 2007 .

chart 1 .

arms transfer agreements worldwide , 2000-2007 developed and developing worlds compared source: u.s. government chart 2 .

arms transfer agreements worldwide ( supplier percentage of value ) source: u.s. government chart 3 .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations ( supplier percentageof value ) source: u.s. government chart 4 .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations by major supplier,2000-2007 ( billions of constant 2007 dollars ) source: u.s. government figure 1 .

worldwide arms transfer agreements,2000-2007 and suppliers' share with developing world ( in millions of constant2007 u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government chart 5 .

arms transfer agreements with near east ( supplier percentage ofvalue ) source: u.s. government chart 6 .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations in asia ( supplierpercentage of value ) ( excludes japan , australia , and new zealand ) source: u.s. government chart 7 .

arms deliveries worldwide 2000-2007 developed and developingworlds compared source: u.s. government chart 8 .

arms deliveries to developing countries by major supplier,2000-2007 ( in billions of constant 2007 dollars ) source: u.s. government figure 2 .

worldwide arms deliveries,2000-2007 and suppliers' share with developing world ( in millions of constant2007 u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government table 1 .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of currentu.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: developing nations category excludes the u.s. , europe , canada , japan , australia and new zealand .

all data are for the calendar year given exceptfor u. s. map ( military assistance program ) , imet ( international military education and training ) , and excess defense article data which are includedfor the particular fiscal year .

all amounts given include the values of all categories of weapons , spare parts , construction , all associated services , militaryassistance , excess defense articles , and training programs .

statistics for foreign countries are based upon estimated selling prices .

all foreign data arerounded to the nearest $100 million .

the united states total in 2000 includes a $6.432 billion licensed commercial agreement with the united arabemirates for 80 f - 16 aircraft .

table 1a .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of constant 2007u.s .

dollars ) source: u.s. government *based on department of defense price deflator .

table 1b .

arms transfer agreements with developing nations , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( expressed asa percent oftotal , by year ) source: u.s. government *major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 1c .

regional arms transfer agreements , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

the united states total for near east in 2000-2003 includes a $6.432 billion licensedcommercial agreement with the united arab emirates in 2000 for 80 f - 16 aircraft .

*major west european category included france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 1d .

percentage of each supplier's agreements value by region , 2000-2007 source: u.s. government *major west european category included france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 1e .

percentage of total agreements value by supplier to regions , 2000-2007 source: u.s. government *major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 1f .

arms transfer agreements withdeveloping nations , 2000-2007: leading suppliers compared ( in millions of currentu.s .

dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

*the united states total includes a $6.432 billion licensed commercial agreementwith the united arab emirates in 2000 for 80 f - 16 aircraft .

table 1g .

arms transfer agreements withdeveloping nations in 2007: leading suppliers compared ( in millions of currentu.s .

dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 1h .

arms transfer agreements with near east,by supplier ( in millions of current u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government note: 0=data less than $50 million or nil .

all data are rounded to nearest $100 million .

*major west european includes france , united kingdom , germany , and italy totals asan aggregate figure .

**the united states total for 2000-2003 includes a $6.432 billion licensed commercialagreement with the united arab emirates in 2000 for 80 f - 16 aircraft .

table 1i .

arms transfer agreements withdeveloping nations , 2000-2007: agreements by the leading recipients ( in millionsof current u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

*the u.a.e .

total includes a $6.432 billion licensed commercial agreement with theunited states in 2000 for 80 f - 16 aircraft .

table 1j .

arms transfer agreements withdeveloping nations in 2007: agreements by leading recipients ( in millions ofcurrent u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government note : all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 2 .

arms deliveries to developing nations , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: developing nations category excludes the united states , russia , europe , canada , japan , australia , and new zealand .

all data are for the calendaryear given , except for u.s. map ( military assistance program ) , imet ( international military education and training ) , excess defense articles , whichare included for the particular fiscal year .

licensed commercial exports are excluded .

all amounts given include the values of all categories of weaponsand ammunition , military spare parts , military construction , military assistance and training programs , and all associated services .

statistics for foreigncountries are based upon estimated selling prices .

all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

table 2a .

arms deliveries to developing nations , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of constant 2007u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government *based on department of defense price deflator .

table 2b .

arms deliveries to developing nations , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( expressed as a percent oftotal , byyear ) source: u.s. government *major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 2c .

regional arms deliveries by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

*major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 2d .

percentage of supplier deliveries value by region , 2000-2007 source: u.s. government *major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 2e .

percentage of total deliveries value by supplier to regions , 2000-2007 source: u.s. government *major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 2f .

arms deliveries to developingnations , 2000-2007 leading suppliers compared ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 2g .

arms deliveries to developingnations in 2007: leading suppliers compared ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 2h .

arms deliveries to near east , by supplier ( inmillions of current u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government note: 0=data less than $50 million or nil .

all data are rounded to nearest $100 million .

*major west european includes france , united kingdom , germany , and italy totals as anaggregate figure .

table 2i .

arms deliveries to developing nations,2000-2007: the leading recipients ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 2j .

arms deliveries to developing nationsin 2007: the leading recipients ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

other useful data for assessing arms transfers are those that indicate who hasactually delivered specific numbers of specific classes of military items to a region .

these data are relatively "hard" in that they reflect actual transfers of militaryequipment .

they have the limitation of not giving detailed information regardingeither the sophistication or the specific name of the equipment delivered .

however,these data show relative trends in the delivery of important classes of militaryequipment and indicate who the leading suppliers are from region to region overtime .

data in the following tables set out actual deliveries of fourteen categories ofweaponry to developing nations from 2000-2007 by the united states , russia , china,the four major west european suppliers as a group , all other european suppliers asa group , and all other suppliers as a group .

the tables show these deliveries data forall of the developing nations collectively , for asia , for the near east , for latinamerica , and for africa ( tables 3-7 ) .

care should be taken in using the quantitative data within these specifictables .

aggregate data on weapons categories delivered by suppliers do not provideprecise indices of the quality and / or quantity of the weaponry delivered .

the historyof recent conventional conflicts suggests that quality and / or sophistication ofweapons can offset quantitative advantage .

further , these data do not provide anindication of the relative capabilities of the recipient nations to use effectively theweapons delivered to them .

superior training - - coupled with good equipment,tactical and operational proficiency , and sound logistics - - may , in the last analysis,be a more important factor in a nation's ability to engage successfully in conventionalwarfare than the size of its weapons inventory .

table 3 .

numbers of weapons delivered by suppliers to developing nations source: u.s. government note: developing nations category excludes the u.s. , russia , europe , canada , japan,australia and new zealand .

all data are for calendar years given .

*major west europeanincludes france , united kingdom , germany , and italy totals as an aggregate figure .

datarelating to surface - to - surface and anti - ship missiles by foreign suppliers are estimates basedon a variety of sources having a wide range of accuracy .

as such , individual data entries inthese two weapons delivery categories are not necessarily definitive .

table 4 .

number of weapons delivered by suppliers toasia and the pacific source: u.s. government note: asia and pacific category excludes japan , australia and new zealand .

all data arefor calendar years given .

*major west european includes france , united kingdom,germany , and italy totals as an aggregate figure .

data relating to surface - to - surface andanti - ship missiles by foreign suppliers are estimates based on a variety of sources having awide range of accuracy .

as such , individual data entries in these two weapons deliverycategories are not necessarily definitive .

table 5 .

numbers of weapons delivered by suppliersto near east source: u.s. government note: all data for calendar years given .

*major west european includes france , unitedkingdom , germany , and italy totals as an aggregate figure .

data relating tosurface - to - surface and anti - ship missiles by foreign suppliers are estimates based on a varietyof sources having a wide range of accuracy .

as such , individual data entries in theses twoweapons delivery categories are not necessarily definitive .

table 6 .

numbers of weapons delivered by suppliersto latin america source: u.s. government note: all data for calendar years given .

*major west european includes france , unitedkingdom , germany , and italy totals as an aggregate figure .

data relating tosurface - to - surface and anti - ship missiles by foreign suppliers are estimates based on a varietyof sources having a wide range of accuracy .

as such , individual data entries in theses twoweapons delivery categories are not necessarily definitive .

table 7 .

number of weapons delivered by suppliers toafrica source: u.s. government note: all data are for calendar years given .

*major west european includes france , unitedkingdom , germany , and italy totals as an aggregate figure .

data relating tosurface - to - surface and anti - ship missiles by foreign suppliers are estimates based on a varietyof sources having a wide range of accuracy .

as such , individual data entries in these twoweapons delivery categories are not necessarily definitive .

ten tables follow .

tables 8 , 8a , and 8b and tables 9 , 9a , and 9b , providethe total dollar values for arms transfer agreements and arms deliveries worldwidefor the years 2000-2007 in the same format and detail as do tables 1 , 1a , and 1b and tables 2 , 2a , and 2b for arms transfer agreements with and arms deliveries todeveloping nations .

tables 8c , 8d , 9c , and 9d provide a list of the top eleven armssuppliers to the world based on the total values ( in current dollars ) of their armstransfer agreements and arms deliveries worldwide during calendar years 2000-2003,2004-2007 , and 2007 .

these tables are set out in the same format and detail as tables 1f and 1g for arms transfer agreements with , and tables 2f and 2g forarms deliveries to developing nations , respectively .

total worldwide arms transfer agreementsvalues , 2000-2007 table 8 shows the annual current dollar values of arms transfer agreementsworldwide .

since these figures do not allow for the effects of inflation , they are , bythemselves , of limited use .

they provide , however , the data from which tables 8a ( constant dollars ) and 8b ( supplier percentages ) are derived .

total worldwide delivery values2000-2007 table 9 shows the annual current dollar values of arms deliveries ( itemsactually transferred ) worldwide by major suppliers from 2000-2007 .

the utility ofthese data is that they reflect transfers that have occurred .

they provide the datafrom which tables 9a ( constant dollars ) and 9b ( supplier percentages ) are derived .

table 8 .

arms transfer agreements with the world , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of current u.s. dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all data are for the calendar year given , except for u.s. map ( military assistance program ) and imet ( international military education andtraining ) , excess defense articles , which are included for the particular fiscal year .

all amounts given include the values of all categories of weapons andammunition , military spare parts , military construction , excess defense articles , military assistance and training programs , and all associated services .

statistics for foreign countries are based upon estimated selling prices .

all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

the u.s. total in 2000includes a $6.432 billion licensed commercial agreement with the united arab emirates for 80 f - 16 aircraft .

table 8a .

arms transfer agreements with the world , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of constant2007 u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government *based on department of defense price deflator .

table 8b .

arms transfer agreements with the world , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( expressed as a percentof total , byyear ) source: u.s. government note: columns may not total due to rounding .

*major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 8c .

arms transfer agreements with theworld , 2000-2007: leading suppliers compared ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

*the u.s. total includes a $6.432billion licensed commercial agreement with the united arab emirates in 2000 for 80f - 16 aircraft .

table 8d .

arms transfer agreements with theworld in 2007: leading suppliers compared ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded data totals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 9 .

arms deliveries to the world , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all data are for the calendar year given , except for u.s. map ( military assistance program ) , imet ( international military education and training ) ,excess defense articles , which are included for the particular fiscal year .

licensed commercial exports are excluded .

all amounts given include the valuesof all categories of weapons and ammunition , military spare parts , military construction , excess defense articles , military assistance and training programs,and all associated services .

statistics for foreign countries are based upon estimated selling prices .

all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100million .

table 9a .

arms deliveries to the world , by supplier , 2000-2007 ( in millions of constant 2007 u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government *based on department of defense price deflator .

table 9b .

arms deliveries to the world , by supplier 2000-2007 ( expressed as a percent of total , byyear ) source: u.s. government *major west european category includes france , united kingdom , germany , italy .

table 9c .

arms deliveries to the world,2000-2007: leading suppliers compared ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

table 9d .

arms deliveries to the world in 2007:leading suppliers compared ( in millions of current u.s.dollars ) source: u.s. government note: all foreign data are rounded to the nearest $100 million .

where rounded datatotals are the same , the rank order is maintained .

tanks and self - propelled guns: this category includes light , medium , and heavytanks ; self - propelled artillery ; self - propelled assault guns .

artillery: this category includes field and air defense artillery , mortars , rocketlaunchers and recoilless rifles - - 100 mm and over ; frog launchers - - 100mm andover .

armored personnel carriers ( apcs ) and armored cars: this category includespersonnel carriers , armored and amphibious ; armored infantry fighting vehicles ; armored reconnaissance and command vehicles .

major surface combatants: this category includes aircraft carriers , cruisers,destroyers , frigates .

minor surface combatants: this category includes minesweepers , subchasers,motor torpedo boats , patrol craft , motor gunboats .

submarines: this category includes all submarines , including midget submarines .

guided missile patrol boats: this category includes all boats in this class .

supersonic combat aircraft: this category includes all fighter and bomber aircraftdesigned to function operationally at speeds above mach 1 .

subsonic combat aircraft: this category includes all fighter and bomber aircraftdesigned to function operationally at speeds below mach 1 .

other aircraft: this category includes all other fixed - wing aircraft , includingtrainers , transports , reconnaissance aircraft , and communications / utility aircraft .

helicopters: this category includes all helicopters , including combat and transport .

surface - to - air missiles: this category includes all ground - based air defensemissiles .

surface - to - surface missiles: this category includes all surface - surface missileswithout regard to range , such as scuds and css - 2s .

it excludes all anti - tank missiles.it also excludes all anti - ship missiles , which are counted in a separate listing .

anti - ship missiles: this category includes all missiles in this class such as theharpoon , silkworm , styx and exocet .

asia afghanistan australia bangladesh brunei burma ( myanmar ) china fiji india indonesia japan cambodia kazakhstan kyrgyzstan laos malaysia nepal new zealand north korea pakistan papua new guinea philippines pitcairn singapore south korea sri lanka taiwan tajikistan thailand turkmenistan uzbekistan vietnam near east algeria bahrain egypt iran iraq israel jordan kuwait lebanon libya morocco oman qatar saudi arabia syria tunisia united arab emirates yemen europe albania armenia austria azerbaijan belarus bosnia / herzegovina bulgaria belgium canada croatia czechoslovakia / czech republic cyprus denmark estonia finland france fyr / macedonia georgia germany greece hungary iceland ireland italy latvia liechtenstein lithuania luxembourg malta moldova netherlands norway poland portugal romania russia slovak republic slovenia spain sweden switzerland turkey ukraine united kingdom yugoslavia / federal republic ( serbia / montenegro ) africa angola benin botswana burkina faso burundi cameroon cape verde central african republic chad congo cã´te d'ivoire djibouti equatorial guinea ethiopia gabon gambia ghana guinea guinea - bissau kenya lesotho liberia madagascar malawi mali mauritania mauritius mozambique namibia niger nigeria rã©union rwanda senegal seychelles sierra leone somalia south africa sudan swaziland tanzania togo uganda zaire zambia zimbabwe latin america antigua argentina bahamas barbados belize bermuda bolivia brazil british virgin islands cayman islands chile colombia costa rica cuba dominica dominican republic ecuador el salvador french guiana grenada guadeloupe guatemala guyana haiti honduras jamaica martinique mexico montserrat netherlands antilles nicaragua panama paraguay peru st. kitts & nevis st. lucia st. pierre & miquelon st. vincent suriname trinidad turks & caicos venezuel .

