despite long - standing commitments to protect threatened species from overexploitation and to support natural resource management development , some argue that the scope and scale of illegal wildlife trade has risen to historic levels .

according to u.s. government estimates , illegal trade in endangered wildlife products , including elephant ivory , rhino horns , and turtle shells , is worth at least an estimated $7 billion to $10 billion annually .

this figure does not include illegal logging and illegal fishing , which can account , respectively , for roughly an additional $30 billion to $100 billion annually and $10 billion to $23 billion annually .

such figures may place illegal wildlife trafficking among the top 10 most lucrative criminal activities worldwide .

the continued existence of black markets for wild plants and animals is widely considered to be driven by ongoing consumer demand as well as gaps in natural resource management , law enforcement , and trade controls .

wildlife trafficking appears disproportionately to impact parts of the developing world that possess valuable natural resources , but do not have the capacity or political will to manage such resources transparently and effectively .

beyond its role in species extinction and endangerment , illegal wildlife trade has also been associated with the spread of disease and proliferation of invasive species .

moreover , high prices for illegal wildlife , combined with often lax law enforcement and security measures , have motivated the involvement of transnational organized crime syndicates , who view such trafficking as an opportunity for large profits with a low risk of detection .

even where heightened security measures to protect wildlife are implemented , they have not consistently had a deterrent effect .

instead , some wildlife trafficking operations have become more elaborate and , at times , more dangerous .

traffickers are known to employ sophisticated hardware for poaching operations , including night vision goggles , military - grade weapons , and helicopters .

park rangers have also been killed in the line of duty by poachers .

some shipments of the wildlife contraband and the illicit profits that result from such trafficking often involve circuitous routes , support from corrupt officials , a complex web of anonymous financial mechanisms , and broad networks of complicit middlemen , processers , exporters , and retailers along the transnational supply chain .

some suggest that armed groups in africa and asia , which happen to be located in biologically diverse areas , are using natural resources to finance violent and politically destabilizing activities .

various observers have alleged the involvement of non - state armed groups , including separatist and islamist militant groups , in africa and south asia .

reports further suggest that military officers in some african countries may be involved or complicit in poaching operations .

well established asian and eurasian organized crime groups are further suspected of bankrolling poaching operations and facilitating the international movement of wildlife contraband .

increased recognition of the potential consequences of wildlife trafficking has caused many to question the efficacy of existing u.s. and international responses and consider new options for addressing the problem .

in november 2012 , for example , then - secretary of state hillary clinton announced the beginning of a revitalized effort to combat international wildlife trafficking .

central to this renewed effort were enhanced diplomatic outreach ; targeted public diplomacy campaigns ; continued international training and technical assistance , and cooperation to enhance natural resource governance and wildlife law enforcement capabilities ; and expanded partnerships with non - governmental organizations .

the u.s. intelligence community has also begun to consider wildlife trafficking as a major transnational organized crime threat .

in march 2013 , the director of national intelligence ( dni ) james r. clapper testified before congress on the u.s. intelligence community's assessment of worldwide threats , stating that "illicit trade in wildlife , timber , and marine resources constitutes a multi - billion dollar industry annually , endangers the environment , and threatens to disrupt the rule of law in important countries around the world. .

the u.s. intelligence community is also reportedly conducting further assessment of wildlife trafficking as a national security issue .

in july 2013 , president barack obama issued executive order 13648 on combating wildlife trafficking .

the executive order identified poaching of protected species and the illegal trade in wildlife and their derivative parts and products as an escalating international crisis that it is in the national interest of the united states to combat .

it directed the secretaries of state and interior and the attorney general to establish a presidential task force on wildlife trafficking , develop and implement a national strategy for combating wildlife trafficking , and convene an advisory council on wildlife trafficking composed of non - governmental expert members .

congress has long held an interest in issues related to the status of endangered species in international trade and policy responses to stem poaching and illicit trafficking of wild animals and plants .

the 113 th congress continues to be involved in addressing the illegal wildlife trade through oversight and proposed legislation .

issues for congress have centered on the extent to which existing legal tools and authorities are over - or under - utilized to respond to wildlife trafficking , including u.s. military assistance , justice sector training and capacity building programs , tools to combat transnational organized crime , free trade agreements , anti - money laundering regulations , trade sanctions , and investigative rewards programs .

the cross - border and transnational export , import , sale , or purchase of wild animal and plant resources becomes illegal when it is conducted in contravention to international commitments or domestic laws .

such commitments and laws may variously prohibit outright taking , transporting , or hunting of selected species , as well as harvesting of certain species beyond an established quota or physical boundary .

laws and regulations also prohibit the export , import , sale , or purchase of certain species without appropriate permits , authorization , or documentation .

further , some laws regulate the processing of plant and wildlife products .

chief among international commitments pertaining to the protection of wild animals and plants , including their parts , products , and derivatives , is the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ; see text box ) .

illegal wildlife trade ranges in scale from single - item , local bartering to multi - ton , commercial - sized exports of animal and plant consignments .

wildlife contraband may include live pets , hunting trophies , fashion accessories , cultural artifacts , ingredients for traditional medicine , wild protein for human consumption ( or bushmeat ) , and other products .

although there is no distinct criminal profile that describes wildlife poachers and traffickers , illicit wildlife trade networks often involve a combination of local hunters , regional middlemen , wildlife experts , criminal entities , global suppliers , front companies , online retailers , corrupt officials , and consumers willing to purchase such contraband .

the primary motivation to engage in illegal wildlife trade appears to be economic gain , coupled with ongoing demand that exceeds what the market can legally supply in many parts of the world , including primarily china , where recent economic growth is driving the expansion of households with disposable income , as well as the united states , and western europe .

further depletions of already - rare wildlife populations often cause the perverse effect of driving up black market prices for endangered wildlife products — which reportedly have risen up to $90,000 for a live lear macaw , $50,000 for a kilogram of rhino horn , $8,000 for a luxury shahtoosh shawl , $1,200 for a kilogram of tiger bones or beluga caviar , and $1,000 for a kilogram of raw elephant ivory .

some point to the involvement of transnational criminal groups in illegal wildlife trade as a cause for concern .

according to a series of u.n. studies on the illicit traffic of wildlife , experts claim that chinese , japanese , italian , and russian organized crime syndicates are "heavily involved in illegal wildlife trade. .

while such claims do not suggest that organized crime syndicates are involved in all forms of wildlife trafficking , the u.n. reports suggest that syndicates are "strongly present" in some sectors and "significant and growing. .

anecdotal evidence indicates that both licit and illicit wildlife has been found comingled with shipments of other contraband goods , including drugs , weapons , stolen cars , and human beings .

in one instance , customs officials recovered colombian cocaine - filled condoms that had been inserted into a crate of snakes .

other mixes of narcotics and wildlife include cases involving elephant tusks stuffed with hashish and exotic parrots smuggled with methamphetamine pills .

valuable wildlife products can be used in lieu of cash as a means to launder money or exchange for other illicit commodities , such as drugs and weapons .

in south africa , for example , street gangs have reportedly provided highly prized , but illegal , catches of abalone to asian crime syndicates in exchange for methamphetamine .

in some cases , particularly those linked to ivory and rhino horn poaching in africa and south asia , anecdotal evidence points to the potential involvement of armed groups , including terrorists , warlords , and insurgents .

the following sections describe several illustrative forms of international illegal trade in wildlife , including trafficking in elephant ivory , rhino horn , caviar , and so - called bushmeat .

despite ongoing international efforts to address illegal trade in wildlife , poaching of protected species and trafficking of their parts continues .

commonly cited challenges in responding to this persistent illicit activity include ongoing legal gaps , capacity and political will gaps , and continuing structural drivers .

legal gaps .

although cites has been in effect for more than three decades , the implementation of cites commitments by states parties continues to be mixed .

moreover , substantial variations exist among countries regarding the regulation of domestic wildlife trade .

this lack of consistency in the implementation of legal frameworks can be exploited by wildlife traffickers , who may actively seek out lax jurisdictions to traffic goods .

legal gaps may also indicate a lack of political will to correct and amend variations in the law .

they may also highlight a lack of international policy consensus or prioritization on how , and how much , to curb wildlife trafficking .

for example , there remains a lack of international consensus of approaches on how best to address elephant ivory trafficking .

ongoing debates have centered on whether to establish a universal trade ban against all ivory sales , including potentially domestic sales , and what to do with existing government - stored stocks , including the possibility of authorizing future cites - led international sale to select countries in asia .

capacity and political will gaps .

even in cases where there is political will to address the problem of wildlife trafficking , some governments suffer from capability gaps , including insufficient personnel , expertise , training , funding , and equipment .

anecdotal reports indicate that in some cases , to poachers possess far greater resources , capabilities , and firepower than park rangers who protect wildlife , sometimes unarmed .

as a cross - cutting issue , some contend that responses to wildlife crime may require not only effective natural resource management practices , but specialized law enforcement and justice sector expertise to successfully investigate and prosecute wildlife crime cases .

moreover , regulating international wildlife trade has reportedly become more complex and resource intensive as the number of protected species has increased and as the criteria for identifying species have become more scientific , requiring in turn more resources for data gathering and reporting .

structural drivers .

to a large degree , the illegal wildlife trade continues to flourish due to complex socioeconomic and political conditions that are often beyond the scope of targeted international programs and agreements .

such structural conditions include conflict , corruption , poverty and the absence of livelihood alternatives , persistent demand for illicit wildlife products and a lack of public awareness of the consequences of such demand , as well as other environmental pressures that contribute to wildlife population losses ( eg , environmental degradation , habitat loss , and ecological fragmentation ) .

to address illicit trade in endangered wildlife , the international community has established a global policy framework to regulate and sometimes ban exports of selected species .

domestic , bilateral , regional , and global efforts are intended to support international goals of sustainable conservation , effective resource management , and enforcement of relevant laws and regulations .

the flagship international mechanism to control wildlife trade is the 1975 convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) .

through cites , approximately 5,000 species of animals and 29,000 species of plants are subject to varying levels of trade restrictions , depending on the extent to which they are at risk of extinction .

among other activities , the secretariat makes periodic recommendations that trade be suspended with certain countries found to be in violation of cites commitments .

a total of 178 governments have committed to cites , including the united states .

although the scope of international initiatives for environmental conservation is vast , there are several international or regional efforts that are specifically geared toward combating the criminal aspects of wildlife trafficking , sharing law enforcement information for the purpose of criminal investigations and prosecutions , and building capacity among wildlife enforcement officials to detect and prevent illegal trade in wildlife .

additionally , several high - level international statements have been adopted in recent years , including by the united nations and asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , which identify the issue of wildlife trafficking as a key global concern .

the united states addresses the international illegal wildlife trade through domestic enforcement and laws , as well as through foreign policy .

u.s. efforts to prohibit aspects of wildlife trade originated with the lacey act of 1900 and have been enhanced through provisions in the lacey act amendments of 1981 , the endangered species act of 1973 , and other laws .

recently , increased awareness of wildlife trafficking as a potential problem has caused some observers and policymakers to question the efficacy of existing u.s. and international responses and consider new options for responding to such illicit activity .

key implementing agencies for u.s. initiatives against wildlife trafficking include the department of interior's fish and wildlife service ( fws ) as well as the state department and usaid .

fws has multiple domestic and international responsibilities related to combating wildlife crime .

the state department and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) lead a variety of intergovernmental and public diplomacy initiatives related to wildlife trafficking , including contributions to international organizations ; bilateral foreign assistance for biodiversity , conservation , and law enforcement purposes ; and various non - governmental partnerships .

in addition to fws , other agencies are involved in border enforcement and federal prosecutions of wildlife crimes .

see text box below .

the u.s. congress has played a role in evaluating and shaping u.s. policy to combat international wildlife trafficking .

over time , congress has enacted a wide range of laws to authorize conservation programs , appropriate domestic and international funding for wildlife protection and natural resource capacity building , and target and dismantle wildlife trafficking operations .

in recent years , congress has also held hearings and events that have addressed the growing problem of wildlife crimes and raised key questions for next steps .

to this end , the 113 th congress is involved in addressing the illegal wildlife trade through oversight and proposed legislation .

briefly , selected issues for congress may include the following .

this report has explored the issue of international wildlife trafficking , including illustrative types of wildlife crime involving african elephants and rhinos , eurasian sturgeon , and so - called bushmeat .

it has also discussed a broad range of international and u.s. policy responses , including long - standing commitments through the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) , as well as newer announcements , such as the obama administration's july 2013 executive order on combating wildlife trafficking .

reports of escalating exploitation of protected wildlife , coupled with the emerging prominence of highly organized and well - equipped illicit actors in wildlife trafficking , suggest that policy challenges persist .

continuing questions for policymakers include whether existing policy responses are achieving sufficient progress or no longer fit the problem ; whether available legal tools and authorities are over - or under - utilized to respond to wildlife trafficking ; and whether new programs , resources , and authorities are warranted or feasible .

