the political and cultural status of tibet remains a difficult issue in u.s. - china relations , and appropriate u.s. actions continue to generate debate among u.s. policymakers .

controversy continues over tibet's current political status as part of the people's republic of china ( prc ) , the role of the dalai lama and his tibetan government - in - exile , and the impact of chinese control on tibetan culture and religious traditions .

these controversies have prompted recurring u.s. congressional actions in support of tibet's status and traditions — actions that are routinely denounced by the chinese government in beijing .

this report consists of three free - standing parts: the first discusses current issues in tibet , including the march 2008 chinese crackdown against demonstrations in lhasa and elsewhere ; the second briefly reviews tibet's historical and political status with respect to china — a basic source of controversy in many sino - tibetan problems ; and the third reviews and analyzes u.s. relations with and congressional actions toward tibet since the 1980s , including legislative initiatives .

tibetan history is notable in two particular respects .

one is the extraordinarily pervasive influence of buddhism in all aspects of daily life .

at one time , a sizeable number of tibet's male population were monks and lamas , and eventually this ecclesiastical group became tibet's temporal rulers as well as its spiritual leaders .

the dalai lama , believed to be the reincarnation of tibet's patron deity , is the highest and most revered among this ruling monastic theocracy .

the second noteworthy aspect of tibetan history is the ambiguity and disagreement surrounding tibet's long political relationship with china .

tibetans generally view tibet as an historically independent nation that had a close relationship with a succession of chinese empires .

a succession of chinese governments , on the other hand , have claimed that tibet has been a political and geographical part of china for many centuries .

in 1949-1951 , the newly established communist government of the people's republic of china ( prc ) backed up this claim by sending military troops to occupy tibet .

since then , tibet has been under active beijing rule as its westernmost province , xizang ( the tibet autonomous region , or tar ) .

tibet became a recurring issue in congressional consideration of matters relating to china in the late 1980's .

a number of factors have contributed to members' greater interest .

these include the dalai lama's and the tibetan community's ongoing political activities ; reports of human rights abuses and china's continuing repressive social and political controls in tibet ; and the lack of consensus among u.s. policymakers over what u.s. policy should be toward china .

on matters involving tibet — as on many matters involving china — congressional views have often been at odds with those of the white house .

as a matter of official policy , the u.s. government recognizes tibet as part of china and has always done so , although some dispute the historical consistency of this u.s. position .

since normalization of relations with the prc in 1979 , a succession of both republican and democratic u.s .

administrations have favored policies of engagement with china .

in the process , they frequently have sought to minimize areas of potential tension with beijing where chinese leaders have taken strong positions , such as on the question of tibet's political status .

the dalai lama himself has been the most charismatic and renowned advocate for the tibetan people over the past decade .

he has a number of supporters in the u.s. congress .

the dalai lama's and his exiled community's efforts to gain international support for tibet's cause took a major step forward in 1986-1987 , when a series of meetings between tibetan and western supporters in new york , washington , and london launched what has become known as tibet's "international campaign. .

the goal of this campaign was to garner western and principally u.s. support for tibet's situation , and ultimately to bring this international pressure to bear on beijing to make satisfactory political concessions .

as part of this new strategy , the u.s. congress in 1987 began to put pressure on the white house to protect tibetan culture and accord tibet greater status in u.s. law , despite beijing's strong objections .

two events of particular importance occurred in 1987 .

first , on september 21 , the dalai lama made his first political speech in the united states , at the invitation of the congressional human rights caucus .

in that speech , the dalai lama made a five - point proposal for resolving the tibet question that was well - received in the united states and had significant consequences on congressional attitudes toward tibet .

second , congress put non - binding measures into place in 1987 declaring that the united states should make tibet's situation a higher policy priority and should urge china to establish a constructive dialogue with the dalai lama .

this language , though not the first that congress had passed regarding tibet , marked the beginning of a significant increase in congressional activity on tibet's status .

from this point on , congressional supporters sought to mention tibet separately whenever possible in legislation relating to china .

in 1990 , in considering foreign relations authorization legislation that contained the so - called "tiananmen sanctions," congress singled out tibet for special mention in sense - of - congress language that closely resembled the "five points" the dalai lama had proposed two years earlier and , in the same legislation , mandated the voice of america to begin broadcasts in the tibetan language .

in 1994 , congress enacted a number of tibetan - related provisions in the foreign relations authorization act of fy1994-1995 , including: a provision mandating that tibet be listed separately in the state department's annual report , "country reports on human rights" ; and a provision mandating the state department to issue a report on the "state of relations between u.s. and those recognized by congress as the true representatives of the tibetan people ; the dalai lama , his representatives , and the tibetan government in exile , and on conditions in tibet. .

congressional efforts to raise the profile of tibet since 1986 have been resisted or mitigated by successive u.s .

administrations , but generally in a low profile , non - confrontational manner .

as early as 1986 , when congress passed legislation authorizing export - import bank funding that listed tibet as a separate country , president reagan signed the legislation into law .

in his remarks , however , the president said: i note that tibet is listed as a country in section 8 .

the united states recognizes tibet as part of the people's republic of china .

i interpret tibet's inclusion as a separate country to be a technical oversight .

in other respects , however , consistent congressional pressure has contributed to u.s .

administrations acknowledging , however subtly , the position of the tibetan community - in - exile .

thus , president george bush in 1991 became the first u.s. president to meet with the dalai lama , while president bill clinton met with the dalai lama several times in casual "drop - by" meetings .

although these meetings were deliberately low - key and informal , they nevertheless offended chinese leaders , as did the clinton administration's decision , after having opposed the special envoy position for four years , to compromise by establishing the position of special coordinator for tibet .

during the early years of the clinton administration , congress began considering measures to establish the position of a u.s. special envoy for tibet , with ambassadorial rank .

in introducing such a measure in 1994 , senator claiborne pell stated he believed it was necessary to further focus white house attention on issues involving tibet: i recall how difficult it was to engage previous administrations in serious , knowledgeable discussions on tibet.... a special envoy for tibet would ensure that this important element of united states - china relations was continually reflected in policy discussions on a senior level .

while legislation to create a special envoy for tibet was never enacted , provisions similar to those in the 1994 legislation were also introduced as sections of authorization bills in the 104 th and the 105 th congresses .

in each case , the provision called for the special envoy to have ambassadorial rank and to actively promote negotiations between the dalai lama and the chinese government .

clinton administration officials opposed these provisions , primarily because of concerns about the creation of an ambassadorial rank position for an entity ( tibet ) that the united states recognizes as part of china rather than as an independent country in its own right .

on october 31 , 1997 , in a move seen as a compromise to appeal to proponents of the "special envoy" position , secretary of state madeleine albright designated a special coordinator for tibetan issues within the state department and named gregory craig to serve in the position concurrently with his job as director of policy planning .

although the new special coordinator position did not come with ambassadorial rank , its creation nevertheless suggested there would be a higher level of official attention on issues involving tibet .

consequently , the 105 th congress dropped the special envoy provision from subsequent legislation .

in 1990 , in considering foreign relations authorization legislation that contained the so - called "tiananmen sanctions," the 101 st congress began a process of regular congressional provisions in various pieces of legislation for u.s. assistance to tibet .

such provisions , which may or may not reflect actual assistance , have included: provision for voice of america broadcasts ( and later , radio free asia broadcasts ) to tibet in the tibetan language ; and periodic provisions for 30 scholarships for tibetans living outside tibet ( p.l .

101-246 , p.l .

106-113 ) ; establishment of an educational and cultural exchange program with tibet ( in p.l .

104-319 ) , later renamed the "ngawang choepel exchange program" ( in p.l .

106-113 ) , funded at $500,000 in each of fiscal years 2000 , 2001 , and 2003 ; authorized and / or appropriated funds for humanitarian , food , medical , and other assistance to tibetans who have fled from china to nepal and india , amounting to $2 million in each of fiscal years 2001 and 2002 ( p.l .

106-113 ) and $2 million in fy2003 ( p.l .

107-228 ) ; and economic support fund ( esf ) assistance for non - governmental organizations who work to support and preserve the tibetan environment and cultural traditions and to promote sustainable development .

esf funds for these purposes were first provided at $1 million in fy2000 ( p.l .

106-113 ) , averaged $4 million per year through fy2006 ( p.l .

109-102 ) , and in the 110 th congress were provided at $5 million ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

much of the u.s. assistance program to tibet is a result of congressional earmarks in such legislation .

 ( see appendix a ) apart from financial assistance measures , congress' other major policy initiative on tibet has been the "tibetan policy act of 2002," enacted as part of the foreign relations authorization act of fy2003 ( p.l .

107-228 ) .

major provisions of that act include the creation of a u.s. special coordinator for tibetan issues within the department of state whose central objective is to encourage and promote dialogue between the dalai lama and the government in beijing ; and a specific declaration of u.s. policy objectives on tibet , including economic , cultural , and environmental support objectives ; release of political prisoners in tibet ; establishment of a state department office in lhasa ; and an effort to ascertain the whereabouts and well - being of the 11 th panchen lama .

in 2006 , the 109 th congress passed legislation to award the dalai lama a congressional gold medal in recognition of his international status and accomplishments .

the decision reportedly was denounced by beijing as a move that "seriously interferes with china's internal affairs and damages u.s. - china relations. .

with president bush in attendance , a move that further raised the profile of the event , the dalai lama was awarded the medal in a ceremony on october 17 , 2007 , in the capitol rotunda .

members of the 110 th congress responded to the march 2008 tibet demonstrations in several ways .

the demonstrations and the prc crackdown in response has prompted some members to call for either a complete u.s. boycott of the 2008 olympic games in beijing or a boycott of the opening ceremony to the games .

senator patrick leahy called the violent actions of both the prc security forces and the tibetan demonstrators "deplorable. .

the demonstrations prompted two members of the house to announce the formation of the tibet caucus to represent the rights of tibetans and the dalai lama's government - in - exile .

other members have introduced legislation , including: h.r .

5668 , the communist chinese olympic accountability act ( mccotter ) .

to prohibit federal government officials from attending the opening ceremonies of the olympic games in beijing because of the crackdown in tibet , relations with sudan , and other prc actions .

introduced april 1 , 2008 .

h.res .

1075 ( smith ) , condemning the chinese government's violence against tibetan protestors and urging beijing to enter into dialogue with the dalai lama .

introduced april 3 , 2008 .

h.res .

1077 ( pelosi ) , calling on china to end its crackdown in tibet , enter into dialogue with the dalai lama , and protect the language , culture , and religious freedom of tibetans .

introduced april 3 , 2008 .

considered on the suspense calendar on april 8-9 , 2008 .

the house passed it by 413-1 on april 9 , 2008 .

appendix a .

legislative earmarks for tibet 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) p.l .

110-161 — consolidated appropriations act , fy2008 .

section 638 ( c ) 1: requires u.s. representatives at international financial institutions to support those projects in tibet that do not provide incentives for non - tibetan immigration into tibet or facilitate transfer of tibetan land and resources to non - tibetans ; ( 2 ) provides not less than $5 million in esf funds to ngos supporting cultural traditions , sustainable development , and environmental protection in tibet ; ( 3 ) specifies that not less than $250,000 be made available to the national endowment for democracy for human rights and democracy programs in tibet .

109 th congress ( 2005-2006 ) p.l .

109-102 — foreign ops , export financing , and related programs act , fy2006 .

section 575 ( a ) : same international institutions instructions provisions as above ; ( b ) provided not less than $4 million in esf funds to ngos supporting cultural traditions , sustainable development , and environmental protection in tibet ; and specified that not less than $250,000 be made available to the national endowment for democracy for human rights and democracy programs in tibet .

108 th congress ( 2003-2004 ) p.l .

108-447 — consolidated appropriations act , fy2005 section 581 ( a ) same international institutions instructions provisions as above ; ( b ) provided not less than $4 million in esf funds to ngos supporting cultural traditions , sustainable development , and environmental protection in tibet ; and specified that not less than $250,000 be made available to the national endowment for democracy for human rights and democracy programs in tibet .

p.l .

108-199 — consolidated appropriations act , fy2004 section 558 ( a ) same international institutions instructions provisions as above ; ( b ) provided not less than $4 million in esf funds to ngos supporting cultural traditions , sustainable development , and environmental protection in tibet .

p.l .

108-7 — consolidated appropriations act , fy2003 section 526 ( a ) provided not less than $15 million for democracy , human rights , and rule of law in china , hong kong , and tibet , of which up to $3 million could be made available to ngos supporting sustainable development in tibet and preserve cultural traditions in tibet and other tibetan communities in china .

107 th congress ( 2001-2002 ) p.l .

107-228 — foreign relations authorization act , fy2003 section 112 ( 1 ) b ( ii ) — provided $500,000 for fy2003 for the "ngawang choepel exchange programs" between the united states and tibet ( established in p.l .

104-319 ) .

section 115 ( c ) — provided $ 2 million for humanitarian , food , medicine , clothing , and medical and vocational training assistance in fy2003 for tibetan refugees in india and nepal who have fled chinese - occupied tibet .

section 222 — extended for fy2003 the tibetan scholarship program established in p.l .

104-319 .

title vi , subtitle b — contained the tibetan policy act of 2002 , which declared u.s. policy goals ; required annual reports on tibet ; established the special coordinator for tibetan affairs ; and beefed up tibetan language training at the department of state .

p.l .

107-115 — foreign ops , export financing , and related appropriations , fy2002 section 526 ( a ) — provided not less than $10 million for democracy , human rights , and rule of law programs in china , of which up to $3 million could be made available to ngos outside china that support sustainable development in tibet and preserve cultural traditions in tibet and other tibetan communities in china .

106 th congress ( 1999-2000 ) p.l .

106-429 — foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , fy2001 section 526 — provided up to $2 million esf funds for ngos located outside china that work to support and preserve tibetan cultural traditions , environmental conservation , and promote sustainable development in that country .

p.l .

106-113 — consolidated appropriations act , fy2000 provided $1 million in esf funds for ngos located outside china to support and preserve tibetan cultural traditions , environmental conservation , and promote sustainable development in tibetan communities in china .

section 103 ( a ) ( 2 ) — provided $2 million in each of fy2000 and fy2001 for humanitarian assistance , food , medicine , clothing , and supplies to tibetan refugees in nepal and india who have fled chinese - occupied tibet .

title iv , subtitle a , section 401 ( a ) — changed the name of u.s. - tibetan educational exchanges to the "ngawang choepel exchange program": provides $500,000 in fy2000 and fy2001 for these exchanges ( b ) extends for fy2000 the u.s. scholarship program for tibetan and burmese scholars and students ( established in p.l .

104-319 ) .

105 th congress ( 1997-1998 ) p.l .

105-261 — strom thurmond national defense authorization act , fy1999 section 3901 — provided sense of congress that a significant amount of $22 million appropriated for radio free asia be directed toward broadcasting in china and tibet in the appropriate languages and dialects .

104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) p.l .

104-319 — human rights , refugee , and other foreign relations provisions act of 1996 section 103 ( a ) — established a program for educational and cultural exchanges for tibetans .

section 103 ( b ) — provided for 30 scholarships for tibetan students and professional outside of tibet for fy1997 .

103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) p.l .

103-236 — foreign relations authorization act , fy1994-fy1995 sec .

221 ( a ) — provided that the u.s. information agency ( usia ) should seek to establish an office in lhasa .

sec .

236 — provided for educational & cultural exchanges with tibet .

sec .

309 — established radio free asia ( rfa ) and provided grants for rfa broadcasts to asian countries , specifically including tibet .

sec .

536 — established annual reporting requirements on "occupied tibet" ; stated the sense of congress that reports on tibet should be separate from reports on china ; stated the sense of congress that the united states should establish dialogue with the dalai lama and tibetans in exile .

102 nd congress ( 1991-1992 ) p.l .

102-138 — foreign relations authorization act , fy1992-fy1993 sec .

355: china's illegal control of tibet established the sense of congress that tibet , including those areas incorporated into the chinese provinces of sichuan , yunnan , gansu , and qinghai , is an occupied country under the established principles of international law ; that tibet's true representatives are the dalai lama and the tibetan government - in - exile ; that throughout its history tibet has maintained a distinctive and sovereign national , cultural , religious , and territorial identity except for periods of illegal chinese occupation , has maintained a separate and sovereign political and territorial identity ; and congress' sense that the united states , mongolia , bhutan , sikkim , nepal , india , japan , great britain , and russia recognized tibet as an independent nation or dealt with tibet independently of any chinese government ; and that the prc in 1949-1950 launched an armed invasion of tibet in contravention of international law .

the measure also stated that "numerous united states declarations since the chinese invasion have recognized tibet's right to self - determination and the illegality of china's occupation of tibet. .

appendix b .

selected u.s. government reports with components on tibe .

