on september 26 , 2006 , president bush signed into law s. 2590 , the federal funding accountability and transparency act ( ffata ; p.l .

109-282 ) .

according to supporters of the new law , the ffata was an attempt to reduce "wasteful and unnecessary spending" by the federal government , including spending on funds earmarked for special projects .

to that end , the legislation required the office of management and budget ( omb ) to establish a publicly available website that would allow users to search for detailed information about entities that are awarded federal grants , loans , contracts , and other forms of assistance .

using the website , supporters asserted , a citizen or watchdog group would be able to easily determine how much money was given to which organizations , and for what purposes .

the premise of the legislation was that , by making the details of federal spending available to the public , government officials would be less likely to fund projects that might be perceived as wasteful .

supporters of the legislation also suggested that the website would give citizens the opportunity to better understand how the government distributes funds , and enable the public to become more involved in the discussion of federal spending priorities .

three of the primary categories of federal expenditures and obligations to be included in the database — federal grants , loans , and contracts — represent a significant element of federal spending .

according to the most recently published consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) , federal agencies award over $880 billion in those three categories of financial assistance alone: $470 billion in grants , $381 billion in contracts , and $29 billion in direct loans .

omb launched the database , usaspending.gov , on december 13 , 2007 .

while the new database has been praised as a step toward a worthy objective — enhancing the transparency of government expenditures — government officials and members of the public have expressed concern about the quality of the data it provides , the ability of the database to identify earmarked awards , and the potential cost of enhancing and expanding data collection efforts .

this report initially discusses the background of the ffata .

it then discusses the act's provisions , noting what types of assistance are part of the new website , the primary sources of the data , and deadlines for implementation .

the report then identifies and discusses issues that have been raised regarding the act that might affect its implementation .

finally , it examines a legislative proposal from the 110 th congress that would have significantly expanded the information accessible through usaspending.gov .

s. 2590 received extensive bipartisan support at each stage of the legislative process .

in the senate , the bill was introduced with bipartisan sponsors , voted unanimously out of committee , and passed by unanimous consent on april 6 , 2006 .

the legislation was ultimately cosponsored by 47 senators , including then - majority leader bill frist and then - minority leader harry reid .

in the house , s. 2590 was passed by voice vote on september 13 , with members of both parties speaking in support of the senate bill and none speaking against it .

the white house did not issue a statement of administrative policy on s. 2590 , but president bush did express his support in a press release distributed the same day the bill was enrolled , making it apparent he would sign the measure once he received it .

as noted previously , the president signed s. 2590 on september 26 , 2006 .

according to senator tom coburn , the bill's original sponsor , s. 2590 was endorsed by over 150 organizations with a wide range of political leanings .

the senator's list of supporters included representatives of private enterprise , such as the u.s. chamber of commerce ; unions , like the american federation of state , county , and municipal employees ; media groups , such as the american society of newspaper editors ; and government watchdog organizations , like omb watch .

as evidence of the unusual alliance in support of s. 2590 , the list indicated that both people for the ethical treatment of animals ( peta ) and gun owners of america supported the bill , as did both the national gay and lesbian task force and the traditional values coalition .

the website required in the act was to be implemented in two phases .

by january 1 , 2008 , the new website was required to provide access to information on entities that were awarded funds directly from the federal government .

entities covered in the first phase of implementation include corporations , associations , partnerships , sole proprietorships , limited liability companies , limited liability partnerships , states , and localities .

by january 1 , 2009 , the website was required to include access to information on subgrantees and subcontractors that receive federal funds through a primary award recipient .

the act excluded individual recipients of federal assistance , and organizations with less than $300,000 in total income were not required to report on subawards .

consistent with the objective of providing to the public comprehensive information on federal financial assistance , virtually all categories of awards are ultimately to be covered by the database , including grants , contracts , subgrants , subcontracts , and loans .

two special provisions addressed particular types of transactions: individual transactions of less than $25,000 are exempt , and credit card transactions were excluded until october 1 , 2008 .

to achieve greater transparency , the act required the website to provide the following information about each federal award: name of entity receiving award amount of award type of award ( eg , grant , loan , contract ) agency funding award a north american industry classification system ( naics ) code for contracts or a catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) number for grants and loans program source award title that describes the purpose of the funding location of recipient city , state , congressional district , and country in which award performance primarily takes place unique identifier for entity receiving award and of the parent entity of recipient , if one exists any other information specified by omb the act required that the website permit users to ( 1 ) conduct a search of federal funding by any of the data elements listed above , and ( 2 ) determine the total amount of federal funding awarded to an entity by fiscal year .

in addition , the act stipulated that the website must provide information in a downloadable format , and that agencies must post new information to the website within 30 days of making an award .

three major financial assistance databases were identified in the act as likely sources of information for the new website — the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) , the federal assistance award data system ( faads ) , and grants.gov .

according to the act , a user must be able to access information from these databases directly through the website .

the act was explicit on this point: it was not acceptable merely to provide links to these or other databases , because that would force users to search for information at different websites .

as previously noted , the act did not require information on subcontractors and subgrantees to be included in the database until january 1 , 2009 .

the delay reflected the fact that information on subrecipients was not collected consistently across federal agencies and programs .

to address existing gaps in the data on subawards , the act required omb to implement a pilot program that tested the feasibility of having primary recipients provide information on their subgrantees and subcontractors .

there was a provision in the legislation that allowed federal award recipients and subrecipients to be reimbursed for the costs associated with collecting and reporting data on subrecipients .

the act also specified that any requirements for collecting data on subawards made by state and local governments under block and formula grants be cost - effective .

according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , no unfunded mandate would be placed on recipients or subrecipients for complying with the act .

the act also required omb to submit an annual report to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform .

the report must include data on public usage of the website , an assessment of the reporting burden on federal award and subaward recipients , and an explanation of any extension of the subaward reporting deadline .

on june 3 , 2008 , then - senator barack obama , on behalf of himself and three cosponsors , introduced new legislation to expand and improve the quality of the data posted to usaspending.gov .

s. 3077 , the strengthening transparency and accountability in federal spending act of 2008 , would have amended the ffata and required usaspending.gov to provide new information on federal awards , including the same information about lease agreements that is already required for grants and contracts ; a copy of each contract and its associated request for proposals , announcement , and scope of work ; the highest , lowest , and median offered price among acceptable procurement bids ; details about the amount of each contract awarded , including profit incentives and options to expand or extend a contract ; information about the extent of competition in awarding a contract , including , when applicable , an explanation of why a contract was awarded without full and open competition ; an indication if an award is the result of a congressionally directed spending item ; and a number of data elements that had been voluntarily provided by usaspending.gov , such as the amount of non - federal matching funds required , if any , to obtain a federal assistance award .

in addition , s. 3077 would have required usaspending.gov to provide information about federal award recipients , including an assessment of the quality of work performed on federal awards during the previous five years ; information about federal audit disputes and resolutions , award terminations , and suspensions and debarments ; information about civil , criminal , and administrative actions taken against the recipient by the federal government or a state government for violation of federal or state laws or regulations related to the workplace , environment protection , fraud , securities , and consumer protections ; and information about compliance with federal tax requirements , including whether the recipient has filed annual tax returns for the previous five years and is paying any taxes owed .

to improve the quality of data on usaspending.gov , the bill would also have required the director of omb to ensure that each agency inspector general reviews a sample of agency awards every six months to verify the accuracy of the data submitted to usaspending.gov ; the data posted to usaspending.gov is audited for quality every six months ; the website provides a simple method for the public to report errors in the data ; and no personally identifiable information is made available through the website .

in contrast to the ffata , which was almost universally supported when it was introduced , s. 3077 was both lauded and criticized .

the president of americans for tax reform , a supporter of the bill , argued that expanding the award information posted to usaspending.gov as proposed by s. 3077 would have been another step towards the objective of "comprehensive fiscal transparency. .

the executive director of omb watch , another supporter , argued that enacting s. 3077 would have strengthened the public's ability to hold government officials accountable for their funding decisions .

critics voiced concerns about making certain contract information available to the public through usaspending.gov , a step they say could have unintended consequences .

for example , s. 3077 would have required the website to include information on the highest , lowest , and median offer for contract bids .

a procurement expert in the private sector said that if usaspending.gov included data on proposed contract prices — which is only one of the factors considered when awarding a contract — then government procurement officers may feel pressured to award contracts to the lowest bidder , even if the lowest bidder "can't do the work. .

the president of a government contractor trade organization wrote in an editorial that posting information on a government website about purported contractor misconduct would be misleading to the public and unfair to contractors .

the broad scope of contractor performance information would lack a proper context , he argued , such as a metric to help the public understand the comparative severity of actions taken against a contractor .

without the proper context , he wrote , the public might presume "that all such cases represent probable or proven misconduct of a serious nature," when some actions are routine , and other actions may result in no findings of misconduct .

he questioned how making such information available to the public would improve federal procurement oversight .

the ffata and s. 3077 also differed in that the former identified specific sources of data to use in implementation , but the latter did not .

it was not possible , therefore , to evaluate the potential costs and technical challenges that might have been associated with implementing s. 3077 .

it was not known , for example , the extent to which agencies were already collecting the data they would have been required to report , the quality of that data , and the cost of collecting any new data .

implementing the reporting provisions of s. 3077 may have also posed technical challenges for agencies .

the data that was required to be reported under the bill , which ranged from workplace discrimination to violations of the clean water act , may have been located in a half dozen or more separate databases , and it is not known how difficult it would have been to incorporate these databases into the usaspending.gov search function .

although usaspending.gov was operating before the statutory deadline , implementation of the ffata may be considered behind schedule in that the data made available to the public remain incomplete and untimely .

some agencies with significant expenditures , such as the department of homeland security , had incomplete information , and no subaward data was available at all .

the effectiveness of usaspending.gov as an oversight tool is diminished in proportion to the amount of award information it does not provide .

implementation of the ffata might be affected by enactment of legislation that would expand the information available through usaspending.gov .

some observers may view such legislation as increasing transparency , a primary objective of the ffata .

for example , s. 3077 would have required usaspending.gov to identify earmarked awards , a function that the website does not currently have .

s. 3077 would also have establish new rules to enhance the quality of data on usaspending.gov , which , as previously discussed , remains an issue .

expanding the data available through usaspending.gov might also slow full implementation of the ffata .

agencies and award recipients are still developing procedures that will enable them to meet the ffata's existing reporting standards , and omb continues to address the technical challenges associated with posting data to usaspending.gov .

some observers suggested that expanding agency reporting requirements would strain already tight agency and recipient resources , and ultimately hamper ffata implementation .

