the medicaid program covers a range of mandatory and optional health care services for low - income populations , primarily individuals with disabilities , the elderly , members of families with dependent children , and some pregnant women and children .

rehabilitation is an optional medicaid service , meaning that states are not required to include it in their medicaid programs .

what is included as a rehabilitation service can be particularly difficult to describe , because it may encompass many medical and social service activities .

some have said that the term rehabilitation is so broad that it has become almost meaningless and these services might better be described as a catchall medicaid service , if an "all other" category did not already exist .

this broad definition of rehabilitation , coupled with limited and contradictory regulations , have had the unintended consequence of creating confusion about what can and cannot be included as medicaid rehabilitation .

states have used the rehabilitation benefit to cover many services , therapies , and treatments , and to even cover services that might be considered benefits of other state and / or federal health and human services programs .

there is at least a perception that states are covering an increasing number of services that could be considered habilitative or custodial rather than rehabilitative .

to address the confusion surrounding the rehabilitation benefit , clarify definitions , create a more transparent process , and ensure that the services states claim as rehabilitation actually are rehabilitative in nature , cms issued a proposed rule on august 13 , 2007 .

in august 2007 , cms issued a proposed rehabilitation services rule to more clearly define the scope of the rehabilitation benefit for states .

cms officials testified that the changes embodied in the proposed new rule were intended to clearly define allowable services that may be claimed as rehabilitative services under medicaid .

the major changes addressed in the proposed rule are outlined below .

estimates of the financial impact of the proposed rule vary .

some claim that cms underestimated the impact of the rehabilitation proposed rule and other medicaid regulations and that cms is attempting to shift medicaid costs to states .

cms estimated that the proposed rule would reduce federal medicaid spending by approximately $180 million in fy2008 and $2.24 billion for the period fy2008-fy2012 .

in a recent estimate for the period fy2008-fy2012 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) forecasted that federal medicaid outlays would decrease by $1.4 billion for the five - year period .

a survey of state medicaid directors by the majority staff of the house committee on oversight and government reform estimated the financial impact of the rehabilitation proposed rule to be approximately $5.2 billion over five years from fy2009-fy2013 .

there are at least three distinct perspectives on rehabilitation policy issues: ( 1 ) the viewpoint of the federal regulatory agency , cms , responsible for monitoring and enforcing states' compliance with federal medicaid statutes ; ( 2 ) the perspective of advocates representing children and adults who could receive medicaid rehabilitation services ; and ( 3 ) the stance of state governments and state medicaid agencies .

cms believes there is evidence that additional guidance is needed to clarify what can and can not be claimed as rehabilitation services .

cms cites criticism from gao and hhs / oig .

the agency also notes that through the spa process it has discerned confusion among states about what is rehabilitation and habilitation and other issues related to rehabilitation .

further cms claims , and as gao also has recommended , without clarifying guidance , states could inappropriately claim excess ffp by paying for services and administrative components of other non - medicaid state agencies that service medicaid beneficiaries .

organizations representing individuals living with mental illness and their families , as well as child welfare and disability groups , have expressed concerns that "person - centered" care approaches , while well - intentioned , may be problematic with rehabilitation beneficiaries .

these groups argue that rehabilitation therapy is often provided to individuals with serious mental health issues and these populations may be unable to be actively involved in their therapy decisions .

these groups state that requirements for "person - centered" rehabilitation plans need to be more flexible when dealing with non - compliant beneficiaries , as opposed to a one - size - fits - all requirement for "person - centered" rehabilitation plans .

similarly , child welfare groups contend that requirements to engage parents in decisions about therapy for children in foster care may compound , delay , or undo therapy by returning an abused or neglected child to influences that are detrimental to the child's treatment .

organizations representing children , particularly special - needs children , are concerned that the rehabilitation proposed rule would make it more difficult for children to receive rehabilitation and related services by creating administrative barriers and restricting access by tightening the definition of rehabilitation .

advocates for special - needs children argue that the distinction between rehabilitation and habilitation is not a relevant factor in addressing children's needs for health services .

advocates say that because of early and periodic screening diagnostic and treatment ( epsdt ) provisions in medicaid , children should receive rehabilitation treatment whether it can be considered habilitation or rehabilitation .

medicaid's children's health benefits , known as the epsdt benefits , ensure that children receive comprehensive coverage for at least categorically needy beneficiaries .

according to special - needs children advocates , epsdt coverage ensures that children receive treatment to ameliorate physical or mental conditions whether children were born with the conditions or developed them later .

similarly , other child welfare advocates indicate that it can be a much more complex judgment with children to determine when a beneficiary has lost functioning or when the child may not yet have developed certain skills or abilities in the first place .

children acquire and master skills at different times and may not be at age appropriate levels because of physical , emotional , social , or many other problems .

these judgments are further compounded among special - needs children , which would include most children in foster care .

advocates for mentally retarded and developmentally disabled ( mr / dd ) individuals are concerned that the proposed rehabilitation regulations could reduce a key funding stream for community - based mental health services resulting in reductions in services for needy individuals , and incentives to treat mr / dd individuals in institutional settings .

if mr / dd individuals and their families were unable to find suitable community - based care , the result might be increased medicaid expenditures where the costs for institutional care might exceed community - based services .

they argue that if the goal is to save money , the proposed rule could be counter - productive .

further , mental health advocates are concerned that the proposed medicaid rehabilitation regulations requiring treatment plans to document skill recovery and lost functionality will diminish medicaid - reimbursed services for individuals who are developing skills to cope with mental and emotional disabilities , but are not considered to have lost previously acquired skills .

states are concerned that cms's proposed rehabilitation service regulations would entail substantial new administrative and procedural burdens on states in bringing their medicaid state plans into compliance .

in addition , states claim that reductions in rehabilitation expenditures might be more costly in the long run as individuals , particularly children , would benefit from earlier interventions that might avert future , more costly care .

further , states note that medicaid expenditures run counter to business cycles , so that when states' economic conditions deteriorate , medicaid expenditures rise .

thus , state governors argue , as the economy contracts , federal medicaid expenditures should not be reduced .

moreover , some states already report shortages of qualified mental health care professionals willing to participate in medicaid .

additional administrative burdens , as well as requirements that mental health and other professionals assume responsibility for rehabilitation plans , might further reduce the supply of rehabilitation service providers .

the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l .

110-173 ) imposed a moratorium until june 30 , 2008 , on implementation of the rehabilitation proposed rule and other medicaid program changes .

in march 2008 , the protecting the medicaid safety net act of 2008 ( h.r .

5613 ) was introduced , which would extend until april 1 , 2009 , moratoria on regulations affecting medicaid , including rehabilitation services .

the house energy and commerce committee sent h.r .

5613 to the full house on april 16 , 2008 .

h.r .

5613 would require the secretary to submit a report by july 1 , 2008 , to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

the secretary's report would be required to cover three topics: ( 1 ) an outline of specific problems the rehabilitation and other medicaid regulations were intended to correct , ( 2 ) an explanation of how the regulations would address these problems , and ( 3 ) the legal authority for the regulations .

in addition , h.r .

5613 would require the secretary to retain an independent contractor to prepare a comprehensive report by march 1 , 2009 , which also would be submitted to the house energy and commerce and the senate finance committees .

the independent contractor's report would describe the prevalence of the specific problems identified in the secretary's report , identify existing strategies to address these problems , and assess the impact of the regulations on each state and the district of columbia .

in the senate , a similar measure to h.r .

5613 , the economic recovery in health care act of 2008 ( s. 2819 ) , was introduced in april .

like h.r .

5613 , s. 2819 would impose a one - year moratorium on rehabilitation and other medicaid regulations until april 1 , 2009 .

on may 22 , 2008 , the senate passed the supplemental appropriations act of 2008 ( h.r .

2642 ) , which contained a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of the rehabilitation regulation .

h.r .

2642 was amended by the house and passed on june 19 , 2008 .

the house amendments included moratoria for six medicaid regulations , including rehabilitation services .

in addition , h.r .

2642 retained requirements from h.r .

5613 for the secretary to report to the house energy and commerce and senate finance committees , and to hire an independent contractor to report on medicaid regulation issues .

on june 26 , 2008 , the senate passed h.r .

2642 without changes to the house legislation , so that implementation of six medicaid regulations , including rehabilitation services , would be delayed until april 1 , 2009 .

h.r .

2642 also retains the requirements for the secretary and an independent contractor to submit reports on the medicaid regulations to the house energy and commerce and senate finance committees .

the president signed p.l .

110-252 into law on june 30 , 2008 .

earlier , on june 4 and 5 , 2008 , the senate and house , respectively , adopted the final version of the budget resolution ( h.rept .

110-659 accompanying s.con.res .

70 ) .

among other provisions , the conference agreement establishes a number of deficit - neutral reserve funds and a sense of the senate provision that would delay medicaid administrative regulations , including medicaid rehabilitation services .

