among the countries that currently employ a merit - based point system , the four highest profile systems are those of canada , australia , new zealand , and the united kingdom .

generally , such merit based criteria are referred to by these countries as "skilled immigration. .

each of these countries employs a point system in assessing candidates for skilled immigration .

in the four different systems , those skilled immigration applicants with the most points according to various characteristics would immigrate ahead of applicants with lower point totals .

in addition , each of these four countries employs a preference system for family - based immigration .

they also employ quotas to determine levels of family and humanitarian immigration .

these family and humanitarian immigrants are thus placed in separate immigration queues .

although the categories vary for each country , each of these countries generally requires that the potential applicant demonstrate some sort of official language competence , educational qualifications , and be within a certain age range .

although failing to meet one of these qualifications may automatically disqualify applicants in some countries , these criteria are not basic requirements in every country .

while the united kingdom , for example , requires a basic knowledge of english for every applicant , skilled immigrants to canada can technically qualify without knowledge of either of the country's official languages ( english or french ) .

generally , an applicant who receives a passing mark in any of the four countries discussed below is believed to possess skills that are in sufficient demand to ensure ample employment opportunities ( if such an offer has not already been extended ) .

the united states has weighed the option of a point system for selecting immigrants in the past , but thus far has not elected to enact one .

the discussion below provides the highlights of the most recent periods when points systems were elements of major efforts to reform legal immigration .

it specifically focuses on the policy debates of the 1980s that culminated in the immigration act of 1990 .

senate action on comprehensive immigration reform legislation stalled at the end of june 2007 after several weeks of intensive debate .

the bipartisan comprehensive immigration reform legislation was negotiated with bush administration officials and introduced in the senate on may 21 , 2007 , as s.amdt .

1150 to s. 1348 .

in terms of the point system provisions , s. 1639 mirrors the comprehensive immigration reform legislation that was announced in may and offers a proposal for a "merit - based" point system to replace the current employment - based preference system's first three categories .

this point system proposal , which is detailed in appendix f , would involve two tiers , namely a tier for merit - based legal permanent residents , and a supplemental second tier for unauthorized workers who have as a prerequisite qualified for a proposed new z visa category .

on june 28 , 2007 , the key cloture vote on s. 1639 failed .

the current comprehensive immigration reform proposal embodied in s. 1639 is sparking a lively discussion , and the point system is among its controversial features .

the themes highlighted below are illustrative of the multifaceted aspects of this debate .

nations currently using points systems , such as those discussed above , typically seek to tailor the selection process to recruit immigrants most likely to invigorate their economies .

the stated objectives are generally to encourage migration that complements shortfalls and skill mismatches in their labor forces , coupled with other factors that are thought to correlate with success .

the challenge for policy makers is adapting a point system — a method that is typically used to encourage migration — to manage the high - demand migration context of the united states .

in this debate , "passing marks" and per - country ceilings will become key elements .

the current preference system for selecting lprs to the united states is largely based upon relationships that are personal .

more specifically , prospective lprs qualify either through marriage and close familial relationships and through the employer - employee relationships .

a point system might well move the selection process away from the judgements of individuals and needs of local labor markets to a standardized set of criteria based on national priorities .

at issue in this context is who / what is perceived to be the proper people / optimal entity to determine who will be permitted to come to the united states .

whether a point system ( or any new mechanism for selecting immigrants ) is augmenting an existing selection system or replacing an existing selection system , it affects the debate .

establishing a new stream of immigrants is likely to spark objections among those who oppose increasing immigration levels .

if , alternatively , a point system replaces an existing set of immigration preference categories then stakeholders in the current system are likely to oppose it .

if a point system creates an independent stream of immigrants it might reduce the control of employers over the selection process and bypass the labor market protections for u.s. workers .

given that many policy makers as well as observers view immigration policy as a "zero - sum game," this aspect may be the most contentious of all .

the challenge in formulating an immigration system is structuring it to represent the country's values , priorities and needs .

the difficulty in many countries is designing a system that effectively operationalizes these specific values , priorities and needs into immigration policy .

point systems are appealing to some because they may be structured to provide a parsimonious and transparent tool defining merit - based immigrant eligibility .

yet , paradoxically , these same attributes of point systems also make them more likely to be a politically charged instrument .

the objective quantification of merit itself provokes debate over what human capital , personal traits and values prospective immigrants should bring to a country .

appendix a .

current u.s. legal immigration preference system appendix b .

new zealand point system requirements basic requirements principal applicants under the skilled migrant category are assessed against: health , character and english language requirements ; and employability and capacity building requirements ; and settlement and contribution requirements .

an application under the skilled migrant category will be approved if: the principal applicant and family members included in the application meet health and character , and english language requirements where required ; and the principal applicant qualifies for the points for employability and capacity building factors on the basis of which their expression of interest was selected from the pool ; or the principal applicant meets the criteria set from time to time by the minister of immigration on the basis of which their expression of interest was selected from the pool ; and the principal applicant is less than 56 years of age ; and the principal applicant is assessed as having the ability to successfully settle in and contribute to new zealand ; and all necessary verification of the application has been completed .

summary of points distribution factors passing mark: 140 points expression of interest: 100 points appendix c. united kingdom current point system requirements basic requirements to qualify for immigration , the principal applicant must at a minimum demonstrate the following criteria: applicant can work , or continue to work , in his chosen field in the united kingdom .

if necessary , he will need to show relevant qualifications and professional membership to work in certain occupations in the united kingdom .

applicant can support himself without recourse to public funds ( this can be demonstrated on the basis of either savings or earning potential ) applicant intends to make the united kingdom his main home applicant has either never been made bankrupt or is considered to be a discharged bankrupt .

applicant has never been convicted of any criminal offences applicant is proficient in the english language .

summary of points distribution factors passing mark: 75 points mba provision the united kingdom currently has a provision for graduates of 50 top mba programs , who have graduated since december 2004 , to remain in the united kingdom for up to 12 months in order to seek employment and gain the necessary points to qualify for permanent residence .

the basic structure of the program will also be taken up in a post - study category for skilled overseas students who have chosen to study at an institution in the united kingdom .

these students would thus be given the same 12 month transitional opportunity .

appendix d. australian point system requirements basic requirements in order to qualify for immigration , the principal applicant must at a minimum demonstrate the following criteria: under 45 ; english at least at "vocational" level ; have a post secondary education ; nominated occupation on skilled occupations list ( sol ) ; and necessary work experience in his nominated occupation .

summary of points distribution factors passing mark: 110-120 points reserve pool: 70-120 points appendix e. canadian point system requirements basic requirements in order to qualify for skilled immigration , the principal applicant must at a minimum demonstrate a sufficient number of points under the points criteria .

if the applicant does not have an offer of employment , he must additionally show sufficient level of funds on hand to qualify .

by household size , these levels of funds are: for a single person c$10,168 for a family unit consisting of the following: 2 persons c$12,659 3 persons c$15,563 4 persons c$18,895 5 persons c$21,431 6 persons c$24,170 7 persons or more c$26,910 summary of points distribution factors passing mark: 67 points appendix f. proposed point system in s. 163 .

