this report outlines the organizational structure of united states northern command ( northcom ) , explains how northcom contributes to homeland security through the interagency process , and summarizes northcom's international relationships with canada and mexico .

some issues for congress involving northcom include dod reorganization and the unified command plan , improving interagency relationships , northcom's increased reliance on reserve component service members , the ongoing cheyenne mountain operations center realignment , and the allocation of resources necessary for northcom to successfully plan for and execute its assigned missions .

in 2002 , president bush signed a new unified command plan ( ucp ) establishing northcom .

northcom is a regional combatant command with an area of responsibility ( aor ) that includes the continental united states , alaska , canada , mexico , and surrounding waters out to approximately 500 nautical miles , including the gulf of mexico and the straits of florida .

northcom's mission is to "anticipate and conduct homeland defense and civil support operations within the assigned area of responsibility to defend , protect , and secure the united states and its interests. .

the northcom commander also commands north american aerospace defense command ( norad ) , a bi - national u.s. and canadian organization charged with air and maritime warning and airspace control .

during deliberations on the fy2009 defense authorization legislation , some northcom issues for congress may include dod reorganization and the unified command plan ( ucp ) , northcom's interagency relationships , northcom's reliance on reserve component forces , the ongoing cheyenne mountain operations center realignment , and the allocation of resources necessary for northcom to successfully plan for and execute its assigned missions .

congress approved dod's request for a 10 th assistant secretary of defense to facilitate the reorganization of the office of the under secretary of defense for policy ( ousd [p] ) .

the conference report for the 2007 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) ( p.l .

109-364 ) expressed several concerns about the reorganization , including the assistant secretary for homeland defense inheriting a western hemisphere focus .

dod intended for the reorganization to streamline combatant command interactions with ousd ( p ) .

however , the proposed reorganization appears to create more rather than fewer entry points to navigate .

for example , the assistant secretary for homeland defense and americas affairs , as well as the new assistant secretary for global security policy , both appear to have northcom interests .

likewise , dod has currently filled only three of five assistant secretary billets within ousd ( p ) .

as dod reorganizes its policy staff , some may call for major changes to the ucp .

after only five years in existence , northcom's geographic aor continues to be refined .

a may 2006 revision of the ucp shifted the aleutian islands from pacom to northcom while moving cuba , puerto rico , the bahamas , and the u.s. virgin islands from northcom to southcom .

there may be merit to further examining combatant command boundaries , particularly between northcom and u.s. southern and pacific commands .

based on hurricane katrina lessons learned , dod and dhs have taken several steps to improve coordination .

several northcom components have been assigned missions that focus on military assistance to civil authorities .

likewise , northcom continues to make tangible efforts to improve cooperation and coordination with national guard forces , as well as key partners like fema .

reportedly , northcom , ngb , and fema partnered to purchase 22 identical deployable cellular communication systems to improve coordinated emergency response capability .

a government accountability office ( gao ) study concluded in april 2008 examined ongoing coordination efforts between northcom , the ngb , and states , while identifying gaps in northcom's efforts .

the gao found a number of ongoing efforts designed to improve northcom's civil support capacity to include the following: state participation in northcom exercises enhances coordination .

including the ngb in the development of northcom plans provides national guard perspective .

northcom's joint force orientation program for state adjutants general and their respective staffs provides information on northcom's civil support role to states .

northcom's hurricane and wildfire conferences are beginning to build effective relationships between participants .

northcom has improved relationships with state and local officials by locating defense coordinating officers in fema regional offices .

however , the gao also identified three remaining gaps in the coordination between northcom , states , and the ngb: northcom only minimally involves states in the development of homeland defense and civil support plans .

northcom was not familiar with state emergency response plans and has no process for obtaining this information .

the roles and responsibilities between northcom and the ngb for planning for homeland defense and civil support are not clearly defined .

as such , the gao recommended the secretary of defense: direct northcom to develop a thorough process to guide coordination with states to include provisions that ( 1 ) involve states in northcom's planning process , and ( 2 ) obtains and incorporates information on state emergency response plans and capabilities into the development and execution of northcom plans .

direct northcom and the ngb to formally develop an agreement that clearly defines roles and responsibilities for northcom , the ngb , and the northcom national guard office .

in response to the gao recommendations , dod stated that a revised memorandum of agreement between northcom and the ngb was in coordination .

however , dod only partially concurred with the first recommendation .

while dod agreed with the need for a more thorough planning process , dod believes the process must include u.s. pacific and southern commands in addition to northcom .

further , dod stated that homeland security presidential directive 8 , annex 1 , requires dhs to produce and integrated planning system ( ips ) .

dod added that northcom , the ngb , the joint staff , and office of secretary of defense staffs are coordinating with dhs to develop an ips .

a separate gao report completed in april 2008 also examined northcom's interagency relationships .

the report found that northcom had taken a number of steps to improve interagency coordination and concluded that northcom's federal interagency coordination efforts have helped address some of the uncertainty in the homeland defense and civil support planning process and have improved northcom's ability to coordinate in the event of actual incidents .

however , the gao found that northcom lacks formal procedures to ensure that integrated planning will be fully adopted .

as such , the gao recommended that dod and northcom in coordination with other appropriate federal agencies develop clear guidance for interagency planning efforts and document agreements for interagency planning groups within the construct of the integrated planning system .

dod concurred with this gao recommendation .

seeking to continue to strengthen relationships between dhs and dod , the 2008 ndaa directs the secretary of defense , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , to determine what military - unique capabilities dod provides that are necessary to support civil authorities during national catastrophic incidents .

additionally , the 2008 ndaa ( p.l .

110-181 ) directs dod to budget for additional requirements deemed necessary to conduct civil support missions .

with the focus on interagency coordination , some are calling for legislation to codify processes with something similar to the goldwater - nichols act that reorganized dod .

the 2007 ndaa directed the president to provide congress a report on improving interagency support .

while the report focused on better dod and civilian executive branch integration , homeland security also requires cooperation across the full spectrum of federal , state , and local agencies .

likewise , some question the advisability of creating additional layers at the federal level , as it may make it more complicated for state and local authorities to interact with federal agencies .

nearly 150 reserve and national guard members staff northcom headquarters , including five general officers .

its air force and marine components are reserve commands that have full - time missions ; jtf - cs is primarily a reserve organization , and jtf - n relies on reserve component units to conduct operations .

likewise , the national command region's integrated air defense system is operated by national guard forces in title 10 status , and since 9 / 11 over 70% of the nation's air defense sorties have been flown by reserve component forces .

recent trends indicate northcom will increase reliance on reserve component forces to support civil authorities .

reserve component forces are also deploying overseas in large numbers for other combatant commanders .

as mobilizations continue and homeland security missions increase , more reserve component forces are serving in full - time status .

some are concerned homeland defense may create near - and long - term resource issues for the reserve components prompting many governors to question whether they will have sufficient national guard forces available to accomplish state missions .

as such , the 2008 ndaa ( p.l .

110-181 ) requires dod in consultation with dhs , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , northcom , and the ngb to prepare and submit a plan to congress for coordinating the use of national guard and members of the armed forces in response to natural and man - made disasters by june 1 , 2008 .

additionally , the 2008 ndaa ( p.l .

110-181 ) requires the president to establish a bipartisan council of governors to advise dod , dhs , and the white house homeland security council regarding the use of the national guard and civil support missions .

some believe that because of the national guard's unique dual status , the northcom deputy commander should be a national guard officer .

this issue was initially deferred to the commission on the national guard and reserves .

the commission recommended that either the commander or deputy commander of northcom be filled by a reserve component officer , but it recommended against adding a second deputy commander billet to allow both active duty and reserve component representation at the deputy level .

the 2008 ndaa ( p.l .

110-181 ) requires that either the commander or at least one deputy commander billet at northcom be filled with a national guard officer .

in july 2006 , northcom announced the cheyenne mountain operations center ( cmoc ) was undergoing an 18-month transition with day - to - day operations moving from the underground complex 15 miles west of peterson to a combined norad / northcom command center at peterson .

the cold war vintage facility will remain in a "standby" status and be used for exercises or contingencies .

northcom believes the combined command center will increase unity of effort and operational effectiveness , enabling an effective response to a full spectrum of threats .

however , the government accountability office ( gao ) has voiced concern over costs , as well as incomplete analyses of security implications and operational effects of the proposed moves .

to address the concerns , the 2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) stipulates funding for the cmoc realignment upon the dod submitting a report to congress that compares the cost of relocation with anticipated operational benefits , details functions that will remain at cmoc and maintain connectivity with functions that transfer out of cmoc , outlines plans for the relocation of norad , and explains the results of and independent security and vulnerability assessment of the new command center at peterson afb , colorado , along with dod plans , costs , and schedules for mitigating identified risks .

the report is due to congress on march 1 , 2008 .

after the report is submitted , gao has 120 days to submit to congress a review of dod's report .

finally , by march 16 , 2008 , the secretary of the air force must submit a master recapitalization plan for cheyenne mountain air station .

an april 2008 gao study examined availability of personnel available to northcom to both plan for and execute assigned missions .

the gao found that northcom planning positions are staffed at relatively high levels in comparison with other geographic combatant commands , and that northcom officials believed they possessed adequate numbers of planning personnel .

on the other hand , the gao questioned whether dod has assigned adequate numbers of forces to northcom to execute assigned missions .

the gao found that unlike other geographic combatant commands within dod , dod has only routinely assigned air defense and supporting forces to northcom .

as a result , the gao asserted that the lack of units specifically identified to execute northcom's plans may increase the level of risk to homeland defense or civil support operations in terms of the availability of a sufficient number of personnel with the appropriate level of training and equipment for conducting the domestic mission .

in addition , the gao found that northcom's ability to monitor the readiness of forces to respond to civil support missions is hampered because few units have been identified for this mission .

as such , the gao recommended that dod assign forces to northcom and require northcom to develop deployment timelines for each of its major operational plans .

in response , dod agreed that certain specialized forces , such as those trained to respond to chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and high - yield explosive attacks , should be regularly assigned to northcom .

however , dod believes that readiness for civil support missions can be improved by developing civil support readiness metrics for general purpose forces .

