president robert mugabe , 86 , and his party , the zimbabwe african national union - - patriotic front ( zanu - pf ) , have ruled zimbabwe since its independence in 1980 .

rising inflation and unemployment rates contributed in the late 1990s to the creation of the opposition movement for democratic change ( mdc ) .

the mdc enjoyed initial success , campaigning against a referendum in 2000 that would have expanded the president's powers , made government officials immune from prosecution , and allowed the uncompensated seizure of white - owned land for redistribution to black farmers .

the referendum failed , and the mdc won nearly half the parliamentary seats in that year's election .

members of zanu - pf have since taken numerous , often undemocratic actions to maintain power .

zimbabwe's most recent elections were held in 2008 .

they were very controversial and sparked serious political violence that illustrated the deep divide between zanu - pf and the opposition .

after months of uncertainty following a september 2008 power - sharing deal known as the global political agreement ( gpa ) , zanu - pf and the mdc reached a final accord in january 2009 .

it led to the creation of a coalition government , with senior positions divided among the parties .

given long - standing tensions between zanu - pf and the mdc , many observers continue to express skepticism that the parties truly share power .

initial reforms by the current government have stemmed zimbabwe's runaway inflation rate and stabilized the economy , but significant challenges to the country's recovery remain .

south africa has led regional mediation efforts to address the parties' outstanding concerns .

both parties have agreed to hold national elections in 2012 , although a date has yet to be set .

the electoral process is expected to be tense .

this report provides an overview of the transitional government and related recent developments .

for additional information , see crs report rl32723 , zimbabwe: background , by lauren ploch .

in january 2009 , prior to the formation of the transitional government , zimbabwe was considered by some analysts to be a failed state .

dubbed "the world's fastest shrinking economy," zimbabwe saw its gross domestic product ( gdp ) decline over 50% between 2000 and 2009 .

after several years of hyperinflation , the country's official inflation rate had risen to a level at which prices doubled in less than 24 hours .

zimbabwe's economy had effectively collapsed , a situation that president mugabe has frequently blamed on western sanctions .

critics contend zimbabwe's economic troubles stem from years of poor governance and mismanagement .

today , zimbabwe continues to face serious political and economic challenges .

over 90% of the population lacks formal employment .

life expectancy for zimbabweans has fallen significantly in the past 20 years , in part due to a high hiv / aids prevalence rate .

some 7 million zimbabweans required food aid in early 2009 , and , while the situation has since improved , localized food insecurity persists .

the breakdown of the country's dilapidated water and sewage systems contributed to an outbreak of cholera in late 2008 that resulted in several thousand deaths and infected almost 100,000 .

in 2009 , over half the population had little or no access to safe drinking water or sanitation .

despite over $50 million in subsequent donor interventions to rehabilitate these systems , the risk of waterborne disease remains high , with one in three rural zimbabweans still lacking access to clean drinking water .

more than 3 million people are estimated to have emigrated in the last decade , including up to half of the country's doctors and nurses .

many hospitals and clinics continue to lack medicines , supplies , and functioning equipment .

the public education system has suffered a major decline .

teachers receive wages that are a fraction of those earned by their regional counterparts .

repeated threats by teachers and other civil servants to strike for higher wages continue to pose a challenge for the transitional government as it struggles to raise state revenues to address competing budget priorities .

flawed elections in 2008 and subsequent months of widespread political violence left the country's political rivals bitterly at odds .

at that time , the government of zimbabwe , considered to be authoritarian by the u.s. state department and others , found few allies in the international community ; several countries , including botswana , refused to recognize its legitimacy .

the following section explores reforms made under zimbabwe's transitional government and examines several of the challenges to economic recovery and greater political stability .

the international community has been divided on how to respond to zimbabwe's political troubles , and many donors remain cautious about when , and under what conditions , international lending should resume .

western governments , including the united states , the united kingdom , and the member states of the european union , have been highly critical of zanu - pf policies , particularly during the political violence that followed the 2008 elections .

these governments welcomed the transitional government's reform agenda in 2009 but remain reluctant to lift sanctions and fully reengage , or to release significant funds to the zimbabwe government .

african governments , particularly those in the sub - region , have expressed support for the transitional government , but several , including south africa , continue to press for further reforms .

china has been vocal in calling for western governments to lift their sanctions against the country .

zimbabwe owes an estimated $8.8 billion in external debt , and remains in arrears to the major international financial institutions , including the imf and world bank , and thus remains ineligible for new loans .

international donors provided an estimated $540 million in the first year of the transitional government for social services and humanitarian assistance , according to the imf , and 2011 donor contributions are expected to total roughly $770 million in off - budget assistance , including food aid , medicine , and expenditures under the mdtf .

many analysts suggest that zimbabwe will require a significant influx of foreign donor assistance to bolster its nascent economic recovery .

in 2009 , the imf warned that "in the absence of cash budget support , higher humanitarian assistance , and wage restraint , the economic and social situation could deteriorate significantly. .

the imf expressed similar concerns two years later .

however , donors have been wary to commit large - scale funding , and may be unlikely to do so until free and fair elections are held .

in early 2010 , mugabe and other zanu - pf officials publicly indicated that the party would not make further political concessions until "tsvangirai and his western allies remove their sanctions. .

the reactions of various international organizations and foreign governments to zimbabwe's 2008 elections and to its transitional government are discussed below .

the u.s. government has been critical of president mugabe and members of his former regime for their poor human rights record and lack of respect for the rule of law .

for much of the past decade , the united states has imposed targeted sanctions ( see below ) against the government , including financial and travel sanctions against select individuals ; bans on transfers of defense items and services ; and suspension of non - humanitarian assistance to the government .

at the same time , the united states has remained one of the largest donors of humanitarian assistance to the people of zimbabwe .

with the exception of defense items , the united states has not imposed trade sanctions on the country .

the george w. bush administration was highly critical of the zanu - pf government .

prior to the 2008 runoff , then - assistant secretary of state jendayi frazer accused mugabe of "trying to steal the election," saying , "my preferred option would be that the will of the people be accepted .

that mr. mugabe does the honorable thing and steps down. .

in may 2008 , a state department spokesman urged mugabe to "call off his dogs," and the u.s .

ambassador publicly condemned what he referred to as a "systematic campaign of violence designed to block this vote for change ... orchestrated at the highest levels of the ruling party. .

american diplomats and officials from other foreign embassies report that they were repeatedly harassed by elements of the mugabe regime , in violation of the vienna convention .

in the months following the 2008 elections , the bush administration repeatedly called for african governments to play a greater role in resolving the political impasse .

former secretary of state condoleezza rice said more bluntly , "it is time for africa to step up. .

in december , she called the power sharing talks a "sham. .

the obama administration has expressed support for the transitional government , but has been cautious in its engagement as administration officials continue to press for the full implementation of the gpa .

both president obama and secretary of state hillary rodham clinton met with prime minister tsvangirai during a visit to washington , dc , in june 2009 .

president mugabe is prohibited from traveling to the united states , except for u.n. events .

the state department has emphasized that it "will not consider providing additional development assistance or even easing sanctions until we see effective governance. .

in late 2009 , president obama presented the human rights group women of zimbabwe arise ( woza ) with the annual robert f. kennedy human rights award .

president mugabe has frequently claimed that western sanctions are to blame for the collapse of the country's economy .

he and other zanu - pf officials often cite a u.s. law , the zimbabwe democracy and economic recovery act ( zdera ) , passed by congress in 2001 .

this legislation is discussed below .

since the formation of the coalition government , u.s. policymakers have reexamined how to approach president mugabe and his current administration .

as mentioned above , president obama has taken a cautious approach and made the return of effective governance a prerequisite to the lifting sanctions or the provision of significant financial support for zimbabwe's economic recovery .

like - minded donor countries and institutions also expect certain economic and political policy changes , including: the end of farm disruptions ; the cessation of politically motivated violence ; the establishment of a credible and transparent reserve bank team ; an end to harassment and intimidation of the media and civil society ; and a commitment to holding credible elections in a timely manner .

as discussed , many of the initial economic reform conditions set by the imf and other donors , including price liberalization , the elimination of quasi - fiscal activities , and cash budgeting , have already been met .

zimbabwe's finance ministry has also taken steps to meet other reform conditions , such as central bank transparency and reform , by initiating legislative reforms related to reserve bank governance .

credible stewardship of the reserve bank and a full restoration of zimbabwe's relationship with the imf and the world bank will take time .

obama administration officials suggest that many of the necessary political conditions for renewed assistance were outlined in the gpa , and thus in zimbabwe's own constitution .

broadly , u.s. officials expect real progress on governance and democracy , as evidenced by continued movement toward constitutional reform and free and fair elections , but they have also reiterated the importance of interim confidence - building measures such as those listed above .

three years into the current government , it appears that the parties to the gpa may have conceded as much as they are willing or able to , until the transitional nature of the current government is resolved through new elections .

the timing and outcome of such an event remains unknown .

some argue that the deployment of international monitors could be influential in preventing potential violence related to the planned constitutional referendum or upcoming elections , although the mugabe government has , in the past , reportedly denied similar delegations entry .

in november 2008 , the government refused to provide visas to several members of the group of world leaders known as the elders , including kofi annan and former u.s. president jimmy carter .

in october 2009 , the u.n. special rapporteur on torture was denied entry to zimbabwe , despite receiving prior permission by prime minister tsvangirai , according to reports .

more recently , in october 2011 , the archbishop of canterbury visited president mugabe to discuss the grievances of zimbabwe's anglican clergy and the reported seizure of church property .

as mentioned above , sadc is currently pushing for a very small number of regional representatives to be included in zimbabwe's joint monitoring commission , jomic , to improve the entity's effectiveness and ensure its impartiality .

there have been calls for members of the mugabe government to be referred to international justice regimes , although some observers suggest such calls for justice should be considered carefully as long as the coalition government remains intact .

given the continuing level of political uncertainty that has persisted throughout the tenure of the transitional government , many donors have been reluctant to provide the level of financial support that many analysts suggest is needed to stimulate substantial economic recovery and development .

some suggest that recovery will require additional policy reforms on which the coalition government is unlikely to agree .

the imf forecasts that the upward trend of real gdp growth in the past three years will not continue without certain policy changes , and has repeatedly stated that zimbabwe's current level of debt is unsustainable .

world bank and imf lending has been suspended for over 10 years due to nonpayment of arrears .

as zimbabwe's economy collapsed over the last decade , every sector of the economy has been affected .

annual outputs of wheat , maize , and tobacco , once zimbabwe's largest foreign exchange earner , remain below historic levels .

manufacturing output has likewise declined , and although the mining sector has recently been a source of optimism , the government acknowledges that major capital inputs are required to keep the sector on its current trajectory .

these factors all contribute to pressure on both the people of zimbabwe and members of the government .

zanu - pf's fast track land reform program and more recent policy changes , such as the indigenization and economic empowerment act , have created significant uncertainty over property rights , deterring foreign direct investment and lowering consumer confidence .

many observers are skeptical that the mdc can counter the entrenched patronage system that currently exists , within the scope of the current government .

several policies of the previous administration , including the mass urban evictions of 2005 ( operation murambatsvina ) , have had lasting repercussions for human development objectives , including access to education , according to some reports .

these development challenges require attention from the current government , but may also benefit from donor pressure and support .

western donors have met periodically in recent years to explore reconstruction options , and their representatives meet regularly in harare to coordinate existing aid programs .

britain has maintained its willingness to release funds to pay for parts of an orderly land redistribution program if mugabe retires and the rule of law is returned .

it is unclear whether britain would concede to release such funds prior to mugabe's departure from office .

the world bank and the imf have also developed strategies for zimbabwe's economic recovery .

significant donor assistance is likely to be required to rebuild the public health sector , which according to reports may have lost over 70% of its skilled workforce .

the education sector faces similar challenges .

reviving the country's agriculture industry will require delicate handling to address historical grievances regarding land distribution and tenure .

maintaining the flow of foreign currency to pay salaries is critical to ensuring stability , but mdc officials have acknowledged donor concerns .

prime minister tsvangirai , in his inaugural address to the parliament , warned mps , "no donor country or institution is going to offer any meaningful assistance unless our government projects a positive new image. .

few governments have publicly indicated a willingness to date to provide loans or aid directly to the government .

the imf has noted positive steps toward fiscal discipline and offered policy advice and technical assistance , but has warned that imf lending will not be renewed until zimbabwe begins to repay its debts and establishes a track record of sound policy implementation and donor support .

in the interim , the imf's executive board met in may 2009 to approve a "targeted lifting" of the fund's suspension of technical assistance to the government .

this resumption of assistance indicated that the imf has judged zimbabwe to be cooperating with the fund on policies and payments toward addressing its outstanding arrears .

it has allowed imf technical advisors to work with the finance ministry to improve its revenue collection and bank payment system , particularly to process transactions in foreign exchange , as well as on fiduciary control of the central bank .

in february 2010 , with the support of the united states , the board voted to restore zimbabwe's voting rights , which were suspended in 2003 after a determination that zimbabwe had not sufficiently strengthened its cooperation with the imf in areas of policy implementation and payments .

several recent studies have explored options for addressing zimbabwe's external debt arrears and pursuing comprehensive debt relief .

the imf has suggested that a staff monitored program ( smp ) could assist zimbabwe in establishing a track record of sound policies that would pave the way for debt relief and access to donor funds .

the state department's fy2009 supplemental request stated that "to be successful , zimbabwe's transition will require a significant infusion of capital and program investment in both the short - and long - term. .

the department's fy2010 request included an expansion of technical assistance to the government on a range of issues , such as trade policy and legal and regulatory reforms that affect businesses , and it aims to reinforce technical assistance provided by the international financial institutions .

recent budget requests go further , proposing new activities to promote private sector development and agricultural recovery , but caution that "if the government does not make adequate progress in meeting donor benchmarks , assistance beyond the agriculture sector may not follow. .

as the transitional government concludes its third year , foreign governments , including the united states , continue to debate the efficacy and utility of their sanctions against zimbabwe and members of the zanu - pf elite .

some suggest that sanctions be lifted , while others maintain that they continue to provide a useful tool to press for democratic reforms .

at issue are three different types of restrictions — travel and financial restrictions targeting individuals ; bilateral donor restrictions that prohibit the provision of aid directly to the zimbabwe government ; and bilateral restrictions that prevent the representatives of certain governments , namely the united states , from supporting the resumption of multilateral lending by the major international financial institutions .

the first two types of restrictions remain solely at the discretion of the governments that imposed them .

however , if foreign governments were to lift the third restriction , against support for imf and world bank lending , those banks' own policies would still be an impediment to renewed financial flows , given zimbabwe's outstanding debt arrears .

as discussed above , the imf and other multilateral banks have stipulated that the zimbabwe government must establish a track record of sound fiscal policy before the debt arrears question can be addressed .

donor governments may also choose to consider debt forgiveness for zimbabwe .

given the transitional nature of zimbabwe's current government and uncertainty surrounding the date of the country's next elections , however , some policymakers question whether such decisions should be delayed until a new , democratically elected government takes office .

in 2007 , after years of political tensions and a violent march 2007 assault by police on government critics that drew widespread international criticism , south africa initiated a mediation effort between the government of zimbabwe and the opposition to create political conditions for free and fair elections , the results of which would be accepted by all parties .

although the negotiations resulted in the amendment of some laws seen to restrict press freedom and political activity , the talks were abandoned after president mugabe announced an election date without consulting the opposition .

human rights activists argued that the legislative changes were cosmetic and that the talks failed to create a level playing field prior to the 2008 elections .

the two factions of the main opposition party , the mdc , which split in 2005 , remained divided prior to the elections .

despite rumors of dissatisfaction with mugabe's continued rule from within his own party , zanu - pf's central committee nominated mugabe to be their presidential candidate .

the committee also supported a resolution to hold all elections ( presidential , parliamentary , and local council ) at the same time , and to reduce the terms for all public offices from six to five years .

in addition , they voted to back efforts to increase the number of parliamentarians .

critics contend that these proposals were an effort to manipulate the electoral process through gerrymandering , with the new constituencies created in rural areas where the ruling party had stronger support .

the proposals were included in a controversial constitutional amendment bill , which , to the surprise of many observers , was passed by the parliament in 2007 with the support of mdc members of parliament ( mps ) .

the final version of the legislation , did , however , include some changes seen as concessions to the opposition , and reports suggest that the mdc supported the legislation because of progress in the south africa negotiations .

in february 2008 , a senior member of zanu - pf , simba makoni , announced his intention to run against president mugabe in the upcoming elections .

he was subsequently expelled from the party and ran as an independent , although he was rumored to have the support of several unnamed senior party officials .

makoni had served as finance minister from 2000 to 2002 and was reportedly dismissed after criticizing the administration's economic policies .

opposition leader tsvangirai dismissed makoni as "old wine in a new bottle," but rival mdc leader arthur mutambara withdrew as a presidential candidate and expressed his support for makoni .

in the pre - election period , civic activists reported significant pre - election irregularities .

the zimbabwean government invited election observers from over 40 countries and regional organizations , including sadc , but allegedly barred observers from countries considered to be critical of its policies .

western media organizations and journalists were also reportedly denied permission to cover the elections .

zimbabwe's first "harmonized" elections were held on march 29 , 2008 .

the zimbabwe electoral commission ( zec ) , widely criticized for its delayed release of the results , announced the national assembly results four days after the election .

for the first time since independence , zanu - pf lost its majority in the national assembly .

the mdc factions won 109 seats in the 220-seat national assembly , over zanu - pf's 97 .

after a month of rising tensions , the results of the presidential race were belatedly announced on may 2 .

they indicated that tsvangirai had received more votes than mugabe , but had failed to garner the 50% needed to avoid a runoff .

although the opposition accused the government of manipulating the results and initially objected to participating in a runoff , morgan tsvangirai agreed to stand against president mugabe in a second round of voting .

while electoral law requires the government to hold a runoff election within 21 days of announcing the initial results , the zec declared that the runoff would not be held until june 27 , three months after the first round .

during the following weeks , reports of political violence increased dramatically , in what many critics contend was a government - orchestrated attempt to punish opposition supporters and ensure a mugabe victory in the runoff .

several of the country's security service chiefs , including the heads of the army and the police , publicly announced that they would not recognize an electoral victory by anyone other that mugabe .

citing the high number of attacks against mdc supporters and the lack of a level playing field , tsvangirai withdrew from the race days before the election .

despite public comments from african observer missions and a presidential statement from the united nations security council arguing that conditions for a free and fair election did not exist , the government held the runoff as scheduled .

mugabe was declared the winner with over 85% of the vote and inaugurated on june 29 , 2008 .

his electoral victory in the runoff election was declared illegitimate by several countries , including the united states and botswana .

prior to the runoff , zimbabwe's state - controlled media sent mixed signals about the regime's post - election plans .

on april 23 , the government - owned herald newspaper printed an editorial that suggested sadc should mediate between the parties to create a transitional coalition government , led by president mugabe , that would organize new elections .

the following day the paper announced on its website that a unity government was "not feasible. .

according to a may 2008 international crisis group report , some senior zanu - pf members , including vice president joyce mujuru and reserve bank governor gideon gono , tried to convince the president to accept a unity government , but were overruled by senior security officials .

central to the concerns of zanu - pf hardliners , critics assert , are questions regarding immunity for serious human rights abuses committed since independence .

both parties issued public statements after the elections indicating a willingness to negotiate , but zanu - pf declared that tsvangirai must acknowledge mugabe's victory as a prerequisite .

tsvangirai refused to do so .

some believe zanu - pf had planned to negotiate even before the runoff , but wanted to enter the talks from a position of power , with mugabe having won the second round .

as noted above , although observers suggest that the march 29 election day was largely peaceful , reports of politically motivated violence subsequently increased to a level not seen in two decades , according to advocacy groups .

the mdc alleged that over 500 of its supporters were killed in the months after the election .

then - u.s .

ambassador james mcgee implicated the ruling party in orchestrating the attacks .

zanu - pf and the zimbabwean army denied involvement with the violence , although the army ; police ; intelligence service ; "war veterans ; " and zimbabwe's national youth service , also known as the "green bombers," were all implicated .

one week after the elections , self - styled war veteran leader jabuli sibanda warned , "it has come to our realization that the elections were used as another war front to prepare for the reinvasion of our country.... as freedom fighters , we feel compelled to repel the invasion," echoing a frequent mugabe refrain that an opposition victory would be tantamount to the british reinstating colonial rule .

the state - owned herald newspaper contributed to fears of a white takeover in the wake of the election , reporting , "an increasing number of white former commercial farmers are reportedly threatening resettled black farmers throughout the country with eviction from their farms or face the wrath of an anticipated 'incoming mdc government.' .

these pronouncements coincided with farm invasions throughout the country , and by mid - april 2008 the commercial farmers union reported that over 100 of the estimated remaining 400 white farmers had been forced off their lands .

further evictions in 2009 may have reduced the number to less than 250 .

zimbabwe's rural areas appear to have been the hardest hit by the post - election violence ; the u.s. embassy in harare documented thousands who fled the countryside for urban areas in the months after the march elections .

most harare medical clinics were at full capacity during the height of the violence , according to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

zimbabwe's largest farmers' union reported that militias displaced over 40,000 farm workers , and there were widespread reports of burned homes , granaries , and livestock .

the united nations' resident representative in zimbabwe stated at the time , "there is an emerging pattern of political violence inflicted mainly , but not exclusively , on suspected followers of the mdc. .

the level of violence was confirmed by an eight - person sadc mission: "we have seen it , there are people in hospital who said they have been tortured , you have seen pictures , you have seen pictures of houses that have been destroyed and so on. .

some zimbabwean officials , including the police chief , accused the mdc of rigging and inciting violence .

more than 10 newly elected mdc legislators were arrested in the wake of the march elections .

sixteen other mdc officials and human rights activists were charged with terrorism and sabotage .

over 100 election officers were arrested on charges of committing fraud and abusing public office in favor of the mdc .

independent reports suggest that teachers , who held many of the election officer positions , were specifically targeted by government supporters .

