in recent years , some states and localities have considered , and in a few cases enacted , measures intended to deter the presence of aliens who entered and / or remain in the united states without legal authorization .

typically , these measures have sought to ( 1 ) limit the hiring and employment of unauthorized aliens , including through the denial of permits to persons that employ unauthorized aliens and the regulation of day labor centers ; ( 2 ) restrict the ability of unlawfully present aliens to rent or occupy dwellings within a state or locality's jurisdiction ; and / or ( 3 ) deny unlawfully present aliens access to state or local services or benefits .

more recently , some states have arguably gone further by imposing criminal or civil penalties upon activities that may facilitate unauthorized immigration .

several such measures have been challenged in court , including on federal preemption and fourteenth amendment grounds .

legal challenges brought in federal court concerning restrictions on employment , in particular , have led to conflicting court rulings .

in some cases , the relevant state or local measure has been upheld as constitutionally and legally valid .

in other cases , the measure has been struck down .

in still other instances , the parties have reached a settlement agreement that precludes enforcement of the contested law ; the government has repealed the challenged provision ; or the presiding court has enjoined the enforcement of the challenged provisions pending trial .

these cases illustrate the difficulties that states and localities face in attempting to regulate the presence and rights of aliens within their jurisdictions in a manner consistent with federal law .

over time , the courts have narrowed the legal bases upon which states and localities may enact legislation affecting aliens .

state and local authority to regulate aliens has also been limited , directly or impliedly , by the growing scope of federal immigration law .

with the enactment of federal employer sanctions , welfare reform , and other recent immigration laws , congress has left increasingly few opportunities for states and localities to legislate .

significantly , these laws have not only broadened the substantive regulation of aliens ( eg , employment eligibility ) , but also established discrete procedures for determining alien eligibility for employment and certain benefits .

perhaps ironically then , even as new state and local measures to deter illegal immigration are motivated in part by a perceived lack of federal enforcement of immigration law , the degree to which states and localities may regulate immigration - related matters has arguably been curbed by the growing breadth of federal immigration law .

conflicting court rulings regarding the permissibility of state and local measures targeting unlawfully present aliens have further contributed to this legal ambiguity .

in particular , the u.s. courts of appeals for the third , ninth , and tenth circuits have reached differing conclusions as to whether federal law preempts state or local measures that would require employers within their jurisdiction to use e - verify , the online federal employment eligibility verification system , to check the work authorization of employees .

this term , the supreme court is considering the case of chamber of commerce v. whiting , which involves arguments as to whether federal law preempts an arizona statute that requires employers to use the federal government's e - verify system to determine the work eligibility of employees and suspends or revokes the business licenses of entities found to have hired unauthorized aliens .

this report discusses the constitutional issues raised by state and local laws intended to deter the presence of unauthorized aliens by limiting their access to housing , employment , and public benefits , as well as the implications that federal civil rights statutes might have for the implementation and enforcement of these laws .

it also discusses recent federal court cases addressing the constitutionality of such measures .

a separate report , crs report r41221 , state efforts to deter unauthorized aliens: legal analysis of arizona's s.b .

1070 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] , discusses state laws that require state and local police to enforce federal immigration law or criminalize conduct that may facilitate unauthorized immigration .

an estimated 37 million foreign - born persons currently reside in the united states , almost a third of whom may be present without authorization .

over the past two decades , the number of aliens who unlawfully reside in the united states has grown significantly , from an estimated 3.2 million in 1986 to a high of more than 11 million in 2008 .

while this number dropped to 10.8 million in 2009 and the level of unauthorized migration into the united states has declined in recent years , some states and localities , concerned about the perceived negative effects of illegal immigration , have enacted measures intended to deter the presence of unauthorized aliens within their jurisdiction .

since early 2006 , some states and localities have considered legislation that would ( 1 ) limit the hiring and employment of unauthorized aliens , including through the denial of permits to persons that employ unauthorized aliens and the regulation of day labor centers ; ( 2 ) restrict the ability of unlawfully present aliens to rent or occupy dwellings within a state or locality's jurisdiction ; and / or ( 3 ) deny unlawfully present aliens access to state or local services or benefits .

although local measures to restrict unlawfully present aliens' access to employment or housing have received considerable attention , relatively few of the measures reportedly introduced appear to have been enacted .

state action on these matters has arguably been more significant , with several states adopting measures that restrict employers from hiring or employing unauthorized aliens or aliens' eligibility for public benefits .

no state appears to have enacted legislation specifically barring unlawfully present aliens from renting private dwellings , although such measures have been enacted by some localities .

state or local restrictions upon unlawfully present aliens' access to employment or housing and eligibility for public benefits have been challenged upon various grounds .

among other things , plaintiffs challenging such restrictions have alleged that they: ( 1 ) are preempted by federal immigration law and thus unenforceable by federal or state courts ; ( 2 ) deprive persons of equal protection of the law in violation of the fourteenth amendment to the u.s. constitution ; and / or ( 3 ) deprive persons of property or liberty interests without providing them due process of law in violation of the fourteenth amendment .

the following sections describe the legal concepts of preemption , equal protection , and procedural due process in more detail , particularly as they may apply to state and local regulation of unlawfully present aliens within their jurisdiction .

the ability of states and localities to restrict the hiring or employment of unauthorized aliens may depend upon the form that those restrictions take , although any such restrictions could potentially be subject to preemption and procedural due process challenges .

state and local measures barring unlawfully present aliens from renting or occupying private dwellings raise issues under both the preemption doctrine and the fourteenth amendment .

these issues are , however , potentially more significant than those raised by state or local restrictions on employment because denial of housing can be seen as a regulation of immigration .

some localities have attempted to deter the presence of illegal aliens within their borders via the denial of services and / or benefits .

such denials may be less prone to legal challenges than measures pertaining to employment and housing , partly because such measures appear less likely to raise preemption and equal protection challenges and partly because federal law expressly requires or authorizes states and localities to deny certain benefits to unlawfully present aliens .

the outcome of any such challenge thus seems likely to hinge upon the scope of the benefits being denied , as well as whether the state or local measure in question would involve state or local personnel making independent assessments of persons' immigration status when determining whether to deny benefits .

the degree to which states and localities may deny services or benefits based on unlawful presence in the united states remains unclear .

during the 1970s and early 1980s , the u.s. supreme court decided a series of cases on governmental authority to discriminate against aliens in providing government benefits .

collectively , these cases set forth the following basic constitutional principles: state governments generally cannot discriminate between aliens who are authorized to live here indefinitely and u.s. citizens when setting eligibility requirements for state benefits ; states have broader , but still limited , authority to discriminate against aliens who are here without authorization ; and the federal government , by contrast , has wide discretion to discriminate both between citizens and legal aliens , as well as between classes of legal aliens .

after these cases were decided , congress enacted the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) , which both established a general rule as to which benefits must be denied to aliens unlawfully residing in the united states and delineated which local public benefits must be provided regardless of immigration status .

prwora prohibits many classes of noncitizens , legal and illegal alike , from receiving assistance .

generally , unlawfully present aliens are denied federal benefits and may qualify for state benefits only under laws passed by the states after the prwora's enactment .

the class of benefits denied is broad and includes: ( 1 ) grants , contracts , loans , and licenses , and ( 2 ) retirement , welfare , health , disability , housing , food , unemployment , postsecondary education , and similar benefits .

there are , however , exceptions to the aforementioned bars , including exceptions for: treatment under medicaid for emergency medical conditions ( other than those related to an organ transplant ) ; short - term , in - kind , emergency disaster relief ; immunizations against immunizable diseases and testing for and treatment of symptoms of communicable diseases ; and services or assistance ( such as soup kitchens , crisis counseling and intervention , and short - term shelters ) designated by the attorney general as: ( i ) delivering in - kind services at the community level , ( ii ) providing assistance without individual determinations of each recipient's needs , and ( iii ) being necessary for the protection of life and safety .

the prwora also expressly bars unlawfully present aliens from most state and locally funded benefits .

the restrictions on these benefits parallel the restrictions on federal benefits .

as such , unauthorized aliens are generally barred from state and local government contracts , licenses , grants , loans , and assistance .

however , states and localities are prohibited from denying benefits and / or services for emergency medical care , disaster relief , and immunizations .

although federal law has established a general framework as to what services may or may not be denied to unlawfully present aliens , courts have generally yet to weigh in on the issue of when localities may make lawful presence a requirement for services to be made available .

some of the services states and localities may attempt to deny to unlawfully present aliens could include bus tours for senior citizens , leadership training programs for adults , rental and mortgage assistance , drug treatment , health care for the uninsured , access to libraries and parks , and use of day labor centers .

courts will have to interpret how broadly the term "local public benefit" should be interpreted and whether denial of particular benefits is consistent with congressional purpose .

this interpretation may depend on which services can be construed as encouraging illegal immigration .

while services such as health care for the uninsured or rental assistance arguably fall within the purview of "local public benefit," others such as access to parks or libraries are less clear cut .

implementation of the denial of services to unlawfully present aliens could also raise issues , particularly if state or local personnel would determine alien eligibility for benefits by means other than that provided for in federal law .

some state and local measures restricting the hiring or housing of unauthorized aliens could also potentially conflict with existing federal anti - discrimination laws .

under title vii of the civil rights act , employers are prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race , color , religion , sex , or national origin .

the supreme court has ruled that , with respect to title vii , "the term 'national origin' does not embrace a requirement of united states citizenship. .

in reaching this result , the court reasoned that national origin refers to the country in which someone is born or from which his or her ancestors came .

because individuals who share the same national origin do not necessarily share the same citizenship status , the court determined that title vii's prohibition on national origin discrimination does not necessarily make it illegal for employers to discriminate on the basis of citizenship status or alienage .

any state or local measure restricting the hiring or employment of unauthorized aliens must comply with title vii requirements .

thus , for example , a local ordinance that authorized the enforcement of an employment complaint that alleged violations solely on the basis of an employee's race or national origin would not be legally enforceable .

however , it is possible that an ordinance restricting the employment of unauthorized aliens could , when implemented , encourage violations of title vii in situations where discrimination on the basis of citizenship would have the purpose or effect of discriminating on the basis of national origin .

for example , employers who are concerned about inadvertently hiring unlawful workers may become reluctant to hire individuals from certain ethnic backgrounds , and such reluctance could have the unlawful effect of discriminating on the basis of national origin .

in other cases , an employer might use a citizenship test as a pretext to disguise what is in fact national origin discrimination .

as the court has noted , "title vii prohibits discrimination on the basis of citizenship whenever it has the purpose or effect of discriminating on the basis of national origin. .

in an effort to comply with such ordinances , therefore , some employers may engage in practices that could give rise to legal challenges under title vii .

like title vii , the fair housing act ( fha ) prohibits discrimination in the sale or rental of housing on a number of grounds , including national origin .

in the housing context , as in the employment context , courts have found that citizenship discrimination does not automatically constitute national origin discrimination under the fha , although they have held that the fha would prohibit citizenship discrimination if such discrimination had the purpose or effect of discriminating on the basis of national origin .

as a result , any state or local measure that authorizes the enforcement of housing complaints based solely on the national origin of a dwelling's inhabitants would be impermissible .

further , if landlords who are attempting to comply with an ordinance barring the tenancy of unlawfully present aliens engage in national origin discrimination , then such actions may give rise to legal challenges under the fha .

thus far , only one federal court appears to have directly addressed whether a local ordinance intended to deter the housing of unlawfully present aliens constitutes a violation of the fha .

in lozano v. city of hazleton , the district court dismissed the plaintiffs' facial challenge , concluding that the plaintiffs had failed to show that there was no set of circumstances under which the ordinance would be valid .

the court did , however , leave the door open to a possible "as applied" challenge to the local ordinances in question , noting , "because the statutes have not yet gone into effect , we cannot know whether they would have the discriminatory effect that plaintiffs claim. .

the plaintiffs did not appeal .

it is also possible that an employment or housing ordinance aimed at unauthorized aliens could give rise to violations of 42 u.s.c .

§ 1981 .

this provision , which was originally enacted as part of the civil rights act of 1870 , states that: all persons within the jurisdiction of the united states shall have the same right in every state and territory to make and enforce contracts , to sue , be parties , give evidence , and to the full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of persons and property as is enjoyed by white citizens , and shall be subject to like punishment , pains , penalties , taxes , licenses , and exactions of every kind , and to no other .

although the supreme court has held that an alien is a "person" for purposes of § 1981 , the court has not addressed whether unauthorized aliens are encompassed within the statute's definition of "person. .

the court , however , has held that unauthorized aliens are "persons" in the context of the fourteenth amendment , and , therefore , might be inclined to make a similar finding with respect to the definition of "person" under § 1981 .

if unauthorized aliens are protected from discrimination by governmental actors under the statute , then states or localities that pass employment or housing ordinances aimed at unauthorized aliens may be liable for violations of § 1981 .

indeed , a federal district court held in the lozano case that a local ordinance intended to deter the employment and housing of unauthorized aliens was a violation of § 1981 .

the third circuit did not address this issue on appeal .

in addition , although the supreme court has held that § 1981 prohibits alienage discrimination by governmental actors , the court has never addressed the question of whether § 1981 bars alienage discrimination by private actors .

until 1991 , when congress amended § 1981 , the federal courts of appeals that had considered the issue were split with regard to this question .

since the amendments to § 1981 , some courts have confirmed that the statute applies to private discrimination against aliens .

as a result , it is possible , but not certain , that a court might find that an employer or landlord who , in complying with a state or local measure , refused to employ or rent to an unauthorized alien was in violation of § 1981 .

the state of arizona has enacted several measures that place it in the vanguard of recent attempts to test the legal limits of state and local measures intended to deter unauthorized immigration .

the legal arizona workers act of 2007 would , among other things , require employers to use e - verify to check the work authorization of employees and suspend or revoke the licenses of employers found to have hired unauthorized aliens .

it has been challenged by several parties on various grounds , including that it is preempted by federal law and deprives employers of due process .

its e - verify and licensing provisions , in particular , have been upheld by the district court and the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit .

the plaintiffs appealed to the supreme court , which granted certiorari .

oral arguments in the case were heard on december 8 , 2010 , on the issue of whether these provisions are expressly or impliedly preempted .

more recently , arizona has arguably gone further in seeking to deter the presence of unauthorized aliens by enacting a measure in april 2010 that is commonly referred to as s.b .

1070 .

in addition to requiring state and local police to facilitate the detection of unauthorized aliens in their daily enforcement activities , s.b .

1070 would also criminalize certain conduct that may help bring about the presence of unlawfully present aliens within the state , including: willful failure to complete or carry an alien registration document ; certain activities relating to the transport or harboring of unlawfully present aliens ; and the application for , solicitation of , or performance of work within the state by unauthorized aliens .

a federal district court has enjoined enforcement of many provisions of s.b .

1070 — including those requiring state and local law enforcement to attempt to ascertain the immigration status of certain persons within their custody reasonably suspected to be unlawfully present — in response to the federal government's suit alleging that these provisions are preempted .

a decision on the merits in this suit is still pending , as is the state of arizona's appeal to the ninth circuit of the district court's grant of a preliminary injunction barring enforcement of many provisions of s.b .

1070 .

private parties have also filed suit challenging s.b .

1070 , including on the grounds that it would "cause widespread racial profiling. .

for more on s.b .

1070 see crs report r41221 , state efforts to deter unauthorized aliens: legal analysis of arizona's s.b .

1070 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

