statutory proscriptions against the illegal importation of aliens into the united states can be found as far back as 1875 .

the modern statute that broadly prohibits various forms of alien smuggling predates the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , the current source for the bulk of the federal immigration laws , and was first enacted in 1917 .

today , this provision and its many amendments can be found in ina § 274 .

not only does this statute prohibit the smuggling of aliens across the u.s. border , but it also prohibits the transport and harboring of aliens within the united states .

thus , the statute covers a broad spectrum of activities that could conceivably subject to criminal liability any individual who provides assistance to an alien he knows or should know is unlawfully present within the united states .

in recent years , several legislative proposals have been introduced that address alien smuggling .

in the 110 th congress , several bills addressing criminal penalties for alien smuggling saw legislative action or received significant congressional interest , though none were ultimately enacted into law .

all contained nearly identical language and would have amended several statutory provisions in both the ina and title 18 of the united states code .

it is possible that similar legislation will be considered in the 111 th congress .

this report describes the law that currently governs alien smuggling and then addresses how the recent legislative proposals would have changed the current law structurally and substantively .

ina § 274 proscribes several types of activities that can be characterized as alien smuggling .

these activities are characterized broadly , potentially criminalizing a wide range of activities .

this is particularly apparent when analyzing the scienter element ( i.e. , the "intent" requirement ) of these provisions .

most of these provisions state that a violation occurs when a defendant commits an offense "knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact" that an alien's presence in the united states is in violation of the law .

"reckless disregard" requires more than mere negligence , but it does not require that a defendant have actual knowledge that the alien he is assisting is in the country illegally .

rather , "reckless disregard" requires a person to consciously disregard a substantial and unjustifiable risk , and such disregard must constitute a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise in the situation .

thus , a violation would occur if a defendant chose to assist an alien in some manner when he "should have known" that the alien was in the united states illegally .

furthermore , although a defendant must either know or act in reckless disregard of the fact that an alien is unlawfully present within the united states in order to commit a violation , the person need not know that his act violates the alien smuggling statute in order to be susceptible to criminal liability .

thus , scienter is only required in terms of the defendant knowing the alien is unlawfully present and the defendant knowingly assisting the alien ; ignorance about the unlawfulness of the assistance is most likely not a defense .

despite the rather broad sweep of ina § 274 , the statute outlines an exemption .

it states that a religious denomination does not violate the proscription against transporting , moving , attempting to transport or to move , concealing , harboring , shielding from detection , attempting to conceal , attempting to harbor , attempting to shield from detection , or encouraging or inducing an alien to reside in the united states , if the denomination encourages , invites , calls , allows , or enables an alien who is present in the united states to perform the vocation of a minister or missionary for the denomination in the united states as an uncompensated volunteer , so long as the alien was a member of the denomination for at least one year .

the various offenses enumerated in ina § 274 carry different baseline penalties , which may be enhanced depending on the circumstances .

for example , committing an alien smuggling offense in furtherance of a commercial activity or causing serious injury or death to a person while committing the offense will enhance the sentence .

the penalties for each smuggling offense are as follows: bringing or attempting to bring an alien into the united states at a place other than a designated port of entry ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) ) or conspiring to commit any of the acts proscribed by ina § 274 ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( v ) ( i ) ) merits either a fine , imprisonment for not more than 10 years , or both .

transporting , moving , or attempting to transport or move an alien ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ) ; concealing , harboring , shielding from detection , or attempting to conceal , harbor , or shield from detection an alien ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) ) ; or encouraging or inducing an alien to enter the united states ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iv ) ) , for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain merits either a fine , imprisonment for not more than 10 years , or both .

transporting , moving , or attempting to transport or move an alien ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ) ; concealing , harboring , shielding from detection , or attempting to conceal , harbor , or shield from detection an alien ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) ) ; or encouraging or inducing an alien to enter the united states ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iv ) ) for purposes other than commercial advantage or private financial gain , or aiding and abetting any of the acts proscribed by ina § 274 ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( v ) ( ii ) ) , merits either a fine , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both .

if during or in relation to the violation of any act proscribed by ina § 274 , serious bodily injury occurs , or a person's life is placed in jeopardy , the violator can be fined , imprisoned for not more than 20 years , or both .

if a death occurs during or in relation to a violation of any of the acts proscribed by ina § 274 , the violator can be fined , punished by death , imprisoned for any number or years or for life , or fined and imprisoned or punished by death .

knowingly hiring for employment aliens not authorized to work in the united states ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) is punishable by fine , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both .

in the case of offenses for bringing or attempting to bring an alien into the united states in any manner whatsoever ( ina § 274 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) , different penalties apply: in general , the above offense can be punished by a fine and / or a term of imprisonment for not more than one year for each alien brought into the united states by the defendant .

however , committing the offense with the intent or with reason to believe that the alien would commit an offense against the united states or any state that is punishable by imprisonment for more than one year , or committing the above offense for the purpose of commercial advantage or private financial gain , is punishable by fine for each violation , and / or a term of imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than 10 years for each of the first two violations , and a term of imprisonment for not less than five years and not more than 15 years for each additional violation .

moreover , committing the above offense in which the alien is not upon arrival immediately brought and presented to an appropriate immigration officer at a designated port of entry is punishable by fine for each violation , and / or a term of imprisonment not more than 10 years for each of the first two violations , and a term of imprisonment for not less than five years and not more than 15 years for each additional violation .

when an alien is brought into the united states in violation of ina § 274 ( a ) , sentences can be enhanced by up to 10 years if the offense was part of an ongoing commercial organization or enterprise ; aliens were transported in groups of 10 or more ; aliens were transported in a manner that endangered their lives ; or the aliens presented a life - threatening health risk to people in the united states .

in addition , "any conveyance , including any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft , that has been or is being used in the commission" of a violation of ina § 274 ( a ) , "the gross proceeds of such violation , and any property traceable to such conveyance or proceeds," is subject to civil forfeiture .

it is possible that the 111 th congress will consider proposals similar to those considered in the 110 th congress to modify the penalties for alien smuggling .

in the 110 th congress , several legislative proposals addressing alien smuggling saw legislative action or received significant congressional interest .

s. 2366 / s. 2368 ( the save act ) ; house - passed h.r .

2399 , its companion bill s. 2463 ; and house - passed h.r .

2830 all contained similar language and would have amended both the ina and title 18 of the u.s. code .

these bills would have significantly altered the wording and structure of ina § 274 , expanding its scope .

they also would have added alien smuggling provisions in § 2237 of title 18 , enhancing sentencing for disobeying federal officials on the high seas while engaging in alien smuggling .

the following sections describe changes proposed by these bills in more detail .

in the 110 th congress , the most significant change proposed in legislation relating to alien smuggling was the overall restructuring of ina § 274 .

the proposed legislation would have consolidated most of the proscribed acts into paragraphs ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) and ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of ina § 274 .

the only proscription left untouched by the legislation would have been the proscription against employing smuggled aliens unauthorized to work in the united states .

the bills did not address cross - referencing issues that could arise if ina § 274 was restructured .

currently , ina §101 ( a ) ( 43 ) ( n ) defines an "aggravated felony" as "an offense described in paragraph ( 1 ) ( a ) or ( 2 ) of" ina § 274 .

if the bills were enacted with the cross - reference left intact , this would have meant that bringing an alien into the united states at a place other than a designated port of entry would no longer have been an aggravated felony .

accordingly , someone convicted of such an offense would no longer be automatically ineligible for certain immigration rights and benefits that aggravated felons are disqualified from receiving .

the restructuring proposed by the major anti - smuggling bills considered in the 110 th congress also modified and reorganized the penalty provisions under ina § 274 .

the only sentencing provisions unaffected by the new legislation would have concerned several sentencing enhancements and the penalties for employing aliens unauthorized to work in the united states .

the proposed legislation would have altered the current sentencing schema in several ways: unless stated otherwise , a violation of any act in ina § 274 would merit a fine , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both .

if the offense involved the transit of the defendant's spouse , child , sibling , parent , grandparent , or niece or nephew , and the offense was not affected by the sentencing enhancements listed below , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for not more than one year , or both .

if the offense was for recruiting , encouraging , or inducing an alien to come to , enter , or reside in the united states , transporting or moving an alien in the united states , or harboring , concealing , or shielding from detection the alien in any place in the united states , for purposes of profit , commercial advantage , or private financial gain , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for not more than 10 years , or both .

if the offense was for bringing an alien into the united states in any manner whatsoever regardless of any future official action that may be taken with respect to the alien , for the purpose of profit , commercial advantage , or private financial gain , or if the offense was committed with the intent or reason to believe the alien would commit an offense against the united states or any state punishable by imprisonment for more than one year , the defendant could be fined for each violation , and / or imprisoned for not less than 3 and not more than 10 years for the first two offenses , and not less than 5 and not more than 15 years for each subsequent offense .

if the offense resulted in serious bodily injury or placed in jeopardy the life of any person , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for not more than 20 years , or both .

if the offense involved an individual who the defendant knew was engaged in or intended to engage in terrorist activities , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for not more than 30 years , or both .

if the offense involved kidnaping , an attempt to kidnap , conduct required for aggravated sexual abuse , an attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse , or an attempt to kill , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for any term of years or life , or both .

if the offense resulted in the death of any person , the defendant may be fined , imprisoned for any term of years or life , punished with death , or both .

the proposed legislation also would have resulted in several other changes to ina § 274 .

for example , the legislation would have added a provision to ina § 274 that would have affirmatively asserted extraterritorial jurisdiction for acts of alien smuggling occurring outside the united states .

although many courts have suggested extraterritorial jurisdiction exists over some offenses , this provision would have clarified that the full reach of the statute extends to acts committed by alien smuggling networks on the high seas and in foreign countries .

furthermore , if a defendant violated ina § 274 on "the high seas," no defense based on necessity could be raised unless ( 1 ) the defendant informed the coast guard "as soon as practicable" of the necessity and if a rescue was claimed , information about the vessel engaging in the rescue and ( 2 ) the defendant did not bring or attempt to bring any alien into the land territory of the united states without lawful authority , unless exigent circumstances existed that placed the life of the alien in danger .

finally , the legislation would have altered the religious denomination exemption by explicitly making it an affirmative defense , which would clarify that the burden of proof is on the defendant religious denomination to demonstrate that its conduct falls under the exemption .

it also would have denied the exemption for religious denominations accused of encouraging or inducing an alien to reside in the united states .

the proposed legislation not only would have altered ina § 274 , but also would have affected § 2237 of title 18 of the u.s. code .

section 2237 prohibits a ship master in charge of a vessel subject to the jurisdiction of the united states from knowingly failing to obey an order by an authorized federal law enforcement vessel to heave to that vessel .

it also prohibits any person on such vessel from forcibly resisting a boarding or a law enforcement action authorized by federal law or to provide materially false information to a federal law enforcement officer with regard to information related to the vessel .

normally , violating § 2237 would subject a defendant to a fine , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both .

however , the proposed legislation would have enhanced the sentences under these circumstances: the offender would be fined , imprisoned for not more than 10 years , or both if the offense was committed in the course of a violation of ina § 274 ; chapter 77 ( peonage , slavery , and trafficking in persons ) , §111 ( shipping ) , § 111a ( interference with vessels ) , § 113 ( stolen property ) , or §117 ( transportation for illegal sexual activity ) of title 18 of the u.s. code ; chapter 705 ( maritime drug law enforcement ) of title 46 of the u.s. code ; or title ii of the act of june 15 , 1917 ; ( vessels at u.s. ports in times of war and national emergency ) .

if the offense resulted in serious bodily injury or transportation under inhuman conditions , the offender would be fined , imprisoned not more than 15 years , or both .

if the offense resulted in death or involved kidnaping , an attempt to kidnap , conduct required to constitute aggravated sexual abuse , or an attempt to commit such abuse , or an attempt to kill , the offender would be fined , imprisoned for any term of years or life , or both .

the proposed legislation also would have limited the availability of a necessity defense and would define the term "transportation under inhumane conditions. .

