trade plays a critical role in the u.s. agricultural sector .

usda estimates that exports account for about 20% of total u.s. agricultural production .

because the united states plays such an important role in so many agricultural markets , its farm policy is often subject to intense scrutiny both for compliance with current wto rules and for its potential to diminish the breadth or impede the success of future multilateral negotiations — in part because a farm bill locks in u.s. policy behavior for an extended period of time during which the united states would be unable to accept any new restrictions on its domestic support programs .

omnibus u.s. farm legislation — referred to as the farm bill — is renewed every five or six years .

farm income and commodity price support programs have been a part of u.s. farm legislation since the 1930s .

each successive farm bill usually involves some modification or replacement of existing farm programs .

the current omnibus farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ; the 2014 farm bill ) , which was signed into law on february 7 , 2014 , made several substantial changes to the previous farm safety net of the 2008 farm bill .

many of the new farm programs became operational for the current 2014 crop year .

most of the 2014 farm bill agricultural provisions will not expire until september 30 , 2018 , or with the 2018 crop year .

ultimately the current farm bill will either be replaced with new legislation , temporarily extended , or allowed to lapse and be replaced with "permanent law" — a set of essentially mothballed provisions for the farm commodity programs that date from the 1930s and 1940s .

the most recent u.s. notification to the wto of domestic support outlays ( made on december 8 , 2014 ) is for the 2012 crop year , which was governed by farm programs of the 2008 farm bill .

a potential major constraint affecting u.s. agricultural policy choices is the set of commitments made as part of membership in the world trade organization ( wto ) , with its various agreements governing agriculture and trade , including dispute settlement .

with respect to disciplines governing domestic agricultural support , two wto agreements are paramount — the agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm ) .

the aoa sets country - specific aggregate spending limits on the most market - distorting policies .

it also defines very general rules covering trade among member countries .

in general , domestic policies or programs found to be in violation of wto rules may be subject to challenge by another wto member under the wto dispute settlement process .

if a wto challenge occurs and is successful , the wto remedy likely would imply the elimination , alteration , or amendment by congress of the program in question to bring it into compliance .

since most governing provisions over u.s. farm programs are statutory , new legislation could be required to implement even minor changes to achieve compliance .

as a result , designing farm programs that comply with wto rules can avoid potential trade disputes .

this report provides a brief overview of the wto commitments most relevant for u.s. domestic farm policy .

a key question that policymakers ask of virtually every new farm proposal is , how will it affect u.s. commitments under the wto ? .

the answer depends not only on cost , but also on the proposal's design and objectives , as described below .

the united states currently is committed , under the aoa , to spend no more than $19.1 billion per year on amber box trade - distorting support .

the wto's aoa procedures for classifying and counting trade - distorting support are somewhat complex ; however , four questions might be asked to determine whether a particular farm measure will cause total u.s. domestic support to be above or below the $19.1 billion annual ams limit .

a subsequent fifth question may be asked to ascertain whether aoa - compliant outlays are also scm - compliant .

1 .

can the measure be classified as a "green box" policy — one presumed to have the least potential for distorting production and trade and therefore not counted as part of the ams ? .

2 .

can it be classified as a "blue box" policy — that is , a production - limiting program that receives a special exemption and therefore is also not counted as part of the ams ? .

3 .

if it is a potentially trade - distorting "amber box" policy , can support still be excluded from the ams calculation under the so - called 5% de minimis exemption ( explained later in more detail ) because total support is no more than 5% of either: a. the value of total annual production if the support is non - product specific , or b. the value of annual production of a particular commodity if the support is specific to that commodity ? .

4 .

if such support exceeds the de minimis 5% threshold ( and thus cannot be exempted ) , when it is added to all other forms of non - exempt amber box support is total u.s. ams still beneath the $19.1 billion limit ? .

5 .

if a program is fully compliant with the aoa rules and limits , does its support result in price or trade distortion in international markets that , in turn , cause adverse effects upon another wto member ? .

if so , then it may be subject to challenge under scm rules .

the aoa's structure of varying spending limits across the amber , blue , and green boxes is intentional .

by leaving no constraint on spending in the green box while imposing limits on ams spending , the wto implicitly encourages countries to design their domestic farm support programs to be green - box - compliant .

negotiations to further reform agricultural trade within the context of the wto — referred to as the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations — began in 2001 .

they are not expected to be completed in the near future .

as lawmakers consider policy options , other countries will be evaluating not only whether , in their view , these options will comply with the u.s. commitments under the aoa , but also how they reflect on the u.s. negotiating position in the doha round of talks .

the u.s. objective is for negotiations to result in substantial reductions in trade - distorting support and stronger rules that ensure that all production - related support is subject to discipline , while preserving criteria - based "green box" policies that can support agriculture in ways that minimize trade distortions .

at the same time , congress might seek domestic farm policy measures that it can justify as aoa - and scm - compliant .

the last u.s. notification to the wto was made on december 8 , 2014 , for the 2012 marketing year and the farm programs of the 2008 farm bill .

following are examples of how various u.s. domestic policies were classified in that notification , along with the associated values .

green box policies ( $127.5 billion ) the united states notified $127.5 billion in green box outlays , including outlays under the following programs ( figure 4 ) .

general services ( $10.3 billion ) state programs for agriculture ( $2.4b ) risk management agency ( rma ) total costs ( $1.5b ) including: 1 .

risk management agency ( rma ) administrative costs ( $0.08b ) 2 .

rma a&o reimbursements ( $1.4b ) 3 .

rma underwriting gains ( $0.0b ) farm service agency ( fsa ) & natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) ( $1.0b ) agricultural research service ( $1.2b ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) programs ( $1.1b ) national institute for food and agriculture ( nifa ) programs ( $1.4b ) food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) meat and poultry inspection ( $1.0b ) agricultural marketing service ( ams ) ( $0.3b ) national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) ( $0.164b ) economic research service ( ers ) ( $0.08b ) grain inspection , packers and stockyards administration ( gipsa ) ( $0.04b ) trade adjustment assistance for farmers ( taa for farmers ) ( $0.04b ) domestic food aid ( $106.8 billion ) supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ( $80.4b ) child nutrition programs ( $18.3b ) special supplemental food program for women , infants , children ( wic ) ( $6.8b ) section 32 food purchases ( $0.8b ) other food assistance programs ( $0.4b ) decoupled income support ( $4.8 billion ) direct payments ( $3.8b ) tobacco quota buyout payments ( $1.0b ) payments for relief from natural disasters ( $0.344 billion ) non - insured crop disaster assistance program ( nap ) payments ( $0.342b ) structural adjustment through investment aids ( $0.135 billion ) farm credit programs ( $0.131b ) environmental payments ( $5.2 billion ) conservation reserve program ( crp ) payments ( $1.8b ) environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) ( $1.4b ) conservation stewardship program ( $0.9b ) wetland reserve program ( $0.6b ) farmland protection program ( $0.145b ) grassland reserve program ( $0.065b ) blue box policies ( $0 ) the united states has not notified any payments under the blue box since 1995 ( the first year of wto notifications ) .

in that year , u.s. blue box notifications consisted entirely of target - price deficiency payments , which ended with 1996 farm law ( p.l .

104-127 ) .

de minimis exclusions ( $5.3 billion ) product - specific de minimis exclusions totaled $5.0 billion in 2012 , including certain federal subsidies for commodity - specific crop insurance premiums that were below 5% of the value of production for those specific commodities .

non - product - specific de minimis exclusions of $0.3 billion in 2012 were well below 5% of the total value of u.s. agricultural production of $396.6 billion .

amber box policies ( $6.9 billion ) prior to the d e m inimis exclusions , u.s. amber box notifications totaled $12.1 billion , including $11.8 billion of product - specific outlays and $0.3 billion of non - product - specific outlays .

however , $5.0 billion in product - specific support and all non - product - specific support of $0.3 billion were exempted from the ams limit under the d e m inimis exclusions , leaving $6.9 billion in amber box support subject to the $19.1 billion limit .

product - specific support ( $11.8 billion ) commodity - specific crop and revenue insurance subsidies ( $7.0b ) dairy price support ( $2.9b ) sugar price support ( $1.5b ) milk income loss contract ( milc ) ( $0.4b ) marketing loan benefits , including gains from repaying marketing loans at less than the loan rate and loan deficiency payments ( $0.0b ) commodity loan - related interest subsidies ( $0.087b ) special cotton marketing payments ( $0.060b ) average crop revenue election ( acre ) program ( $0.003b ) disaster assistance programs lip , lfp , elap , and tap ( $0.0b ) non - product specific support ( $0.3 billion ) irrigation subsidies in western states ( $0.167b ) grazing programs ( $0.054b ) renewable energy for america program ( reap ) ( $0.068b ) biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) ( $0.0b ) supplemental crop revenue assurance ( sure ) program ( $0.0b ) counter - cyclical payments ( $0.0b ) .

