rs20258 - - patient protection and mandatory external review: amending erisa's claims procedure updated january 19 , 200 .

the patients' bill of rights plus act of 1999 , s. 1344 , was introduced by senator trent lott ( r - ms ) on july 8 , 1999 , and passed by the senate onjuly 15 , 1999 .

s. 1344 sought to amend erisa to provide additional requirements for group health plansand health insurance issuers offeringcoverage in connection with group health plans .

if enacted , s. 1344 would have required group health plans and health insurance issuers to develop written procedures for addressing grievances .

agrievance was defined by the bill as any complaint made by a participant or beneficiary that does not involve acoverage determination .

once a grievance wasaddressed , a resulting determination would not have been appealable .

s. 1344 would have allowed participants and beneficiaries to appeal any adverse coverage determination to an internal review process .

an adversecoverage determination was defined as any determination under the plan which results in a denial of coverage orreimbursement .

a participant or beneficiaryseeking internal review would have been allowed at least 180 days after the date of the adverse coveragedetermination to make an appeal .

review would havebeen conducted by an individual with appropriate expertise who was not involved in the initial determination .

appeals involving issues of medical necessity orexperimental treatment would have been conducted by physicians with appropriate expertise .

internal review would have been completed within 30 working days of receiving the request for review .

where delay could jeopardize the life or health of theclaimant , s. 1344 would have required that review was completed no later than 72 hours after receiving therequest for review .

a request forexpedited review would have to include documentation of a medical exigency by the treating health careprofessional .

for routine determinations , notice of thedecision would have to be issued no later than 2 working days after the completion of review .

for expediteddeterminations , notice would have to be issuedwithin the 72-hour review period .

failure to issue a timely decision would been treated as an adverse coveragedetermination for purposes of obtaining externalreview .

if enacted , s. 1344 would have required all plans and issuers to have written procedures to permit access to an independent external review process .

external review would have been available to selected adverse coverage determinations .

those determinationsincluded coverage decisions that ( 1 ) are based onmedical necessity and exceed a significant financial threshold ; ( 2 ) are based on medical necessity and involve asignificant risk of placing the life or health of theparticipant in jeopardy ; or ( 3 ) involve an experimental or investigational treatment .

to obtain external review , aclaimant would have to complete the internalreview process and file a written request for review within 30 working days of receiving the internal reviewdecision .

within 5 working days after receiving the request for external review , the plan or issuer would have selected an external appeals entity .

 ( 13 ) this external appealsentity would have designated an external reviewer who would conduct the review .

the external reviewer wouldhave to ( 1 ) be appropriately credentialed orlicensed to deliver health care ; ( 2 ) not have any material , professional , familial , or financial affiliation with the caseunder review ; ( 3 ) have expertise in thediagnosis or treatment under review and be a physician of the same specialty , when reasonably available ; ( 4 ) receiveonly reasonable and customary compensationfrom the plan or issuer ; and ( 5 ) not be held liable for decisions regarding medical determinations .

the externalreviewer would have been required to consider allvalid , relevant , scientific , and clinical evidence to determine the medical necessity , appropriateness , or experimentalnature of the proposed treatment .

review would have been conducted in accordance with the medical exigencies of the case , but would have to be completed within 30 days of the date on whichthe reviewer was designated or all necessary information was received , whichever was later .

for cases where delaycould jeopardize the life or health of theparticipant , review would have to be conducted within 72 hours of the date on which the reviewer was designatedor all necessary information was received,whichever was later .

the determination of the external reviewer would have been binding upon the plan or issuer .

the bipartisan consensus managed care improvement act of 1999 , h.r .

2990 , combined two bills: the quality care for the uninsured act of 1999,originally h.r .

2990 , was introduced by representatives james m. talent ( r - mo ) and john b. shadegg ( r - az ) on september 30 , 1999 , and thebipartisan consensus managed care improvement act of 1999 , originally h.r .

2723 , was introduced byrepresentatives charlie norwood ( r - ga ) and john d. dingell ( d - mi ) on august 5 , 1999 .

 ( 14 ) the combined bill was passed by the house of representatives on october 7 , 1999 .

h.r .

2990 would not only have required group health plans and health insurance issuers to provide an external review processfor denied claims , but would have alsoestablished new deadlines for the internal review process and mandated the creation of a formal grievance system .

under h.r .

2990 , group health plans and health insurance issuers would have been required to maintain a system that addressed oral and writtengrievances .

these grievances would have included any aspect of the plan's or issuer's services , but would notinclude a claim for benefits .

once resolved,grievances would not have been subject to appeal .

if enacted , h.r .

2990 would have permitted a participant , beneficiary , or enrollee to request and obtain an internal review of his claim within 180days following a denial of a claim for benefits .

review would have been conducted by a named fiduciary if thedispute involved a claim for benefits under theplan .

for disputes involving denied coverage , review would have been conducted by a named appropriate individual .

if the case involved medical judgment,review would have been conducted by a physician .

internal review would have been completed in accordance with the medical exigencies of the case , but not later than 14 days after receiving the request for review .

if additional information was needed , this deadline could be extended to 28 days .

where delay could seriouslyjeopardize the life or health of the claimant , reviewwould have to be completed within 72 hours after receiving a request for expedited review .

this request could besubmitted orally or in writing by the claimant orprovider .

h.r .

2990 would have required all plans and issuers to create an external review process .

external review would have been available for benefitdenials that were either based on medical necessity or involved investigational or experimental treatment .

externalreview would have also been available when adecision as to whether a benefit is covered involved a medical judgment .

h.r .

2990 would have allowed thesecretary of labor to establishadditional standards for external review , including a filing deadline .

the plan or issuer would have been permittedto condition external review on the exhaustionof the internal review process .

in addition , the plan or issuer would have been able to charge a filing fee for externalreview .

however , this fee could not exceed$25 .

external review would have been conducted by a certified external appeal entity .

for group health plans , the entity would have to be certified either by thesecretary of labor , under a process recognized or approved by the secretary of labor , or by a qualified privatestandard - setting organization .

for state healthinsurance issuers , the entity would have to be certified by the applicable state authority or under a processrecognized or approved by such authority .

if the statehad not established a certification process , the entity would have to be certified either by the secretary of health andhuman services , under a process recognizedor approved by such secretary , or by a qualified private standard - setting organization .

the external appeal entitywould have to conduct its activities through apanel of not fewer than three clinical peers , and have sufficient medical , legal , and other expertise and sufficientstaffing to conduct its activities in a timelymanner .

the determination of the external appeal entity would have been made in accordance with the medical exigencies of the case , but not later than 21 days afterreceiving the request for external review .

where delay could seriously jeopardize the life or health of the claimant,a determination would have to be made within72 hours after receiving the request for external review .

the decision of the external appeal entity would have beenbinding on the plan and issuer involved in thedetermination .

please see the following crs issue briefs and reports for additional information .

crs issue brief ib98002 , medical records confidentiality .

crs issue brief ib98017 , patient protection and managed care: legislation in the 106thcongress .

crs issue brief ib98037 , tax benefits for health insurance .

crs report 97-643 , medical savings accounts .

crs report 98-286 , erisa's impact on medical malpractice and negligence claims .

crs report rl30077 ( pdf ) , managed care: recent proposals for new grievance and appealsprocedures .

crs report rl30144 , side by side comparison of selected patient protection bills in the106th congress .

crs report 97-482 , the use of financial incentives .

crs report 97-913 , a primer .

crs report 97-938 , federal and state regulation .

