social security is financed primarily by payroll and self - employment taxes , as well as by a portion of the proceeds from the income taxation of social security benefits .

the revenues are deposited in the u.s. treasury .

social security benefits and administrative expenses are also paid from the u.s. treasury .

by law , if social security revenues exceed expenditures , the "surplus" is credited to the social security trust funds in the form of u.s. government securities .

the money itself , however , is used to pay for whatever other expenses the government may have at the time .

there is no separate pool of money set aside for social security purposes .

that is not to say that the trust funds are ephemeral — as long as the trust funds show a positive balance , they represent the authority and an obligation for the u.s. treasury to issue benefit payments during periods when the program's expenditures exceed revenues .

at the end of calendar year 2013 , the trust funds were credited with holdings of $2.8 trillion .

section 201 of the social security act provides the following guidelines for trust fund investment .

1 .

funds not immediately in demand for benefits or administrative expenses are to be invested in interest - bearing obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the united states .

2 .

obligations are to be purchased at issue at the issue price or at the market price for outstanding obligations .

3 .

the managing trustee of the social security trust funds ( the secretary of the treasury ) is required to invest in special "nonmarketable" federal public - debt obligations — special issues to the trust funds that are not available to the general public — except where he or she determines that the purchase of marketable federal securities is "in the public interest. .

4 .

special issues shall have maturities fixed with due regard for the needs of the trust funds and will pay a rate of interest , calculated at the time of issue , equal to the average market yield on all marketable interest - bearing obligations of the united states that are not due or callable ( redeemable ) for at least four years .

5 .

marketable federal securities purchased by the trust funds may be sold at the market price and special issue obligations may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest ( without penalty for redemption before maturity ) .

the treasury department has determined that the purchase of marketable federal securities ( i.e. , public issues ) would be in the public interest only when it might serve to stabilize the market for treasury issues .

because an "unstable market" would be characterized by falling bond prices , purchases of marketable federal securities at these times would appear to be advantageous for the trust funds .

in practice , however , open market purchases have been rare .

although the trust funds have held public issues in the past , the trust funds currently hold special issues only .

the interest earned on these holdings is credited to the trust funds semiannually ( on june 30 and december 31 ) ; it is done by issuing additional federal securities to the trust funds .

in calendar year 2013 , net interest totaled $102.8 billion , representing 12% of total trust fund income .

the effective annual rate of interest earned on all obligations held by the trust funds in calendar year 2013 was 3.8% .

the interest rate earned on special issues purchased by the trust funds in august 2014 is 2.375% .

the maturity dates of newly issued special issues are set by a standardized procedure .

revenues are invested immediately in short - term issues called certificates of indebtedness , which mature on the next june 30 .

on june 30 of each year , certificates of indebtedness that have not been redeemed are reinvested in longer - term special issue bonds .

generally , the maturities of these bonds range from 1 to 15 years ; the goal is to have about one - fifteenth of them mature each year , depending on the needs of the trust funds .

while some critics have questioned whether the current investment policy has constrained the earnings of the trust funds , over the years various advisory councils , congressional committees , and other groups generally have endorsed it .

it has been justified as a way to ensure safety of principal and stability of interest , and as a way to avoid intrusion into private markets .

it also has been regarded as a way to avoid the political influences that would be inherent in investing outside the u.s. government .

generally , the goal espoused has been to place the trust funds in the same position as any long - term investor seeking a safe rate of return by investing in u.s. securities , and neither advantage nor disadvantage the trust funds relative to these investors or other parts of the government .

for most of the program's history , interest income to the trust funds has not been a major factor in program financing .

in recent years , however , the increasing role of interest income , as well as interest by some policy makers in preventing any surplus social security tax revenues from being used for other government spending purposes , have focused attention on alternative investment practices .

for example , there have been proposals to replace the special issues held by the trust funds with marketable federal securities , as well as proposals to allow any surplus social security tax revenues or a portion of trust fund reserves to be invested in assets other than u.s. government obligations , including equities .

