the united states is a member of five multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) : the world bank , african development bank ( afdb ) , asian development bank ( asdb ) , european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) , and inter - american development bank ( idb ) .

it also belongs to two similar organizations , the international fund for agricultural development ( ifad ) and the north american development bank ( nadbank ) .

the world bank also administers trust funds , focused on particular global issues such as food security and the environment .

the mdbs have similar programs , though they all differ somewhat in their institutional structure and emphasis .

each has a president and executive board that manages or supervises all of its programs and operations .

except for the ebrd , which makes only market - based loans , all the mdbs make both market - based loans to middle - income developing countries and concessional loans to the poorest countries .

their loans are made to governments or to organizations having government repayment guarantees .

in each mdb , the same staff prepares both the market - based and the concessional loans , using the same standards and procedures for both .

the main differences between them are the repayment terms and the countries which qualify for them .

the mdbs also have specialized facilities which have their own operating staff and management but report to the bank's president and executive board .

the world bank's international finance corporation ( ifc ) and the idb's inter - american investment corporation ( iic ) make loans to or equity investments in private - sector firms in developing countries ( on commercial terms ) without government repayment guarantees .

the asdb makes similar loans from its market - rate loan account .

the world bank's multilateral investment guarantee agency ( miga ) underwrites private investments in developing countries ( on commercial terms ) to protect against noneconomic risk .

at the idb , the multilateral investment fund ( mif ) helps latin american countries institute policy reforms aimed at stimulating domestic and international investment .

it also funds worker retraining and programs for small and micro - enterprises .

the mif originated as part of president bush's 1990 enterprise for the americas initiative ( eai ) .

the nadbank was created by the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) to fund environmental infrastructure projects in the u.s. - mexico border region .

the international fund for agricultural development ( ifad ) , created in 1977 , focuses on reducing poverty and hunger in poor countries through agricultural development .

finally , the world bank also serves as the trustee for several targeted multilateral development funds , for which the administration has requested and congress has appropriated funds .

these multilateral funds include the clean technology fund ( ctf ) , the strategic climate fund ( scf ) , the global environment facility ( gef ) , and the global agriculture and food security program ( gafsp ) .

the mdbs' concessional aid programs are funded with money donated by their wealthier member country governments .

periodically , as the stock of uncommitted mdb funds begins to run low , the major donors negotiate a new funding plan that specifies their new contribution shares .

loans from the mdbs' market - rate loan facilities are funded with money borrowed in world capital markets .

the ifc and iic fund their loans and equity investments partly with money contributed by their members and partly with funds borrowed from commercial capital markets .

the mdbs' borrowings are backed by the subscriptions of their member countries .

they provide a small part of their capital subscriptions ( 3% to 5% of the total for most mdbs ) in the form of paid - in capital .

the rest they subscribe as callable capital .

callable capital is a contingent liability , payable only if an mdb becomes bankrupt and lacks sufficient funds to repay its own creditors .

it cannot be called to provide the banks with additional loan funds .

countries' voting shares are determined mainly by the size of their contributions .

the united states is the largest stockholder in most mdbs , and has maintained this position to preserve veto power in some institutions over major policy decisions .

 figure 1 , figure 2 , and tables 1-4 show the amounts the administration has requested and congress has appropriated annually since fy2000 to the multilateral development banks .

note that the figures and tables do not include callable capital .

since the early 1980s , congress has authorized but not appropriated callable capital .

as figure 1 illustrates , appropriations to the mdbs increased dramatically starting in 2009 , from $1.28 billion in 2008 to a peak of $2.67 billion in fy2014 .

the uptick was driven largely by capital increases for the nonconcessional lending facilities at the mdbs in response to the global financial crisis , as well as the proliferation of trust funds administered by the world bank focused on specific policy issues .

as these commitments have been met , particularly in funding the capital increases at the mdbs , overall funding levels started declining .

appropriations have declined over the past three fiscal years to $1.52 billion in fy2018 .

president trump campaigned on an "america first" platform and has signaled a reorientation of u.s. foreign policy .

in march 2017 , the trump administration proposed cutting $650 million over three years compared to the commitments made under the obama administration .

for fy2019 , the trump administration requested $1.42 billion for the mdbs , a 16% cut from the amount appropriated in fy2017 .

the bulk of the request — $1.32 billion , about 90% — would fund u.s. commitments to concessional lending facilities at the mdbs , particularly ida .

the request also includes funding toward the capital increase at the afdb , multilateral trust funds focused on environmental issues , and international food security programs .

