according to the national institute on deafness and other communication disorders , exposure to loud sounds is responsible for hearing impairment in 10 million of the nearly 30 million people with hearing loss in the united states , and another 30 million people are daily exposed to dangerous noise levels .

many individuals are also regularly exposed to sound levels that may not lead to hearing loss , but can be intrusive and impair one's quality of life .

several federal laws require the federal government to maintain standards for various sources of noise .

however , the standards do vary in stringency among individual sources .

although there is some variance among the standards , all of them limit sound levels at least to a degree that would prevent human hearing loss .

the responsibility for setting and enforcing noise control standards is divided among multiple federal agencies .

in the past , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) coordinated all federal noise control activities through its office of noise abatement and control .

however , congress phased out the office's funding in fy1983 as part of a shift in federal noise control policy to transfer the primary responsibility for regulating noise to state and local governments .

although epa no longer plays a prominent role in regulating noise , its past standards and regulations remain in effect , and other federal agencies continue to set and enforce noise standards for sources within their regulatory jurisdiction .

public interest in the federal regulation of noise and the adequacy of existing standards continues to be strong , especially among communities where sources of noise have proliferated , and as residential development has resulted in people living closer to sources of noise .

considering that existing standards generally are protective against hearing loss , the primary concern among the public has been whether the standards should be tightened to protect the quality of life in communities where sound levels may be perceived as annoying or intrusive , but not necessarily harmful to human hearing .

potential effects of various sound levels , and the roles of federal , state , and local governments in regulating individual sources of noise , are discussed below .

sound is measured in units of decibels ( dba ) , and an increase of 10 dba represents sounds that are perceived to be twice as loud .

there is broad consensus among regulators in the united states that constant or repeated exposure to sound levels in the vicinity of 90 dba and higher can lead to hearing loss .

exposure to sounds significantly below these levels are generally not considered harmful to human hearing .

however , most individuals perceive unwanted sound above 65 dba to be intrusive , which can impair one's quality of life , depending on the sensitivity of the individual and the frequency and duration of exposure .

some also argue that persistent exposure to intrusive sound may have certain physiological effects , such as headaches or nausea , even though one's hearing ability may not be impaired .

there also have been some questions about the vibration - induced effects of low frequency sound , which can be felt but not heard .

the noise control act of 1972 ( p.l .

92-574 ) and several other federal laws require the federal government to set and enforce noise standards for aircraft and airports , interstate motor carriers and railroads , workplace activities , engines and certain types of equipment , federally funded highway projects , and federally funded housing projects .

the noise control act also requires federal agencies to comply with all federal , state , and local noise requirements .

various federal laws and regulations governing the administration of park and recreational lands owned by the federal government also provide authorities for agencies to regulate noise that would be generated from human activities on , and in the vicinity of , these lands .

most federal noise standards focus on preventing hearing loss by limiting exposure to sounds of 90 dba and higher .

some federal standards are stricter and focus on limiting exposure to lower levels of around 65 dba to protect quality of life .

whether "quality - of - life" standards should be tightened has been an ongoing issue , particularly among communities located near transportation sources such as airports and highways , where exposure to noise is a daily or routine occurrence .

as noted above , there also have been some questions about the effects of low frequency sound , but so far , noise standards in the united states have not regulated low frequency sound below the threshold of human hearing .

major existing federal standards that regulate human exposure to noise , and the agencies responsible for setting and enforcing them , are discussed below .

the federal role in regulating noise is primarily limited to transportation , workplace activities , certain types of equipment , and human activities on public lands owned by the federal government .

state and local governments determine the extent to which other sources of noise are controlled , and regulations for such sources can vary widely among localities .

further , some states do not directly regulate noise , but allow local governments to play the primary role .

sources of noise commonly regulated at the state and local level include commercial , industrial , and residential activities .

regulations for such sources typically control the public's exposure to noise by limiting certain activities to specific times , such as construction noise only during business hours .

public concern about differing state and local control of noise has led some to suggest that the federal role should be expanded to regulate a greater variety of sources uniformly across the country .

