rs20522 - - army aviation: the rah - 66 comanche helicopter issue updated july 2 , 200 .

the rah - 66 comanche is a next generation armed reconnaissance helicopter .

it is the first helicopter designed anddeveloped specifically for this mission .

the comanche is being designed to stealthily penetrate enemy airspace andconductreconnaissance .

it is to incorporate advanced computers and communications to play a leading role in the digital,networkcentric battlespace , with enough weaponry to engage a wide range of targets .

some call the comanche the world'smostsophisticated combat helicopter , with more lines of software code than even the f / a - 22 raptor .

 ( 2 ) the comanche's primaryroles would be to seek out enemy forces and designate targets for the ah - 64 apache attack helicopter at night , inadverseweather , and in battlefields obscured by smoke and dust. .

originally , the army envisioned developing and procuring 5,023 comanches to replace the army's 1960s - era observation,utility transport , and attack helicopters ( oh - 6 , oh - 58 , uh - 1 , ah - 1 ) .

budget constraints and force structuremodificationscaused significant modifications to the comanche program .

first , the utility transport version of the platform wascanceledand the procurement objective reduced to 1,292 armed reconnaissance helicopters .

second , the fy1993 budgetdeferred aproduction decision until 2006 and trimmed the number of prototypes from six to three .

third , in december 1994dodtrimmed $2 billion from the rah - 66 program and dropped another prototype , going from three to two .

fourth , in1995 , thearmy restructured the program to add 6 "experimental operational capability" helicopters within the reduced budgetlimits,in part by producing them without the armaments suite .

in april 2000 the comanche program successfully completed a series of tests and was cleared to begin its two - year , $3.1billion engineering and manufacturing development phase ( 3 ) .

boeing - sikorsy has built and flown two comancheprototypes .

the first pre - production model , and the third comanche is being built and is expected to be flown firstin march2005 .

 ( 4 ) the last plan was for five pre - productionaircraft to be built in this phase and eight production aircraft were due fordelivery by 2004 for initial operational testing and evaluation .

a total of 14 initial operational capability rah - 66swasplanned for delivery at the end of 2006 ( 5 ) and 1,213comanches were to have been produced through 2024 .

on october 21,2002 it was announced that former dod acquisition chief pete aldridge had signed an acquisition decisionmemorandum ( adm ) giving final approval for the latest restructuring of the rah - 66 program .

under this new plan , the totalpurchase ofcomanches would be reduced from 1,213 to 650 aircraft .

seventy three aircraft will be produced during low rateinitialproduction ( lrip ) in different blocks .

nine emd aircraft , which will most likely be used as trainers , will be builtanddelivered by 2006 .

the comanche's initial operating capability ( ioc ) will be achieved in september 2009 , threeyearslater than originally planned , and nine months after the most recent plan .

the remaining 577 aircraft will beproduced undera full rate production schedule of 60 aircraft per year , starting in 2011 .

the army had wanted to boost the productionrate to96 aircraft per year as part of an effort to cut costs .

 ( 6 ) this restructuring reduces the comanche's production phase from $39.3 billion to an estimated $26.9 billion .

dod hasagreed to add $3.7 billion to the helicopter's $3.2 billion full - scale development program .

army officials estimatethat thecost of each comanche , adjusted for inflation , will increase by 33 percent - to $32.3 million ( 7 ) much of the program's problems have been due to the amount of systems that have been developed concurrently .

forexample , the radar , armor , and navigation and communication systems were all being developed at the same time .

 ( 8 ) thelatest restructuring will reduce this concurrence by delaying the fielding of certain capabilities - the radar system,a highlevel of control of uavs , full air - to - air engagement with the turreted gun system , link 16 datalink , and satellitecommunications - to later blocks .

 ( 9 ) the program was also restructured to field a companion uav for the comanche , which will be developed with fundsintended to upgrade comanche itself .

more sophisticated sensors and a better power drive system will be sacrificedin lieuof the uav development .

comanche officials estimate that about $644 million between fiscal years 2004 and 2009will bespent on the comanche's uav instead of the platform itself .

 ( 10 ) the army has experimented with teaming uavs and bothapache and comanche for several years , including work with the rq - 5a hunter .

 ( 11 ) it is currently unclear whether thecomanche's companion will be an operational uav , one currently in development , or one developed specificallyfor thejob .

if there are no further changes , comanche prime contractors boeing and sikorsky would build helicopters through 2019. .

 ( 12 ) however , the final word on comanche numbers has not been spoken .

some note that while dod originally plannedtoprocure approximately 1,100 h - 60 helicopters , over 2,500 have been procured to date .

 ( 13 ) army officials claim that 650aircraft are too few , and that they require 819 comanches to effectively equip their objective force which is hopedto beready by 2008 .

plans call for fielding detachments of 12 comanche aircraft to the objective force brigade - strength'units ofaction,' accompanied by eight uavs. .

 ( 14 ) in may 2002 , dod's inspector general ( ig ) reviewed the restructured comanche program .

the ig report called therestructuring a constructive approach to reducing risk and improving the program .

however , the ig cautioned thatcontinued emphasis is required to ensure that integration problems do not emerge in the future that could result inincreasedcost and schedule .

 ( 15 ) .

the rah - 66 comanche is designed to replace the aging ah - 1 and oh - 58d helicopters and to augment the ah - 64 apacheattack helicopter .

critics of the comanche program argue that there is no need for a highly sophisticated , very lowobservable armed reconnaissance helicopter in today's threat environment .

they contend that comanche'scapabilities and mission requirements were developed in response to a cold war threat environment that no longer exists .

criticsalso arguethat the comanche's role and capabilities are too similar to the apache's to justify the costs of the helicopter'sdevelopmentand production .

they would cancel the rah - 66 , and use the savings to upgrade the oh - 58 aircraft and the ah - 64dapache's longbow ( 16 ) target acquisitioncapabilities .

others say that comanche's reduced radar signature will do little tomake it more survivable than current helicopters .

they note that in iraq , army and marine corps helicopters wereshotdown or damaged by ir - guided missiles , rocket - propelled grenades , and small arms fire , none of which use radarsfortargeting .

proponents of the rah - 66 agree that the cold war threat has disappeared , but counter that today's low - intensity regionalconflicts ( such as kosovo and somalia ) place even greater burdens on army aviation .

u.s .

forces must be moredeployable , less reliant on forward bases , and more versatile than they were during the cold war .

supporters arguethatcomanche satisfies all three criteria .

furthermore , proponents argue that comanche makes the whole force moreeffectiveand will reduce the army's maintenance burden .

this perspective , proponents argue , is supported by initial resultsfrom anarmy "analysis of alternatives. .

this study compared attack and air cavalry squadrons equipped with ah - 64dlongbowsand oh - 58d kiowa warriors to units composed of apaches and comanches .

the force equipped with comanchesreportedly demonstrated better situational awareness , survivability and lethality than the other force .

the comancheprovided better sensing , lethality , range , agility , survivability , and versatility than the kiowa units .

comanche alsoimproved the effectiveness of the longbow when the two aircraft were mixed in attack units .

the rah - 66's stealthimproved apache longbow's survivability when cooperative tactics , techniques and procedures were used .

 ( 17 ) claims of reduced maintenance burdens for the comanche , however , are more controversial than are claims of itseffectiveness ( 18 ) .

projected ratios of maintenanceman - hours to flight hours have varied over time .

the army hopes toachieve a ratio of 2.6 hours of maintenance to every one hour of flight ; however , both the general accounting officeandcongressional budget office assert that projected reductions in maintenance are always optimistic .

 ( 19 ) additionally , somestudies conclude that the comanche is more expensive to fly than the kiowa warrior ( $2,042 / hour vs $1,598 / hour ) ,butless expensive than the ah - 64d , which can cost as much as $3,622 / hour to fly .

 ( 20 ) the comanche's role vis - a - vis the apache is a continued point of debate .

the most recent reduction in the comancheprogram has increased the prominence of the ah - 64 apache .

to compensate for fewer comanches , the army isconsidering improvements to apache , such as a life - extension program or upgrades .

another option may be toprocure more longbow models .

 ( 21 ) some suggest that the dabdecision reaffirms the apache's place as the army's attack aircraft , andquestion whether comanche should pursue features such as the external fuel , armaments and munitions system,or anair - to - air missile capability .

 ( 22 ) another issue is whether the army will upgrade comanche for 'heavy' attack requirements .

in november 2001 , armyofficials said they were planning on a heavy variant of the rah - 66 as a replacement for the ah - 64d .

as part ofarmytransformation plan , army officials said that the comanche could perform the attack as well as the armedreconnaissancemission in the future .

 ( 23 ) it is unclear whether therah - 66 could maintain its stealthy profile while carrying externalweapons , however , and some questions whether comanche - which currently suffers from weight problems - hasthepower and fuel capacity to take on even more weight .

 ( 24 ) the marine corps is expected to seek a replacement for its ah - 1zsuper cobra helicopters around 2020 and it has been suggested that a joint program with the army is worthinvestigating .

 ( 25 ) .

congress strongly supported the comanche program by consistently meeting or exceeding dod's budget requests forfunding .

in its report on dod's fy1996 budget request , the house armed services committee reproached both thearmyand the dod for tepid commitment to the program , urging that it be given a higher funding priority and thatfull - scaleproduction by 2004 be guaranteed .

 ( 26 ) summary of recent comanche r&d funding in $ millions in their reports ( h.rept .

108-106 , h.r .

1588 ; and s.rept .

108-46 , s. 1050 ) , house and senate authorizers respectively matched the administration's request for fy04 comanche funding .

in light of the facts and arguments presented above , congress may wish to pursue the following lines of inquiry: comanche is the army's only major aviation development program .

the comanche operational requirementsdocument describes the rah - 66's contribution to future army warfighting missions .

it states that "aviationcapabilitiesadd increased deployability , versatility , lethality , flexibility , mobility , extended coverage and sustainment tomaneuver,fire support , air defense..."and other mission areas .

if the comanche buy is reduced , what effect will this have onlong - term capabilities ? .

how much does comanche contribute to combat power vis - a - vis the light armored vehiclesthatthe also army wants ? .

$6.8 billion has been spent on the comanche through fy03 .

 ( 27 ) will a purchase of 650 helicopters be a sufficient returnon this r&d investment ? .

some say that in recent conflicts , fixed wing aircraft have played a more prominent role , than army attackhelicopters.might improved versions of the ac - 130 and a - 10 , or the stovl variant of the joint strike fighter , be moreeffectiveproviders of close air support to army ground forces than the rah - 66 ? .

the need for comanche has been challenged on the basis that its capabilities do not differentiate it sufficientlyfromapache to merit its development .

however , turning this argument around , some would assert that the comancheiswell - suited to be the apache's replacement as the army's premier attack helicopter and the army's best platformforfuture growth and development in this area .

subsequently , one could anticipate a helicopter force structurecomposedsolely of heavy lift ( ch - 47 ) , battlefield utility ( uh - 60 ) , and scout / attack ( rah - 66 ) aircraft .

what are the merits ofthisforce structure ? .

consideration of export issues is part and parcel of any military program .

how much might comanche exportscontributeto sustaining the aviation industrial base and balancing u.s. trade ? .

as a new platform , and one less overtly designedforattack than the apache , might the comanche be offered for export to a larger number of countries than the ah - 64 ? conversely , due to its low observable features might comanche exports need to be limited to our closest allies ? .

1 .

 ( back ) this report supercedes crs report 96-525 f , army aviation: rah - 66 comanche , by steven r. bowman .

washington,1996 ( archived ) .

2 .

 ( back ) vernon loeb .

"fate of army chopper onthe block. .

washington post .

august 31 , 2002. p.2 .

3 .

 ( back ) "comanche cleared to begin engineeringand manufacturing development. .

defense daily .

april 6 , 2000 .

4 .

 ( back ) kent faulk .

"comanche helicopter onlast chance to fly. .

birmingham news .

july 1 , 2002 .

5 .

 ( back ) telephone conversation with jacksatterfield , boeing spokesman ; capaccio , tony , u.s. army to make decision onhelicopter purchases in april , bloomberg news service , march 2 , 2000 .

6 .

 ( back ) neil baumgardner .

"aldridge inkscomanche acquisition decision memorandum , numbers cut to 650. .

defense daily .

october 21 , 2002 .

7 .

 ( back ) tony capaccio .

"boeing , utx seepositive impact in comanche cut. .

bloomberg.com .

october 23 , 2002 .

8 .

 ( back ) neil baumgardner .

"army ready to moveforward with comanche , program manager says. .

defense daily .

february28 , 2002 .

9 .

 ( back ) baumgardner .

opcit .

"aldridge inks comanche acquisition decision memorandum. .

10 .

 ( back ) erin winograd .

"army leadersadamant that 650 comanches won't meet requirements. .

inside the army .

october28 , 2002. p.10 .

11 .

 ( back ) kim burger .

"ausa - army eyesapache to fill comanche gap. .

jane's defense weekly .

october 30 , 2002 .

12 .

 ( back ) robert wall .

"new comanche plangets green light. .

aviation week & space technology .

october 28 , 2002 .

13 .

 ( back ) ron laurenzo .

"comanche's lookingup , but now comes the crunch. .

defense week .

june 2 , 2003 .

14 .

 ( back ) burger .

opcit "ausa - army eyes apache to fill comanche gap. .

15 .

 ( back ) james asker .

"pentagon inspector:latest comanche development plan reduces program risk. .

aviation week &space technology .

may 19 , 2003 .

16 .

 ( back ) the ah - 64d longbow is an upgradedversion of the ah - 64a which includes a millimeter - wave fire control radartarget acquisition system and fire - and - forget hellfire missiles .

17 .

 ( back ) erin winograd .

"initial results ofalternatives analysis show rah - 66 contributions. .

inside the army .

january 24,2000 .

18 .

 ( back ) claims of improved maintenancerequirements are based on projections of advanced processes and technologies whichwon't be proven until the aircraft is fielded .

in general , more technologically sophisticated weapon systems are moredifficult to maintain than less sophisticated weapon systems .

19 .

 ( back ) crs report 96-525 , armyaviation: rah - 66 comanche .

p. 3-4 .

20 .

 ( back ) winograd opcit .

"initialresults of alternatives analysis show rah - 66 contributions. .

21 .

 ( back ) burger .

opcit .

"ausa - army eyes apache to fill comanche gap. .

22 .

 ( back ) winograd .

opcit .

"armyleaders adamant that 650 comanches won't meet requirements. .

23 .

 ( back ) neil baumgardner .

heavy comancheto replace apache , army officials say .

defense daily .

november 13 , 2001 .

24 .

 ( back ) tony capaccio .

boeing , united techcomanche copter's cost , weight hit by gao .

bloomberg.com .

may 18 , 2001 .

25 .

 ( back ) kim burger .

"us army cutscomanche buy. .

jane's defense weekly .

october 16 , 2002. p.3 .

26 .

 ( back ) u.s. congress .

house ofrepresentatives .

committee on national security , national defense authorization act forfiscal year 1996 , 104th cong. , 1st sess. , h.r .

104-131 , june 1 , 1995 .

p.91 .

27 .

 ( back ) selected acquisition report ( sar ) summary tables .

 ( as of june 30 , 2002 ) department of defense , ousd ( a&t ) ,systems acquisition .

http: / / www.acq.osd.mil / ara / am / sar / index.html .

