as noted , hi and smi are financed very differently .

hi is funded by current workers through a payroll tax , while smi is funded by premiums from current beneficiaries and federal general revenues .

because of this financing , the smi trust fund's income is projected to equal expenditures for all future years .

historically , therefore , the major focus of concern was the hi fund .

more recently attention has also turned to the rapid increase in smi costs , which have been growing significantly faster than gdp .

for a number of years , the trustees have been emphasizing the importance of considering the program as a whole and the fact that the projected increases are unsustainable over time .

to further emphasize this point , in 2002 they began issuing a single report covering the entire program .

the enactment of mma made the consideration of the future of the total program more critical .

the legislation increased spending under parts a , b , and c. in addition , it added a new prescription drug benefit under part d ; spending for this benefit is recorded as a separate account in the smi trust fund .

the trustees note that these changes have important implications .

in 2005 , total medicare expenditures represented 2.73% of gdp .

in 2006 ( the first year of the new drug benefit ) , total expenditures were 3.11% of gdp .

the percentage is expected to increase to 7.23% by 2035 and to 11.18% by 2080 .

the trustees note that over the past 50 years , total federal tax receipts have averaged 11% of gdp .

they further note that projected medicare costs will exceed those for social security by 2028 , and be more than double the cost of social security by 2083 .

there is concern that over time the economy will be unable to support the increasing reliance on general revenues which in large measure comes from taxes paid by the under - 65 population .

in response , mma ( section 801 ) required the trustees report to include an expanded analysis of medicare expenditures and revenues .

specifically , a determination must be made as to whether general revenue financing will exceed 45% of total medicare outlays within the next seven years ( on a fiscal year basis ) .

general revenues financing is defined as total medicare outlays minus dedicated financing sources ( i.e. , hi payroll taxes ; income from taxation of social security benefits ; state transfers for prescription drug benefits ; premiums paid under parts a , b , and d ; and any gifts received by the trust funds ) .

the 2006 report projected that the 45% level would first be exceeded in fy2012 ; the 2007 report projected that it would first be exceeded in 2013 , while both the 2008 and 2009 reports project the first year at 2014 .

the four findings were within the required seven - year test period .

the reports , therefore , made a determination of "excess general revenue medicare funding. .

mma ( sections 802-804 ) requires that if an excess general revenue funding determination is made for two successive years , the president must submit a legislative proposal to respond to the warning .

the congress is required to consider the proposals on an expedited basis .

however , passage of legislation within a specific time frame is not required .

on january 6 , 2009 , the house approved a rules package ( h.res .

5 ) that nullifies the trigger provision for the 111 th congress .

because the medicare trustees issued such a warning in 2008 , the mma required that the president submit legislation to congress responding to the warning within the 15-day period , beginning on the date of the budget submission to congress this year .

however , the president considers this requirement to be advisory and not binding , in accordance with the recommendations clause of the constitution .

the president's 2010 budget includes proposals that if enacted would bring the share of medicare funded by general revenues below 45% ( estimated medicare savings are $92.3 billion over the five - year budget period , $287.5 billion over the 10-year budget period , and about $49.9 billion in 2014 ) .

the budget requests that these savings be set aside in a reserve fund for health care reform .

finally , the president's budget asserts that there are more significant ways to measure the health of the medicare program than the warning , such as the overall financial burden of the program on the u.s. economy , the number of workers for each medicare beneficiary , and / or medicare spending as a percentage of gdp .

the financial outlook for the hi trust fund , and for medicare as a whole , continues to raise serious concerns .

there are no simple solutions to address the problems raised by the aging of the population , the downturn in the economy , and the rapid growth in health care costs .

trustees and many other observers continue to warn that the magnitude of the impending deficit and the expanding drain on the federal budget need to be addressed .

even in the short run , correcting the financial imbalance in the hi trust fund will require substantial changes to program income and / or expenses .

at the same time , observers express concern about the impact of any solution on quality of care and on beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs .

it seems likely that in the short term , congress will focus its attention on specific medicare issues — for example , payment updates for certain types of providers .

it may also consider medicare spending reductions as part of broader health reform legislation or as part of legislation ( such as budget reconciliation ) designed to reduce overall federal spending .

