sanctions have been a significant component of u.s. iran policy since iran's 1979 islamic revolution that toppled the shah of iran , a u.s. ally .

in the 1980s and 1990s , u.s. sanctions were intended to try to compel iran to cease supporting acts of terrorism and to limit iran's strategic power in the middle east more generally .

after the mid - 2000s , u.s. and international sanctions focused largely on ensuring that iran's nuclear program is for purely civilian uses .

during 2010-2015 , the international community cooperated closely with a u.s. - led and u.n. - authorized sanctions regime in pursuit of the goal of persuading iran to agree to limits to its nuclear program .

still , sanctions against iran have multiple objectives and address multiple perceived threats from iran simultaneously .

this report analyzes u.s. and international sanctions against iran .

crs has no way to independently corroborate whether any individual or other entity might be in violation of u.s. or international sanctions against iran .

the report tracks "implementation" of the various u.s. laws and executive orders as designations and imposition of sanctions .

some sanctions require the blocking of u.s. - based property of sanctioned entities .

crs has not obtained information from the executive branch indicating that such property has been blocked , and it is possible that sanctioned entities do not have any u.s. assets that could be blocked .

the sections below are grouped by function , in the chronological order in which these themes have emerged .

most of the hostage crisis - related sanctions were lifted upon resolution of the crisis in 1981 .

the united states began imposing sanctions against iran again in the mid - 1980s for its support for regional groups committing acts of terrorism .

the secretary of state designated iran a "state sponsor of terrorism" on january 23 , 1984 , following the october 23 , 1983 , bombing of the u.s. marine barracks in lebanon by elements that established lebanese hezbollah .

this designation triggers substantial sanctions on any nation so designated .

none of the laws or executive orders in this section were waived or revoked to implement the jcpoa .

no entities discussed in this section were "delisted" from sanctions under t he jcpoa .

successive administrations have expanded sanctions , primarily by executive order , on several significant nonoil industries and sectors of iran's economy .

the targeted sectors include iran's automotive production sector , which is iran's second - largest industry ( after energy ) , and its mineral exports , which account for about 10% of iran's export earnings .

u.s. efforts to shut iran out of the international banking system were a key component of the 2010-2016 international sanctions regime .

some u.s. laws require or call for divestment of shares of firms that conduct certain transactions with iran .

a divestment - promotion provision was contained in cisada , providing a "safe harbor" for investment managers who sell shares of firms that invest in iran's energy sector at levels that would trigger u.s. sanctions under the iran sanctions act .

as noted above , section 219 of the itrshra of 2012 requires companies to reports to the securities and exchange commission whether they or any corporate affiliate has engaged in any transactions with iran that could trigger sanctions under isa , cisada , and e.o 13382 and 13224 .

implementation : numerous states have adopted laws , regulations , and policies to divest from — or avoid state government business with — foreign companies that conduct certain transactions with iran .

the jcpoa requires the united states to work with state and local governments to ensure that state - level sanctions do not conflict with the sanctions relief provided by the federal government under the jcpoa .

most states that have adopted iran sanctions continue to enforce those measures .

u.n. sanctions on iran , enacted by the security council under article 41 of chapter vii of the u.n. charter , applied to all u.n. member states .

during 2006-2008 , three u.n. security council resolutions — 1737 , 1747 , and 1803 — imposed sanctions on iran's nuclear program and weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) infrastructure .

resolution 1929 , adopted on june 9 , 2010 , was key for its assertion that major sectors of the iranian economy support iran's nuclear program — giving u.n. member states authorization to sanction civilian sectors of iran's economy .

it also imposed strict limitations on iran's development of ballistic missiles and imports and exports of arms .

the following sections discuss sanctions relief provided under the november 2013 interim nuclear agreement ( jpa ) and , particularly , the jcpoa .

later sections discuss the degree to which iran is receiving the expected benefits of sanctions relief .

during 2010-2016 , converging international views on iran produced global consensus to pressure iran through sanctions .

in addition to asserting that the international community needed to ensure that iran did not develop a nuclear weapon , some countries joined the sanctions regime to head off unwanted u.s. or other military action against iran .

some countries cooperated in order to preserve their close relationships with the united states .

this section assesses international cooperation and compliance with u.s. sanctions , and cooperation with u.s. sanctions reimposed as a consequence of the may 8 , 2018 , u.s. exit from the jcpoa .

all the jcpoa parties publicly opposed the u.s. decision to exit the jcpoa and have sought to stay engaged in the iran market in order to continue to provide the jcpoa's economic benefits to iran .

a comparison between u.s. , u.n. , and eu sanctions against iran is contained in table a - 1 below .

broader issues of iran's relations with the countries discussed in this section can be found in crs report r44017 , iran's foreign and defense policies , by kenneth katzman .

it can be argued that the question "are sanctions on iran 'working' ? .

should be assessed based on an analysis of the goals of the sanctions .

the following sections try to assess the effectiveness of iran sanctions according to a number of criteria .

jcpoa oversight and implications , and broader issues of iran's behavior have been the subject of legislation .

the jcpoa states that as long as iran fully complies with the jcpoa , the sanctions that were suspended or lifted shall not be reimposed on other bases ( such as terrorism or human rights ) .

the obama administration stated that it would adhere to that provision but that some new sanctions that seek to limit iran's military power , its human rights abuses , or its support for militant groups might not necessarily violate the jcpoa .

the iran nuclear agreement review act of 2015 ( inara , p.l .

114-17 ) provided for a 30- or 60-day congressional review period after which congress could pass legislation to approve or to disapprove of the jcpoa , or do nothing .

no such legislation of disapproval was enacted .

there are several certification and reporting requirements under inara , although most of them clearly no longer apply as a result of the trump administration withdrawal: material breach report .

the president must report a potentially significant iranian breach of the agreement within 10 days of acquiring credible information of such .

within another 30 days , the president must determine whether this is a material breach and whether iran has cured the breach .

certification report .

the president is required to certify , every 90 days , that iran is "transparently , verifiably , and fully implementing" the agreement , and that iran has not taken any action to advance a nuclear weapons program .

the latest certification was submitted on july 17 , 2017 , and another one was due on october 15 , 2017 .

on october 13 , 2017 , the administration declined to make that certification , on the grounds that continued sanctions relief is not appropriate and proportionate to iran's measures to terminate its illicit nuclear program ( section ( d ) ( 6 ) ( iv ) ( i ) of inara ) .

if a breach is reported , or if the president does not certify compliance , congress may initiate within 60 days "expedited consideration" of legislation that would reimpose any iran sanctions that the president had suspended through use of waiver or other authority .

that 60-day period is to expire on december 12 , 2017 .

semiannual report .

inara also requires an administration report every 180 days on iran's nuclear program , including not only iran's compliance with its nuclear commitments but also whether iranian banks are involved in terrorism financing ; iran's ballistic missile advances ; and whether iran continues to support terrorism .

the fy2016 consolidated appropriation ( p.l .

114-113 ) contained a provision amending the visa waiver program to require a visa to visit the united states for any person who has visited iraq , syria , or any terrorism list country ( iran and sudan are the two aside from syria still listed ) in the previous five years .

iran argued that the provision represented a violation of at least the spirit of the jcpoa by potentially deterring european businessmen from visiting iran .

the obama administration issued a letter to iran stating it would implement the provision in such a way as not to not impinge on sanctions relief , and allowances for iranian students studying in the united states were made in the implementing regulations .

another provision of that law requires an administration report to congress on how iran has used the benefits of sanctions relief .

president trump has issued and amended executive orders that , in general , prohibit iranian citizens ( as well as citizens from several other countries ) from entering the united states .

this marked a significant additional restriction beyond the fy2016 consolidated appropriation .

the 114 th congress acted to prevent isa from expiring in its entirety on december 31 , 2016 .

the iran sanctions extension act ( h.r .

6297 ) , which extended isa until december 31 , 2026 , without any other changes , passed the house on november 15 by a vote of 419-1 and then passed the senate by 99-0 .

president obama allowed the bill to become law without signing it ( p.l .

114-277 ) , even though the administration considered it unnecessary because the president retains ample authority to reimpose sanctions on iran .

iranian leaders called the extension a breach of the jcpoa , but the jcpoa's "joint commission" did not determine it breached the jcpoa .

the conference report on the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

114-328 ) contained a provision ( section 1226 ) requiring a quarterly report to congress on iran's missile launches the imposition of u.s. sanctions with respect to iran's ballistic missile launches until december 31 , 2019 .

the conference report on the fy2018 ndaa ( p.l .

115-91 ) extended that reporting requirement until december 31 , 2022 .

the report is to include efforts to sanction entities or individuals that assist those missile launches .

the iran policy oversight act ( s. 2119 ) and the iran terror finance transparency act ( h.r .

3662 ) contained a provision that would have added certification requirements for the administration to remove designations of iranian entities sanctioned .

the house passed the latter bill but then vacated its vote .

the irgc terrorist designation act ( h.r .

3646 / s. 2094 ) would have required a report on whether the irgc meets the criteria for designation as a foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) .

the obama administration argued that the law that set up the fto designations ( section 219 of the immigration and nationality act [8 u.s.c .

1189] ) applies such designations only to groups , rather than armed forces of a nation - state ( which the irgc is ) .

the prohibiting assistance to nuclear iran act ( h.r .

3273 ) would have prohibited the use of u.s. funds to provide technical assistance to iran's nuclear program .

the provision appeared to conflict with the provision of the jcpoa that calls on the p5+1 to engage in peaceful nuclear cooperation with iran ( paragraph 32 ) .

the justice for victims of iranian terrorism act ( h.r .

3457 / s. 2086 ) would have prohibited the president from waiving u.s. sanctions until iran completed paying judgments issued for victims of iranian or iran - backed acts of terrorism .

the house passed it on october 1 , 2015 , by a vote of 251-173 , despite obama administration assertions that the bill would contradict the jcpoa .

h.r .

3728 would have amended itrshra to make mandatory ( rather than voluntary ) sanctions against electronic payments systems such as swift if they were allowed to be used by iran .

the irgc sanctions act ( h.r .

4257 ) would have required congressional action to approve an administration request to remove a country from the terrorism list and would have required certification that any entity to be "delisted" from sanctions is not a member , agent , affiliate , or owned by the irgc .

the iran ballistic missile sanctions act of 2016 ( s. 2725 ) would have required that specified sectors of iran's economy ( automotive , chemical , computer science , construction , electronic , energy metallurgy , mining , petrochemical , research , and telecommunications ) be subject to u.s. sanctions , if those sectors were determined to provide support for iran's ballistic missile program .

a similar bill , h.r .

5631 , the iran accountability act , which passed the house on july 14 , 2016 , by a vote of 246-179 , would have removed some waiver authority for certain provisions of several iran sanctions laws and required sanctions on sectors of iran's civilian economy determined to have supported iran's ballistic missile program .

the latter provision , as did s.2725 , appeared to contradict the jcpoa .

in the 115 th congress , s. 15 and key sections of s. 227 and h.r .

808 ( iran nonnuclear sanctions act of 2017 ) mirror s. 2725 .

h.r .

4992 , which passed the house on july 14 , 2016 , by a vote of 246-181 , and the related countering iranian threats act of 2016 ( s. 3267 ) , would have , among their central provisions , required foreign banks and dollar clearinghouses to receive a u.s. license for any dollar transactions involving iran .

the obama administration opposed the bill as a violation of the jcpoa .

h.r .

5119 , which passed the house by a vote of 249-176 , would have prohibited the u.s. government from buying additional heavy water from iran and appeared intended to block additional u.s. purchases similar to one in april 2016 in which the united states bought 32 metric tons from iran at a cost of about $8.6 million .

several bills and amendments in the 114 th congress sought to block or impede the sale of the boeing aircraft to iran by preventing the licensing , financing , or ex - im bank loan guarantees for the sale .

these included h.r .

5715 , h.r .

5711 , and several amendments to the house version of the fy2017 financial services and general government appropriations act ( h.r .

5485 ) .

that act passed the house on july 7 , 2016 , by a vote of 239-185 , and h.r .

5711 passed by the house on november 17 , 2016 , by a vote of 243-174 .

the obama administration opposed the measures as jcpoa violations .

even before the trump administration pulled the united states out of the jcpoa , congress acted on or considered additional iran sanctions legislation .

the following iran sanctions legislation was enacted or considered in the 115 th congress .

a bill , s. 722 , which initially contained only iran - related sanctions , was reported out by the senate foreign relations committee on may 25 , 2017 .

after incorporating an amendment adding sanctions on russia , the bill was passed by the senate on june 15 , 2017 , by a vote of 98-2 .

a companion measure , h.r .

3203 , was introduced in the house subsequent to the senate passage of s. 722 , and contained iran - related provisions virtually identical to the engrossed senate version of s. 722 .

following a reported agreement among house and senate leaders , h.r .

3364 , with additional sanctions provisions related to north korea ( and provisions on iran remaining virtually unchanged from those of the engrossed s. 722 ) , was introduced and passed both chambers by overwhelming margins .

president trump signed it into law on august 2 , 2017 ( p.l .

115-44 ) , accompanied by a signing statement expressing reservations about the degree to which provisions pertaining to russia might conflict with the president's constitutional authority .

caatsa's iran - related provisions are analyzed above .

overall , caatsa does not appear to conflict with the jcpoa insofar as it does not reimpose u.s. secondary sanctions on iran's civilian economic sectors .

the jcpoa did not require the united states to refrain from imposing additional sanctions — as caatsa does — on iranian proliferation , human rights abuses , terrorism , or the irgc .

section 108 of caatsa requires an administration review of all designated entities to assess whether such entities are contributing to iran's ballistic missile program or contributing to iranian support for international terrorism .

h.r .

1698 .

the iran ballistic missiles and international sanctions enforcement act , passed the house on october 26 , 2017 , by a vote of 423-2 .

it would have amended the remaining active ( not waived ) section of isa ( section 5b ) to clarify that assistance to iran's ballistic missile program is included as subject to sanctions .

the provision would have applied the sanctions to foreign governments determined to be assisting iran's missile programs , and would have applied several isa sanctions to foreign entities , including foreign governments , that sell to or import from iran the major combat systems banned for sale to iran in security council resolution 2231 .

this represents a more specific list of banned items than the "destabilizing numbers and types" of weaponry the sale to iran of which can be sanctioned under isa and several other u.s. laws discussed above .

h.r .

1638 .

on november 14 , 2017 , the house financial services committee ordered reported h.r .

1638 , the iranian leadership asset transparency act , which would have required the treasury secretary to report to congress on the assets and equity interests held by named iranian persons , including the supreme leader , the president , various irgc and other security commanders , and members of various leadership bodies .

h.r .

4324 .

the house financial services committee also ordered reported on november 14 , 2017 , the strengthening oversight of iran's access to finance act .

the bill would have required administration reports on whether financing of iranian commercial passenger aircraft purchases posed money - laundering or terrorism risks or benefited iranian persons involved in iranian proliferation or terrorism .

some argued that the bill might affect the willingness of the treasury department to license aircraft sales to iran , and in so doing potentially breach the u.s. jcpoa commitment to sell such aircraft to iran .

following president trump's october 13 , 2017 , statement on iran , then - senate foreign relations committee chairman bob corker and senator tom cotton released an outline of legislation that would reimpose waived u.s. sanctions if , at any time — including after jcpoa restrictions expire — iran breaches jcpoa - stipulated restrictions .

the bill draft , which was not introduced , included sanctions triggers based on iranian missile developments .

h.r .

5132 .

the iranian revolutionary guard corps economic exclusion act .

this bill mandated administration reports on whether specified categories of entities are owned or controlled by the irgc , or conduct significant transactions with the irgc .

the bill defined an entity as owned or controlled by the irgc even if the irgc's ownership interest is less than 50% — a lower standard than the usual practice in which ownership is defined as at least 50% .

the bill would have required administration investigation of several specified entities as potentially owned or controlled by the irgc , including several telecommunications , mining , and machinery companies , and required a report on whether the iran airports company violates e.o .

13224 by facilitating flight operations by mahan air , which is a designated sdn under e.o .

13224 .

whereas the bill's provisions did not mandate any sanctions on entities characterized within , the bill appeared to establish a process under which the administration could name as sdns entities in iran's civilian economic sectors , including civil aviation .

h.r .

6751 .

the banking transparency for sanctioned persons act of 2018 , would have required reporting to congress on any license given to a bank to provide financial services to a state sponsor of terrorism .

h.r .

4591 , s. 3431 , and h.r .

4238 .

several bills would have essentially codified executive order 13438 by requiring the blocking of u.s. - based property and preventing u.s. visas for persons determined to be threatening the stability of iraq — legislation apparently directed at iran's shiite militia allies in iraq .

the latter two bills specifically mentioned the iraqi groups as'aib ahl al haq and harakat hizballah al nujabi as entities that the administration should so sanction .

h.r .

4591 passed the house on november 27 , 2018 .

because the trump administration has exited the jcpoa , there is increased potential for the 116 th congress to consider legislation that sanctions those iranian economic sectors that could not be sanctioned under the jcpoa .

as the 116 th congress began work in 2019 , press reports indicated that several senators and at least one house member planned to introduce legislation to greatly expand u.s. secondary sanctions on iran's financial sector .

among the reported provisions were ( 1 ) mandatory imposition of sanctions on the swift electronic payments system if it does not expel sanctioned iranian banks from its network ; ( 2 ) amending ifca to sanction any significant transactions with iran's financial sector ( in addition to energy , shipping , and shipbuilding sectors in the current law ) ; ( 3 ) requiring the treasury department to issue a final rule that would sanction any international transaction with iran's central bank ; and ( 4 ) sanctioning foreign persons that supply or provide other help to iran's efforts to establish a digital currency .

the following have been introduced: several bills similar or virtually identical to those introduced previously have been introduced , imposing sanctions on iranian proxies in iraq and elsewhere .

these bills include h.r .

361 , the iranian proxies terrorist sanctions act of 2019 , and h.r .

571 , the preventing destabilization of iraq act of 2019 .

the iranian revolutionary guard corps exclusion act ( s. 925 ) , similar to h.r .

5132 in the 115 th congress , has been introduced in the senate .

the iran ballistic missiles and international sanctions enforcement act ( h.r .

2118 ) .

the bill includes provisions similar to h.r .

1698 in the 115 th congress ( see above ) .

there are a number of other possible sanctions that might receive consideration — either in a global or multilateral framework .

these possibilities are analyzed in crs in focus if10801 , possible additional sanctions on iran , by kenneth katzman .

appendix a .

comparison between u.s. , u.n. , and eu and allied country sanctions ( prior to implementation day ) appendix b. post - 1999 major investments in iran's energy sector appendix c. entities sanctioned under u.n .

resolutions and eu decisions appendix d. entities sanctions under u.s. laws and executive order .

