rs20500 - - medical records privacy: questions and answers on the hipaa rule updated february 4 , 200 .

health plans and health care providers and their business associates are subject to the federal health information privacy regulation ( 45 cfr parts 160 , 164 ) .

the privacy rule gives patients the right of access totheir medical information and prohibits health plans and health care providers from using or disclosingindividually identifiable information without a patient's written authorization except as expressly permitted orrequired by the rule .

for routine health care operations , including treatment and payment , plans and providersmay use and disclose health information without the individual's authorization .

in certain other circumstances ( eg , disclosures to family members and friends ) , the rule requires plans and providers to give the individualthe opportunity to object to the disclosure .

the rule also permits the use and disclosure of health informationwithout the individual's permission for various specified activities ( eg , public health oversight , lawenforcement ) that are not directly connected to the treatment of the individual .

for uses and disclosures that arenot permitted by the rule , plans and providers must obtain a patient's written authorization .

they must alsohave in place reasonable administrative , technical , and physical safeguards to protect patient information fromintentional or unintentional uses or disclosures that are in violation of the rule .

the health privacy rule is one of several new standards mandated by the 1996 health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) to support the growth of electronic record keeping and claims processing in thenation's health care system .

under hipaa , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) has issuedelectronic format and data standards for several routine administrative transactions between plans and providers ( eg , claims for payment ) .

the secretary has also issued security standards to safeguard electronic patientinformation against unauthorized access , use , and disclosure .

most plans and providers have until april 21,2005 , to comply with the security standards .

the hipaa privacy and security standards have helped lay the groundwork for the adoption of information technology ( it ) systems in health care to support the electronic collection and exchange of patient information .

developing a secure platform to protect confidential health information is central to the growth of a nationalhealth information infrastructure that allows health care providers to share patient information .

a small butgrowing number of communities and health care systems around the country have developed electronic medicalrecords and established secure networks for the exchange of health data among providers , patients , and otherauthorized users .

the creation of regional networks is seen as a critical step toward the goal of interconnectingthe health care system nationwide .

the handling of electronic patient information by these networks hasimportant and , as yet , not fully understood implications for the privacy rule , which was developed with thetraditional paper - based system of medical records in mind .

who is covered ? .

as specified under hipaa , the privacy regulation applies to three groups of entities: ( i ) individual and group health plans that provide or pay formedical care ; ( ii ) health care clearinghouses ( i.e. , entities that facilitate and process the flow of informationbetween health care providers and payers ) ; and ( iii ) health care providers who transmit health informationelectronically in a standard format in connection with one of the hipaa - specified transactions , or who rely onthird - party billing services to conduct such transactions .

the rule , therefore , does not apply directly to otherentities that collect and maintain health information such as life insurers , researchers , employers ( unless theyare acting as providers or plans ) , and public health officials .

however , business associates with whom coveredentities share health information are covered .

business associates include persons who provide legal , actuarial,accounting , data aggregation , management , administrative , accreditation , or financial services to or for acovered entity .

the rule permits a covered entity to disclose health information to a business associate or toallow the business associate to create or receive health information on its behalf , provided both parties sign awritten contract that essentially binds the business associate to the covered entity's privacy practices .

what types of health information are covered ? .

the rule covers all individually identifiable health information that is created or received by a covered entity , includinggenetic tests and information about an individual's family history .

it applies to both paper and electronicrecords , as well as oral communications .

health information from which all personal identifiers have beenremoved is not subject to the rule .

can patients access and amend their health information ? .

yes , covered entities must allow patients to inspect or obtain a copy of their health information , except incertain limited circumstances .

covered entities may charge a reasonable , cost - based copying fee .

patients mayalso request amendment or correction of information that is incorrect or incomplete .

finally , patients have theright to receive a detailed accounting of certain types of disclosures of their health information made bycovered entities during the past six years .

disclosures for routine health care operations and those madepursuant to an authorization ( see below ) are exempt from the accounting requirement .

how may plans and providers use and disclose patient information ? .

the privacy rule places certain limitations on when and how health plans andhealth care providers may use and disclose medical information .

generally , plans and providers may use anddisclose health information for their own treatment , payment , and health care operations ( tpo ) without theindividual's authorization and with few restrictions .

a covered entity may also disclose information for: thetreatment and payment activities of another provider ; the payment activities of another health plan ; and forcertain health care operations of another covered entity , if each entity has a relationship with the patient .

forexample , a physician can mail or fax medical test results or a patient's medical record to a specialist whointends to treat the patient , provided that "reasonable safeguards" are used .

patients may request that coveredentities restrict the use and disclosure of their information for tpo , but covered entities are not required toagree to such a request .

the privacy rule also permits the disclosure of health information without a patient's authorization for the following specified national priority activities , consistent with other applicable laws and regulations .

first,disclosures may be made for public health purposes ( eg , reporting diseases , collecting vitalstatistics ) , asrequired by state and federal law .

second , health information may be disclosed to public agencies to conduct health oversight activities such as audits ; inspections ; civil , criminal , or administrativeproceedings ; and otheractivities necessary for oversight of the health care system .

third , disclosures may be made to lawenforcement officials pursuant to a warrant , subpoena , or order issued by a judicial officer , or pursuantto agrand jury subpoena .

disclosures for law enforcement purposes are also permitted pursuant to anadministrative subpoena or summons where a three - part test is met ( i.e. , the information is relevant , the requestis specific , and non - identifiable information could not reasonably be used ) .

fourth , health information may bedisclosed in judicial and administrative proceedings if the request for the information is madethrough orpursuant to a court order .

fifth , covered entities may disclose health information to researchers without apatient's authorization , provided an institutional review board ( irb ) or an equivalent , newly formed "privacyboard" reviews the research protocol and waives the authorization requirement .

 ( 1 ) additionally , health information may be disclosed without authorization: ( i ) to coroners , medical examiners , and funeral directors ; ( ii ) to workers' compensation programs ; ( iii ) to a government authority authorized toreceive reports of abuse , neglect , or domestic violence ; ( iv ) to organizations in order to facilitate organ , eye,and tissue donation and transplantation ; ( v ) to government agencies for various specialized functions ( eg,national security and intelligence activities ) ; ( vi ) to avert a serious threat to health or safety ; ( vii ) and in othersituations as required by law .

for the most part , the privacy rule addresses permissible uses and disclosures .

hhs expects covered entities torely on their professional judgement in deciding whether to permit the use or disclosure of health information .

covered entities are required to disclose information only to the individual who is the subject of theinformation and to hhs for enforcement of the rule .

for all uses and disclosures of health information that arenot otherwise required or permitted by the rule , covered entities must obtain a patient's written authorization ( eg , releasing information to financial institutions that offer mortgages and other types of loans , or sellingmailing lists to marketing companies ) .

authorization forms must contain certain specified core elements including a description of the health information to be used or disclosed and the identity of the recipient of the information .

in general , a coveredhealth care provider may not condition treatment on receiving a patient's authorization .

health plans maycondition enrollment or eligibility for benefits on the provision of an authorization prior to an individual'senrollment in the plan .

patients may in writing revoke their authorization at any time .

can medical information be shared with a patient's family or friends ? .

yes , the rule permits covered entities to disclose information to a family member,relative , close friend , or other person identified by the individual .

only information that is directly relevant tosuch person's involvement with the individual's care may be shared .

if the individual is present and able tomake health care decisions , the covered entity may disclose information provided ( 1 ) the patient has beengiven , in advance , the opportunity to object to any disclosures , or ( 2 ) the covered entity , using professionaljudgment , reasonably infers that the patient does not object .

in an emergency situation or if the patient is notpresent , the covered entity may use its professional judgment and experience with common practice in decidingwhether a disclosure is appropriate .

hhs has repeatedly stated that it is not the intent of the rule to impedecommon health care practices ( eg , hospitals discussing treatment options with spouses and relatives , andfamily members picking up a prescription ) .

does the rule restrict parental involvement and notification ? .

in general , a parent is deemed to have the rights associated with a minor'shealth information , including the right to authorize disclosure or to request access to the information .

but if aminor is authorized by law to consent to treatment and has consented to care ( with or without the consent of aparent ) , or if the parent has assented to an agreement of confidentiality between a provider and a minor , thenthe minor has the exclusive rights associated with that information .

the rule , however , defers to state parentalnotification laws .

it allows covered entities to disclose a minor's information to a parent ( or provide the parentwith access to such information ) if such disclosure is permitted or required by state law .

similarly , disclosureto ( and access by ) a parent is prohibited where prohibited by state law .

where state law is silent or unclearabout parental notification , the rule permits a covered entity to provide or deny access to the parent providedthat action is consistent with state law .

are there limits on the amount of information disclosed ? .

the rule requires that whenever a covered entity uses or discloses health information , or requests suchinformation from another covered entity , it must make a reasonable effort to limit the information to theminimum amount necessary to accomplish the intended purpose of the use or disclosure .

the minimumnecessary standard does not apply to: disclosures to or requests by a provider for treatment purposes ; disclosures made to patients upon their request ; disclosures made to the secretary to enforce compliance ; authorized uses or disclosures ; and uses or disclosures that are required by law .

what about incidental disclosures ? .

incidental uses and disclosures of health information that occur as a result of a use or disclosure that is otherwise permitted underthe privacy rule are not considered violations of the rule , provided that the covered entity has met thereasonable safeguards and minimum necessary standards .

examples of incidental uses and disclosures includepatient sign - in sheets , bedside charts , and confidential conversations that are inadvertently overheard by others .

are covered entities required to explain their privacy practices to patients ? .

health plans and health care providers must provide patients with a written notice oftheir privacy practices .

plans are required to give notice at enrollment .

providers that have a direct treatmentrelationship with the patient are required to give notice at the date of first service delivery and , except inemergency situations , make a good faith effort to obtain a written acknowledgment from the patient of receiptof the notice .

the notice must include a description of the patient's rights , the legal duties of the coveredentity , and a description of the types of uses and disclosures of information that are permitted , including thosethat do not require an authorization .

does the rule restrict employers' access to health information ? .

the rule permits a group health plan to disclose individually identifiable healthinformation to an employer that sponsors the plan , provided the information is used only for planadministration purposes .

in order for a group health plan to disclose health information to a plan sponsor , theplan documents must be amended so that they limit the uses and disclosures of information by the sponsor tothose consistent with the privacy rule .

in addition , an employer must certify to a group health plan that it willnot use the information for employment - related actions ( eg , hiring and promotion decisions ) .

the employermust agree to establish adequate firewalls , so that only those employees that need health information to performfunctions on behalf of the group health plan have access to such information .

can health information be used for marketing ? .

a covered entity may not disclose health information to a third party ( eg , pharmaceutical company ) , in exchange fordirect or indirect remuneration , for the marketing activities of the third party without first obtaining a patient'sauthorization .

similarly , a covered entity may not use or disclose health information for its own marketingactivities without authorization .

however , communications made by a covered entity ( or its business associate ) to encourage a patient to purchase or use a health care - related product or service are not defined asmarketingunder the rule and , therefore , do not require the patient's authorization , even if the covered entity is paid .

suchcommunications include prescription refill reminders and information about alternative treatments , as well asmore controversial activities paid for by third parties ( eg , communications by pharmacies , paid for by a drugmanufacturer , that recommend patients switch their medication to the company's product ) .

what must covered entities do to ensure compliance ? .

covered entities must have reasonable administrative , technical , and physical safeguards in place,commensurate with the size and scope of their business , to protect the privacy of patient information .

theseinclude designating a privacy official , training employees , and developing a system of sanctions for employeeswho violate the entity's policies .

covered entities are not directly liable for the actions of their businessassociates .

they may be held liable if they know of a business associate's pattern of activity or practice inviolation of the contract unless they take reasonable steps to correct the problem and , if such steps areunsuccessful , terminate the contract or report the problem to hhs .

does the rule preempt state health privacy laws ? .

as mandated by hipaa , the rule does not preempt , or override , state laws that are more protective of patientprivacy .

although most states do not have comprehensive health privacy laws , many states have detailed,stringent standards governing the use and disclosure of health information related to certain medical conditions,such as mental illness , genetic testing , and communicable diseases ( eg , hiv / aids ) .

these stronger privacyprotections will remain in force .

the rule only preempts state laws that are in conflict with its requirements and that provide less stringent privacy protections .

therefore , it serves as a federal "floor" of minimumprivacy protections .

how will the rule be enforced ? .

any person who believes a covered entity is not complying with the privacy rule may file a complaint with hhs's office of civil rights ( ocr ) , which is responsible for implementing and enforcing the rule .

ocr is working with covered entities toencourage voluntary compliance .

it says that enforcement of the rule will be reactive and complaint - driven .

under hipaa , ocr has the authority to impose civil monetary penalties against covered entities that fail tocomply with the rule , and the department of justice may seek criminal penalties for certain wrongfuldisclosures of personal health information .

the civil fines are $100 per incident , capped at $25,000 per year foreach provision that is violated .

the criminal penalties include fines of up to $250,000 and up to 10 years inprison for disclosing or obtaining health information with the intent to sell , transfer or use it for commercialadvantage , personal gain , or malicious harm .

hipaa did not provide a private right of action for individuals tosue for violations of their health information privacy in federal court .

however , nothing in hipaa prohibitsaggrieved individuals from filing a state law claim against a covered entity for its noncompliance and resultingharm .

where can i obtain more information ? .

general information on all the hipaa standards can be found at http: / / aspe.os.dhhs.gov / admnsimp .

implementationguidance , answers to frequently asked questions , and other details on complying with the privacy rule may befound on the ocr website at http: / / www.hhs.gov / ocr / hipaa .

