the fy2001 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

5408 ) enacted into law by p.l .

106-398 , established authority for the secretary of defense to operate a facility for the purpose of providing "professional education and training to eligible nations of the western hemisphere within the democratic principles set forth in the charter of the organization of american states...while fostering mutual knowledge , transparency , confidence , and cooperation among the participating nations and promoting democratic values , respect for human rights , and knowledge of united states customs and traditions. .

the name of the new facility is the western hemisphere institute for security cooperation ( whinsec ) .

this institute is the successor to the u.s. army school of the americas , whose authorities were repealed in the legislation establishing the institute .

the purpose of the new institute is to help prepare mid - level civilian and military personnel of eligible countries for various challenges involved in dealing with new transnational threats to the region .

the secretary of defense is authorized by law to designate the secretary of a military department as the defense department's executive agent for carrying out the responsibilities of the defense secretary in administering the institute .

the person designated for this task is the secretary of the army .

the institute is located on the grounds of the u.s. army base at fort benning , georgia .

the institute was formally opened on january 17 , 2001 , and has begun to conduct training at this location since that date .

congress has demonstrated a long - standing interest in military instruction and training of foreign students at u.s. military installations .

controversies related to activities at the former u.s. army school of the americas at fort benning , georgia , led to attempts from 1993 through 2000 to effect changes in the nature and focus of the training at that school , and in some instances to abolish it and its functions entirely .

the strongest critics of this school , inside and outside the congress , argued that in the post - cold war circumstances , there was no compelling reason to continue its operations .

others in congress took a different view , arguing that a military training institution for students from nations in the western hemisphere had continuing utility , but that it was important to ensure that its focus and training activities were consistent with support of u.s. interests , policies and values .

in this context , congress authorized the creation of the western hemisphere institute for security cooperation , while at the same time disestablishing the u.s. army school of the americas in the fy2001 defense department authorization , enacted into law on october 30 , 2000 .

through explicit statutory guidelines for the new institute's operations , the need for funds to be appropriated annually , and the requirement for an annual report on the institute's activities , congress has indicated that it will continue to monitor the institutes's progress in fulfilling its mandate .

key elements of oversight of the new institute are described below .

the institute receives funding from three sources: operations and maintenance funds , army ( oma ) ; international narcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) funds ; and international military education and training ( imet ) funds .

such funds are annually provided through the defense department appropriations legislation , and the foreign operations appropriations legislation .

by law , tuition fees charged for persons who attend the institute may not include the "fixed costs of operating and maintaining the institute. .

the defense department's preliminary estimate was that the initial costs of operating the new institute would be comparable to those of the now disbanded u.s. army school of the americas .

the department of the army has stated that the total cost of operating whinsec in fy2002 is $5.887 million .

the largest portion ( $3.419 million ) of this total comes from the army's operation and maintenance account .

another estimated $1.5 million comes from the imet account .

the statute creating the institute established a board of visitors .

this board is composed of the chairman and ranking minority member of both the house and senate armed services committees or a designee of any of these individuals ; six persons designated by the secretary of defense , "including , to the extent practicable , persons from academia and the religious and human rights communities .

the board also includes one person designated by the secretary of state , and additional military personnel to include the "senior military officer responsible for training and doctrine for the army" or a "designee" of that senior military officer , as well as the "commander of the unified combatant command having geographic responsibility for latin america," or a "designee" of that officer .

the board of visitors is to meet at least once a year , and is charged with inquiring into the "curriculum , instruction , physical equipment , fiscal affairs , and academic methods of the institute , other matters relating to the institute that the board decides to consider," and "any other matter" determined to be appropriate by the secretary of defense .

the board is to review the curriculum of the institute to determine whether it: "complies with applicable united states laws and regulations," is "consistent with united states policy goals toward latin america and the caribbean," adheres to current united states doctrine," and that "instruction under the curriculum appropriately emphasizes" the matters mandated in law relating to instruction on human rights , the rule of law , due process , civilian control of the military , and the role of the military in a democratic society .

the board is to submit to the secretary of defense , not later than 60 days after its annual meeting , a "written report of its activities and of its views and recommendations pertaining to the institute. .

the institute , as a defense department school , receives routinely scheduled visits from standard defense department oversight agencies .

the defense department , the joint staff , and the u.s. army will validate the education and training needs for north american nations .

in the case of latin american and caribbean nations , the southern command , as the unified command responsible for that region , will conduct annual validation reviews of courses to ensure that they support one or more the southcom theater engagement plan's objectives .

each year , not later than march 15 , the secretary of defense , by law , must submit to congress a "detailed report on the activities of the institute during the preceding year .

this report must be prepared in consultation with the secretary of state .

