executive orders are one vehicle of many through which the president may exercise his authority .

while the president's ability to use executive orders as a means of implementing presidential power has been established as a matter of law and practice , it is equally well established that the substance of an executive order , including any requirements or prohibitions , may have the force and effect of law only if the presidential action is based on power vested in the president by the u.s. constitution or delegated to the president by congress .

the president's authority to issue executive orders does not include a grant of power to implement policy decisions that are not otherwise authorized by law .

indeed , an executive order that implements a policy in direct contradiction to the law will be without legal effect unless the order can be justified as an exercise of the president's exclusive and independent constitutional authority .

this report first reviews the "definition" of an executive order and how it is distinguishable from other written instruments , and then provides an overview of the president's constitutional authority to issue such directives .

next , the report discusses the legal framework relied on by the courts to analyze the validity of presidential actions , and also discusses the roles of the president and congress in modifying and revoking executive orders .

presidents have historically utilized various written instruments to direct the executive branch and implement policy .

these include executive orders , presidential memoranda , and presidential proclamations .

the definitions of these instruments , including the differences between them , are not easily discernible , as the u.s. constitution does not contain any provision referring to these terms or the manner in which the president may communicate directives to the executive branch .

a widely accepted description of executive orders and proclamations comes from a report issued in 1957 by the house government operations committee: executive orders and proclamations are directives or actions by the president .

when they are founded on the authority of the president derived from the constitution or statute , they may have the force and effect of law... .

in the narrower sense executive orders and proclamations are written documents denominated as such.... executive orders are generally directed to , and govern actions by , government officials and agencies .

they usually affect private individuals only indirectly .

proclamations in most instances affect primarily the activities of private individuals .

since the president has no power or authority over individual citizens and their rights except where he is granted such power and authority by a provision in the constitution or by statute , the president's proclamations are not legally binding and are at best hortatory unless based on such grants of authority .

the distinction between these instruments — executive orders , presidential memoranda , and proclamations — seems to be more a matter of form than of substance , given that all three may be employed to direct and govern the actions of government officials and agencies .

moreover , if issued under a legitimate claim of authority and made public , a presidential directive could have the force and effect of law , "of which all courts are bound to take notice , and to which all courts are bound to give effect. .

the only technical difference is that executive orders and proclamations must be published in the federal register , while presidential memoranda are published only when the president determines that they have "general applicability and legal effect. .

just as there is no definition of executive orders , presidential memoranda , and proclamations in the u.s. constitution , there is , likewise , no specific provision authorizing their issuance .

as such , authority for the execution and implementation of these written instruments stems from implied constitutional and statutory authority .

in the constitutional context , presidential power is derived from article ii of the u.s. constitution , which states that "the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states," that "the president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states," and that the president "shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed. .

the president's power to issue these directives may also derive from express or implied statutory authority .

despite the amorphous nature of the authority to issue executive orders , presidential memoranda , and proclamations , these instruments have been employed by every president since the inception of the republic .

notably , executive orders historically have been more contentious as presidents have issued them over a wide range of controversial areas such as the establishment of internment camps during world war ii ; the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus ; and equal treatment in the armed services without regard to race , color , religion , or national origin .

however , presidents have also used executive orders for arguably more mundane governing tasks such as directing federal agencies to evaluate their ability to streamline customer service delivery and establishing advisory committees .

because there is no underlying constitutional or statutory authority that dictates the circumstances under which the president must issue an executive order , it is probable that the president also could have chosen to issue presidential memoranda rather than executive orders .

as a matter or historical practice , however , it seems that presidents are more apt to utilize executive orders on matters that may benefit from public awareness or be subject to heightened scrutiny .

memoranda , on the other hand , are often used to carry out routine executive decisions and determinations , or to direct agencies to perform duties consistent with the law or implement laws that are presidential priorities .

presidents' broad usage of executive orders to effectuate policy goals has led some members of congress and various legal commentators to suggest that many such orders constitute unilateral executive lawmaking that impacts the interests of private citizens and encroaches upon congressional power .

the supreme court in youngstown sheet & tube co. v. sawyer established the framework for analyzing whether the president's issuance of an executive order is a valid presidential action .

as discussed below , the framework established by justice robert h. jackson in his concurring opinion has become more influential than the majority opinion authored by justice hugo black , and has since been employed by the courts to analyze the validity of controversial presidential actions .

executive orders are undoubtedly one of many tools available to presidents to further policy goals during his administration .

by their very nature , however , executive orders lack stability , especially in the face of evolving presidential priorities .

the president is free to revoke , modify , or supersede his own orders or those issued by a predecessor .

the practice of presidents modifying and revoking executive orders is exemplified particularly where orders have been issued to assert control over and influence the agency rulemaking process .

beginning with president gerald ford's administration , the following timeline demonstrates the gradual modification by succeeding presidents in supplementing the congressionally mandated rulemaking process with a uniform set of standards regarding cost - benefit considerations .

president gerald ford issued executive order 11821 , which required agencies to issue inflation impact statements for proposed regulations .

president jimmy carter altered this practice with executive order 12044 , which required agencies to consider the potential economic impact of certain rules and identify potential alternatives .

president ronald reagan revoked president carter's order and implemented a scheme that arguably asserted much more extensive control over the rulemaking process .

he issued executive order 12291 , which directed agencies to implement rules only if the "potential benefits to society for the regulation outweigh the potential costs to society. .

this required agencies to prepare a cost - benefit analysis for any proposed rule that could have a significant economic impact .

president william j. clinton later issued executive order 12866 , which modified the system established during the reagan administration .

while retaining many of the basic features of president reagan's order , executive order 12866 arguably eased cost - benefit analysis requirements , and recognized the primary duty of agencies to fulfill the duties committed to them by congress .

president george w. bush subsequently issued two executive orders — executive orders 13258 and 13422 — both of which amended the clinton executive order .

executive order 13258 concerned regulatory planning and review , and it removed references from clinton's executive order regarding the role of the vice president , and instead referenced the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) or the chief of staff to the president .

executive order 13422 defined guidance documents and significant guidance documents and applied several parts of the clinton executive order to guidance documents .

it also required each agency head to designate a presidential appointee to the newly created position of regulatory policy officer .

executive order 13422 also made changes to the office of information and regulatory affairs' ( oira ) duties and authorities , including a requirement that oira be given advance notice of significant guidance documents .

president barack obama revoked both of these orders via executive order 13497 .

this order also instructed the director of omb and the heads of executive departments and agencies to rescind orders , rules , guidelines , and policies that implemented president bush's executive orders .

in addition , president obama issued two other executive orders on the regulatory review process .

the first , executive order 13563 , reaffirmed and supplemented the principles of regulatory review in executive order 12866 .

obama's order addressed public participation and agency coordination in simplifying and harmonizing regulations for industries with significant regulatory requirements .

the order also instructed agencies to consider flexible approaches to regulation , required them to ensure the objectivity of scientific and technical information and processes that support regulations , and mandated that agencies develop a preliminary plan to review existing significant regulations for potential modifications or repeal .

the second executive order , executive order 13579 , stated that independent regulatory agencies should also comply "to the extent permitted by law" with the goals and requirements of the first order , executive order 13563 .

congress may also influence the duration and effectiveness of executive orders .

orders issued pursuant to authority provided to the president by congress , as distinguished from orders that are based on the president's exclusive constitutional authority , may be legislatively modified or nullified .

congress may revoke all or part of such an order by either directly repealing the order , or by removing the underlying authority upon which the action is predicated .

either of these actions would appear to negate the legal effect of the order .

congressional repeals of executive orders are relatively rare in modern times , primarily because such legislation could run counter to the president's interests and therefore may require a congressional override of a presidential veto .

one study has suggested that less than 4% of executive orders have been modified by congress .

to effectuate a repeal , congress need only enact legislation directing that provisions of the executive order "shall not have legal effect. .

for example , the energy policy act of 2005 explicitly revoked a december 13 , 1912 , executive order that had created the naval petroleum reserve numbered 2 .

in 1992 , congress similarly revoked an executive order issued by president george h. w. bush that had directed the secretary of health and human services to establish a human fetal tissue bank for research purposes .

the repeal legislation stated that "[t]he provisions of executive order 12806 ... shall not have any legal effect. .

additionally , congress may also inhibit the implementation of an executive order by preventing funds from being used to implement the order .

for example , congress has used its appropriations authority to limit the effect of executive orders by denying salaries and expenses for an office established in an executive order , or by directly denying funds to implement a particular section of an order .

conversely , if congress supports an executive order , and wants to provide the directive with greater stability , congress may codify the presidential order as it was issued or with certain modifications .

similarly , if the president issues an executive order on questionable legal authority , congress may subsequently ratify the order either expressly or by implication .

