dla troop support's clothing and textile directorate ( c&t ) supplies more than 8,000 different items ranging from uniforms and body armor to tents and canteens .

many c&t products , such as uniforms , are unique to the military .

the directorate collaborates with military service customers and private vendors to design and test uniforms .

c&t also identifies , tests , and approves commercial items for military use , including sweatshirts , gloves , and blankets , and supplies special purpose clothing , wet weather clothing , chemical suits , and field packs .

dod offers the following guidance on the management of military uniform procurement: section 850 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 ( p.l .

105-85 ) requires that any notice of agency requirements or notice of an agency solicitation for contracts be provided through a single , government - wide point of entry .

the federal business opportunities ( fedbizopps ) site is the electronic , government - wide entry point for information on all federal government contracts over $25,000 ; dod instruction 4160.1-r , dod supply chain: materiel management regulation , which describes the process of materiel management within the dod supply chain system ; and dod instruction 4140.63 , management of dod clothing and textiles ( class ii ) , which outlines the authority , policy , and responsibilities for the management of the dod clothing and textiles , and directs the establishment of the joint clothing and textiles governance board .

in addition , military uniforms are procured in accordance with the provisions of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , dla's own internal regulations , the berry amendment , and the buy american act ( baa ) .

the berry amendment ( title 10 u.s.c .

2533a ) , which dates from the eve of world war ii , was established for a narrowly defined purpose: to ensure that u.s. troops wore military uniforms wholly produced in the united states and that u.s. troops were fed food products wholly produced in the united states .

there are exceptions to the berry amendment that waive the domestic source restrictions .

one such exception allows dod to purchase specialty metals and chemical warfare protective clothing from countries where the united states has entered into reciprocal procurement memoranda of understanding ( mous ) .

a deputy secretary of defense's memorandum of may 1 , 2001 , stated that the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and the secretaries of the military services have the authority to determine that certain items under the berry amendment are not available domestically in quantities or qualities that meet military requirements .

such decisions are called "domestic nonavailability determinations" or dnads .

this authority may not be re - delegated .

use of dnads requires an analysis of the alternatives and certification of the process .

military uniforms are generally procured through competitive contracts .

c&t maintains access to a variety of supplies and uniform - related products .

c&t specialists may also procure textiles and materials directly from the textile industry , and then provide textiles and materials to the contractors .

the materials may be used to manufacture additional uniforms and related products , often achieving higher quality and substantial savings over purchased , finished generic products .

according to a gao report on dod's ground combat uniforms , dla managed eight uniforms for the military services as of 2010 .

vendors and customers may review current solicitations in fedbizopps , the online source for all federal government procurement opportunities .

dla has established an automated system to provide contractors with the ability to conduct detailed searches for solicitations and contract awards .

dla troop support's clothing & textiles supply chain has established a 24-hour , 7-day - a - week customer contact center as the point for all customer inquiries .

prospective bidders should obtain specifications prior to submitting an offer .

according to dfars parts 204 , 212 , and 252 , contractors must first register in the central contractor registration ( ccr ) prior to the administration of contract awards , basic ordering agreements , or blanket purchase agreements , unless the award results from a solicitation issued on or before june 1 , 1998 .

dla has stated on its website that price is not always the sole determination in contract awards , as described here .

many of our acquisitions ( most notably our negotiated acquisitions ) involve a review of a contractor's technical capability ; corporate experience ; quality ; past performance and surge capability ( as well as price ) .

this methodology is used because it makes good business sense and ensures reliable contractors with proven performance records will deliver quality products at the lowest possible costs .

this concept , known as best value , is defined as any competitive negotiated acquisition where the contracting officer uses discriminating factors , in addition to price , in the evaluation of proposals and award of a contract .

within dla troop support , this would encompass virtually all our awards with the exception of low price , technically acceptable source selection and sealed bidding .

section 839 of p.l .

113-66 would have required that the initial military footwear issued to enlisted military personnel be procured in accordance with the provisions of the berry amendment , 10 u.s.c .

2533a .

the provision appears below .

 ( a ) requirement - section 418 of title 37 , united states code , is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ( d ) ( 1 ) in the case of athletic footwear needed by members of the army , navy , air force , or marine corps upon their initial entry into the armed forces , the secretary of defense shall furnish such footwear directly to the members instead of providing a cash allowance to the members for the purchase of such footwear .

 ( 2 ) in procuring athletic footwear to comply with paragraph ( 1 ) , the secretary of defense shall comply with the requirements of section 2533a of title 10 , without regard to the applicability of any simplified acquisition threshold under chapter 137 of title 10 ( or any other provision of law ) .

 ( 3 ) this subsection does not prohibit the provision of a cash allowance to a member described in paragraph ( 1 ) for the purchase of athletic footwear if such footwear — ( a ) is medically required to meet unique physiological needs of the member ; and ( b ) cannot be met with athletic footwear that complies with the requirements of this subsection.' .

 ( b ) certification - the amendment made by subsection ( a ) shall not take effect until the secretary of defense certifies that there are at least two sources that can provide athletic footwear to the department of defense that is 100 percent compliant with section 2533a of title 10 , united states code .

