t he trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs were first authorized by congress in the trade expansion act of 1962 , as amended , to help workers and firms adjust to import competition and dislocation caused by trade liberalization .

although overall economic welfare can be increased by trade liberalization , taa has long been justified on grounds that the government has an obligation to help the "losers" of policy - driven trade openings that may cause adjustment problems for firms and workers adversely affected by import competition .

taa programs that cover workers , firms , and farmers aim to "facilitate efforts by the domestic industry to make a positive adjustment to import competition and provide greater economic and social benefits than costs. .

congress continues to monitor taa program performance and to periodically reauthorize and amend the governing legislation .

this report discusses the trade adjustment assistance for firms ( taaf ) program , which is administered by the economic development administration ( eda ) of the department of commerce .

the taaf program assists eligible american companies that have been harmed by increasing imports ; this harm is defined by lower domestic sales and employment because of increased imports of similar goods and services .

through the taaf program , eda provides technical assistance , on a cost - sharing basis , to help eligible businesses create and implement business recovery plans that may allow them to remain competitive in a dynamic international economy .

the taaf program provides technical assistance through a partnership with a national network of 11 eda - funded trade adjustment assistance centers ( taacs ) .

congress first authorized taa in title iii of the trade expansion act of 1962 ( p.l .

87-794 ) , but it was little used until it was updated and reauthorized under the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) , enacted in january 1975 .

congress has amended taa programs many times over the half - century of its existence .

taa includes a firm and industry assistance program that is administered by the eda .

the taaf provides technical assistance to help trade - impacted firms make strategic adjustments that may allow them to remain competitive in a global economy .

originally , taaf also included loans and loan guarantees , but congress eliminated all direct financial assistance in 1986 because of federal budgetary cutbacks and concern over the program's high default rates and limited effectiveness .

taaf authorizations and appropriations for fy2005-fy2017 appear in table 1 .

historically , taaf program evaluation was limited , with eda lacking a formal evaluation process .

early efforts to analyze the program included comprehensive outside studies by the urban institute in 1998 and government accountability office ( gao ) in 2000 that addressed two critical issues: program administration and effectiveness .

the 2000 gao report was not able to conclusively assess the impact of the program on firms because of a lack of systematic data .

both reports identified specific deficiencies with the taaf program , such as a cumbersome certification process , long approval times , and little oversight and evaluation of projects .

as a small program with limited resources , the taaf had not received the managerial input required to adequately evaluate its efforts .

congress addressed this issue in the 2009 tgaaa , which required the creation of a new director of adjustment assistance for firms , along with additional support staff .

the act also required an annual report to congress and included specific performance measures to be collected and analyzed .

congress also mandated eda to certify petitions for assistance and adjustment proposals within specific time frames .

economists tend to agree that in defining the rules of exchange among countries , freer trade is preferable to protectionism .

insights from trade theory point to the mutual gains for countries trading on their differences , producing those goods at which they are relatively more efficient , while trading for those at which they are relatively less so .

additional gains are realized from intra - industry trade based on efficiencies from segmented and specialized production .

firm - level evidence supports this theory .

trade appears to "enable efficient producers within an industry , and efficient industries within an economy , to expand," leading to a reallocation of resources that increases a country's productivity , output , and income .

consumers ( both firms and households ) also gain from a wider variety of goods and lower prices .

however , increased competition from trade liberalization also creates "winners and losers," presenting adjustment problems for all countries .

some firms may grow as they expand into new overseas markets , while others may contract , merge , or fail when faced with greater foreign competition .

while the adjustment process may be healthy from a macroeconomic perspective , much like market - driven adjustments that occur for reasons other than trade ( eg , technological changes , weather - related disasters ) , the transition can be hard on some firms and their workers .

critics of free trade agreements often highlight the adjustment costs of reducing trade barriers .

to avoid business closures and layoffs , firms likely to be affected by increased trade may seek to weaken , if not defeat , trade liberalizing legislation .

this makes economic sense from the perspective of the affected industries , firms , and workers , but economists argue that in the long run it can be more costly for the country as a whole .

the costs of protection arise because competition is suppressed , reducing pressure on firms to innovate , operate more efficiently , and become lower - cost producers .

the brunt of these costs falls to consumers , both individuals and businesses , who must pay higher prices , but the national economy is also denied forgone productivity gains .

one way to balance the large and broad - based gains from freer trade with the smaller and more highly concentrated costs is to address the needs of firms negatively affected , such as through the taa programs , including the one for firms .

supporters justify taa policy on grounds that ( 1 ) it helps those who are hurt by trade liberalization ; ( 2 ) the economic costs are lower than protectionism and can be borne by society as a whole ; and ( 3 ) given rigidities in the adjustment process , it may help redeploy economic resources more quickly , thereby reducing productivity losses and related public sector costs ( eg , unemployment compensation ) .

others dispute these claims and have raised concerns over the effectiveness and costs of the program , arguing that it should be limited or discontinued .

in debates over trade liberalization , some observers may not appreciate the full impact that globalization and digitization trends are having on trade .

while trade liberalization may present greater import competition for smes domestically , globalization and digitization also present opportunities for growth .

the emergence of global value chains ( gvcs ) and the internet revolution provide possible growth opportunities for firms as foreign markets are opened through trade liberalization .

taaf programs offer one way to help smes to gain the knowledge and skills needed to take advantage of these global shifts .

the programs can help smes to improve their position by integrating into a gvc or using digital platforms to reach new markets , thus offsetting losses that may occur as a result of trade liberalization .

gvcs are mainly organized and coordinated by large multinational companies ( mncs ) and account for more than 70% of global trade in goods and services and in capital goods .

a large share of global trade takes place within gvcs in the form of imports and exports of intermediate ( or unfinished ) goods and services that move within , between , and among countries .

according to one study , in many countries , a domestically manufactured good contains over 20% of foreign value added , and that may rise to over 50% in some countries and industries .

this system of production depends on the willingness of many countries to import in order to export .

the wto's "made in the world" initiative finds that the increased use of gvcs has led industries globally to demand greater trade liberalization and lower protectionism as these firms depend on other links in the value chain , both domestic and foreign .

at the domestic level , the u.s. small - and medium - sized domestic producers that sell goods and services to multinational exporters are not counted as exporters — even though they may contribute a substantial amount of the value added in u.s. exports .

the statistical data needed to measure the contribution of domestic and foreign value added at each stage of gvc production are under development , and a complete picture of the impact of gvcs may not be possible until such data become available .

in one study , the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) states that the participation of smaller firms in gvcs is often underestimated .

smaller firms "often supply intermediates to exporting firms in their country and are as such relatively more integrated in the domestic value chains. .

unlike most other major industrialized , emerging , and developing economies , the united states is less dependent on imports of foreign intermediate goods for its exports .

instead , small - and medium - size domestic firms are , in the aggregate , major suppliers of goods ( parts , components , and finished products ) and services to large u.s. exporters .

the oecd cites studies by matthew slaughter and the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) showing that the typical u.s. mnc buys more than $3 billion in inputs [goods and services] from more than 6,000 u.s. small and medium - sized enterprises ( smes ) — or almost 25% of the total input purchased by these firms .

these domestic supplies are not reflected in international trade statistics , which only count direct exports ; estimates for the united states show that in 2007 the export share of smes increased from approximately 28% ( in gross exports ) to 41% ( in value - added exports ) , when such indirect exports are taken into account .

the usitc calculated that in 2007 total direct exports by u.s. smes amounted to $382 billion and indirect exports of smes amounted to $98 billion .

the usitc translated these figures into an estimated 4.0 million u.s. jobs , with 1.7 million u.s. jobs supported by direct sme exporters and an additional 2.1 million jobs created by sme indirect exporters that sell intermediate inputs to direct exporters .

of the 10 million u.s. jobs that were supported by u.s. exports of goods and services , sme exports accounted for approximately 40% of all export - supported jobs in the united states .

significantly , the usitc report found that "much of the indirect value - added exports by smes — the intermediate goods and services produced by smes that are eventually shipped abroad as components embedded in other products — is concentrated in the manufacturing sector. .

given that the main focus of taaf is on troubled smes , the magnitude of u.s. sme - produced goods that are exported by gvcs suggests that the taaf program could assist and encourage linkages between these troubled enterprises and the multinationals that are major exporters of their inputs .

although many smes have built strong ties to large u.s. exporters and mncs , liberalized trade policies adopted by the united states or other countries , new technologies , or macroeconomic conditions could potentially erode the incumbent position and domestic advantages of u.s. smes .

a potential question is whether the eda , through the taaf program and the taacs , could assist trade - impacted firms in developing more relationships with mncs , as well as analyzing the necessary conditions that would allow taaf - participating firms to have a realistic chance of doing so .

the high volume of trade that flows through gvcs and the predominant position of the united states as a major hub and headquarters nations ( with the highest level of domestic value - added export content [89%] of any oecd country and the third highest in the group of twenty [g20] after russia and brazil ) suggests the possibility that such chains could be a source of opportunity for u.s. trade - impacted firms .

eda produces an annual report for congress on the operations of the taaf program , but among the data requirements established by congress in the tgaaa , as amended , there are no performance measures that document or report on taaf - participating firms that sell goods or services to u.s. exporters ( in terms of number of firms assisted and value of goods sold ) , or that provide data on direct exports by firms receiving taaf assistance .

another opportunity related to gvcs is the growing demand for a skilled workforce to operate and support supply chains .

a report by the u.s .

departments of transportation , education , and labor titled "strengthening skills training and career pathways across the transportation industry" identified high - paying , high - skilled , high - demand transportation jobs .

as global trade and gvcs grow , these shortages could become more acute .

pairing a taaf - qualified firm with mncs or companies focused on supply chain may provide opportunities for eda to help firms through taaf meet growing demand .

a second fundamental shift in global trade that is opening new markets for smes is occurring with the internet - driven digital revolution .

digital platforms , including online communication tools and e - commerce websites , can minimize costs and enable smes to grow through extended reach to new customers and markets or by integrating into a gvc .

as a result , many such firms that in the past might not export or seek new markets abroad are more easily able and willing to conduct business in global markets .

in addition , increased digitization of customs and border control mechanisms helps simplify and speed delivery of imported goods to customers , making them more attractive to foreign buyers .

as a result , digitization can enable smes to serve the new markets abroad that are opened by trade liberalization .

for example , a study of u.s. smes on the e - commerce platform ebay found that 97% export ; among the 50 states , the range was from 93 to 98% .

according to ebay , 59% of its u.s. smes export to 10 or more markets .

in countries as diverse as peru and the ukraine , a full 100% of ebay smes export .

taaf programs provide one channel for helping trade - impacted smes make the necessary shifts and gain the skills to succeed in online marketplaces and keep up with technological changes .

as congress considers trade liberalization agreements and ongoing trade negotiations , it may wish to further examine the taaf in light of the current debate of its effectiveness and the impact of international trade on the u.s. economy .

an implementing bill for a new trade agreement , such as a renegotiated nafta , may provide congress an opportunity to reexamine and potentially revise the taa programs .

in addition to adjusting appropriations levels , congress could examine changing the current program or eda's administration of it .

potential options for congress to consider on taaf may include determining if current funding levels are appropriate ; further refining the performance metrics to measure the employment or economic impact of taaf programs ; placing a stronger emphasis on assisting smes utilize technology to improve operational efficiency , expand into new markets , including through e - commerce , and take fuller advantage of an increasingly digitally - driven economy ; facilitating partnerships with large multinational companies to support sme integration into gvcs ; or consolidating or streamlining taaf with other federal programs that assist troubled smes such as those operated by the small business administration ( sba ) .

while taaf has traditionally focused on firms who can demonstrate they have been harmed by import competition , congress could also explore the feasibility and possible steps that could or should be taken before firms are harmed .

congress might consider requiring eda to conduct outreach and education on pending trade liberalization agreements .

the analysis of each proposed trade agreement by the usitc may help identify industries or regions as potentially vulnerable or likely to experience a negative impact as a result of proposed trade liberalizing measures .

for example , the usitc economic impact assessment report for the potential trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) contended that u.s. demand for business services would outstrip supply , presenting opportunities for growth , while employment could decline in certain manufacturing and transport sectors .

congress could , for example , consider requiring eda to prepare a capacity building plan to assist those industries or regions usitc identified as potentially vulnerable or likely to experience a negative impact from implementation of a proposed trade agreement .

appendix a .

acronym .

