morning hour debates have been a part of house floor procedure only since the 103 rd congress .

they began on february 23 , 1994 , for a 90-day trial period under procedures outlined in a joint leadership unanimous consent agreement ( formally , "a standing order of the house" ) .

morning hour debates were created , in part , to offset the new restrictions on special order speeches that took effect the same day .

these restrictions , such as a ban on special orders after midnight and a four - hour limitation on longer special orders , scaled back opportunities for non - legislative debate available through special orders .

the 1994 agreement establishing morning hour debates for a 90-day trial period was later extended to cover the remainder of the 103 rd congress .

morning hour debates continued in the 104 th congress under a slightly modified unanimous consent agreement .

the modification concerned the length and starting time of morning hour debates on tuesdays "after the first tuesday in may" ( see the " days and meeting times " section for more information ) .

an identical unanimous consent agreement ( agreed to on january 6 , 2009 ) governs morning hour speeches in the 111 th congress .

morning hour debates are not provided for in the rules of the house .

instead , they are a unanimous consent practice of the chamber .

the house gives unanimous consent to holding morning hour debates when it agrees to the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement governing these debates .

in the 111 th congress , the chair refers to this agreement at the start of the morning hour debate period when he announces , "[p]ursuant to the order of the house of january 6 , 2009 , the chair will now recognize ..." the unanimous consent agreement governs recognition for morning hour debates and establishes the days and meeting times for these debates ( for more information , see later sections of this report ) .

during morning hour debates , members must abide not only by the unanimous consent agreement but also by the rules of the house , the chamber's precedents , and the speaker's announced policies .

relevant house rules include those governing debate , decorum , and the speaker's power of recognition .

house precedents discuss how the chamber has interpreted and applied its rules .

there is not an established body of precedents for morning hour debates because these debates are a relatively new feature of house floor procedure .

the term "speaker's announced policies" refers to the speaker's policies on certain aspects of house procedure such as decorum in debate , the conduct of electronic votes , and recognition for one - minute and special order speeches .

while the speaker's announced policies do not govern recognition for morning hour debates ( the unanimous consent agreement governs recognition ) , they do regulate television coverage of morning hour debates .

the speaker's policies prohibit house - controlled television cameras from panning the chamber during the morning hour debate period .

instead , a caption ( also called a "crawl" ) appears at the bottom of the television screen indicating that the house is conducting morning hour debates .

morning hour debates are in order only on mondays and tuesdays .

they take place infrequently on mondays because the house is not always in session that day .

the starting time and length of morning hour debates are established by the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement .

the house convenes for monday morning hour debates 90 minutes earlier than the time established for that day's session .

for example , if the house is scheduled to meet at noon , the morning hour debate period begins at 10:30 a.m .

the monday morning hour debate period can last up to one hour , with a maximum of 30 minutes of debate on each side .

the full hour is rarely used .

tuesday morning hour speeches on or before may 18 , 2009 , take place in the same manner as monday morning hour debates .

the agreement provides , however , that tuesday morning hour debates after may 18 , 2009 , begin 60 minutes before the chamber's meeting hour for a maximum duration of 50 minutes , with 25 minutes allocated to each side .

the different procedures for tuesday morning debates after early may were first established in the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement of may 12 , 1995 .

these procedures , which are included in the agreement for the 111 th congress , are designed to accommodate the chamber's practice of convening earlier for legislative business after early may .

in the 105 th congress , the procedures were only on those tuesdays after early may when the house was scheduled to meet at 10:00 a.m. on tuesdays after early may when the chamber's appointed meeting hour was a later time ( eg , 12:00 noon ) , the tuesday morning debates took place in the same manner as monday morning hour debates .

when monday and tuesday morning hour debates are completed , the house recesses until the meeting hour established for that day's session .

the daily prayer , the pledge of allegiance , and approval of the previous day's journal take place when the house meets after this recess .

the joint leadership unanimous consent agreement requires that the majority and minority leaders give the speaker a list showing how each party's time for morning hour debates will be allocated among its members .

the chair follows this list in recognizing members for morning hour debates .

a majority party representative appointed as "speaker pro tempore " often presides in the chair during morning hour debates .

during each morning hour debate period , he alternates recognition between the majority and minority for both the initial morning hour speech ( i.e. , if a majority member is recognized for the first speech on monday , a minority member is recognized for first speech on tuesday ) and subsequent ones .

individual members must limit their morning hour debate speech to five minutes or less .

only the majority leader , minority leader , or the minority whip may deliver a morning hour debate speech longer than five minutes .

members reserve time for morning hour debates through their party leadership: democratic representatives reserve time through the office of the minority leader , and republican members do so through the republican cloakroom or the party leadership desk on the house floor .

reservations can be made no earlier than one week before the speech date .

while most members reserve five minutes for their morning hour speech , some representatives reserve as little as one minute .

individual members often use the morning hour debate period to deliver speeches on subjects unrelated to legislation before the house .

they deliver eulogies and tributes to individuals and organizations from their congressional district .

they also use the period to deliver speeches on broad policy issues and to present their views on local , national , and international events .

because morning hour debates take place early in the day , they are sometimes used by individual members and the party leadership to share information relevant to that day's session .

for example , members deliver morning hour speeches to explain a bill they are introducing that day and to invite cosponsors .

the chairman of the rules committee has spoken during morning hour debates to announce an emergency meeting of the committee .

this use of morning hour debates to disseminate information among colleagues parallels how members often employ one - minute speeches as a visual form of the "dear colleague" letter .

on occasion , members of the same party use the morning hour debate period to deliver a series of speeches about the party's views on a particular bill or policy issue .

for example , on february 11 , 1997 , four minority party members delivered morning hour debate speeches on campaign finance reform .

this coordinated use of morning hour debates by party members is similar to how the parties sometimes use "leadership special orders" ( i.e. , the first hour of longer special orders that is usually reserved for the party's leadership or a designee ) to focus on a specific theme with participation from other party members .

