the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) examines and approves applications for patents on claimed inventi ons and administers the registration of trademarks .

it also assists other federal departments and agencies to protect american intellectual property in the international marketplace .

the uspto is funded by user fees paid by customers that are designated as "offsetting collections" and subject to spending limits established by the committee on appropriations .

p.l .

112-29 , the leahy - smith america invents act , makes several changes to the handling of fees generated by the uspto .

under the new statute , the use of fees generated is still subject to the appropriations process whereby congress provides the budget authority for the uspto to spend these fees .

however , to address the issue of fees withheld from the office in the past , the america invents act creates within the treasury a "patent and trademark fee reserve fund" into which fee collections above that "appropriated by the office for that fiscal year" will be placed .

these funds will be available to the uspto "to the extent and in the amounts provided in appropriations acts" and may only be used for the work of the uspto .

in addition , the new law grants the uspto authority "to set or adjust by rule any fee established or charged by the office" under certain provisions of the patent and trademark laws .

this appears to provide the uspto with greater flexibility to adjust its fee schedule absent congressional intervention .

the act requires that "patent and trademark fee amounts are in the aggregate set to recover the estimated cost to the office for processing , activities , services and materials relating to patents and trademarks , respectively , including proportionate shares of the administrative costs of the office. .

beginning in 1990 , appropriations measures have , at times , limited the ability of the u.s. patent and trademark office to use the full amount of fees collected in each fiscal year .

even when the office was given the budget authority to spend all fees , the issue remained an area of controversy .

proponents of the withholding approach to funding the uspto claimed that despite the ability of the appropriators to impose limits on spending current year fee collections , the office was provided with sufficient financial support to operate .

advocates of this appropriations structure saw it as a means to provide necessary funding for other programs in the relevant budget category given budget scoring and the caps placed upon the committee on appropriations .

however , many in the community that pay the fees to maintain and administer intellectual property disagreed with this assessment .

critics argued that , over time , a significant portion of the fees collected were not returned to the uspto due to the ceilings established by the appropriations process and the inability of the office to use the fees on a dollar - for - dollar basis .

they claimed that all fees were necessary to cover actual , time - dependent activities at the uspto and that the ability of the appropriators to limit funds severely diminished the efficient and effective operation of the office .

under the america invents act , the budget authority to use fees collected by the uspto remains within the congressional appropriations process .

fees generated above the amount provided in the appropriations legislation are to be put into a special fund and are restricted to use solely by the patent and trademark office .

however , the office must still obtain congressional authority to use these "excess" funds .

it remains to be seen how this new approach addresses the issues associated with the operations of the uspto and the use of those fees collected within a given fiscal year .

an additional issue was raised in regard to the fy2013 sequestration of fees paid to the uspto .

according to the office of management and budget ( omb ) , the fees collected are not considered "voluntary payments" and are therefore subject to sequestration .

however , others disagree with this assessment .

in a letter to the director of omb , the american intellectual property law association stated: we have serious doubts that the uspto is lawfully subject to sequestration in the first place because it is funded through fee collections , not through government spending .

section 255 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( "bbedca" ) ( 2 u.s.c .

905 ) provides a list of exemptions from sequestration including "[a]ctivities financed by voluntary payments to the government for goods or services to be provided for such payments. .

2 u.s.c .

905 ( g ) ( 1 ) ( a ) .

a plain reading of the statute suggests that this exemption should apply to the fees collected by the uspto since they are from voluntary users in exchange for patent and trademark examination and review .

similar concerns have been expressed by other organizations , including the american bar association , which stated in another letter to the director of omb that the "unique funding mechanism for the uspto" lends itself to the congressionally mandated exemptions from sequestration for "activities financed by voluntary payments to the government for goods or services to be provided for such payments. .

