in 2011 , an estimated 552,640 u.s. teenagers ( ages 15-19 ) became pregnant , approximately 80,220 had miscarriages , and 142,650 had legal abortions ( latest available data ) .

the result was that there were 329,772 births to teenagers in that year .

in 2015 , 5.8% of all u.s. births were to teens , and 12.9% of all nonmarital births were to teens .

according to a 2010 report: teen childbearing is associated with adverse health and social outcomes for teen mothers and their children , although these outcomes often reflect preexisting social deficits .

compared with women who delay childbearing until their 20s , teen mothers are more likely to drop out of school and have low educational attainment ; to face unemployment , poverty , and welfare dependency ; to experience more rapid repeat pregnancy ; to become single mothers ; and to experience divorce , if they marry .

infants of teen mothers are more likely to be premature and experience infant mortality .

the children of teenage mothers do less well on indicators of health and social wellbeing than do children of older mothers .

in recognition of the negative , long - term consequences associated with teenage pregnancy and births , the prevention of out - of - wedlock pregnancies is a major goal of this nation .

reducing nonmarital childbearing is one of the explicit goals that were stipulated in the 1996 welfare reform law .

although the birth rate for u.s. teens has dropped in 22 of the last 24 years , it remains higher than the teenage birth rate of most industrialized nations .

in 2015 , 24.1% of 9 th graders reported having experienced sexual intercourse .

the corresponding statistics for older teens were 35.7% for 10 th graders , 49.6% for 11 th graders , and 58.1% for 12 th graders .

the high volume of pregnancies and birth rates among teenagers is associated with earlier sexual activity among teen girls .

also , beginning in about 2004 , the use of contraception ( which was never as high as the use in other developed countries ) started waning .

the academic and professional communities also maintain that teen parenthood is one of the negative consequences of growing up without a father .

the president of the alan guttmacher institute , commenting on a study about adolescent pregnancy and childbearing in "developed" countries , stated: "in the united states , poverty and inequity clearly are behind much of our high rates of pregnancy , birth and abortion .

but lack of sensitive , confidential , low - cost contraceptive services and the denial of accurate and frank information about sex , are equally to blame. .

other commentators argue that teen childbearing is so high in the united states because of underlying social and economic problems .

it reflects a decision among a set of girls to "drop - out" of the economic mainstream ; they choose non - marital motherhood at a young age instead of investing in their own economic progress because they feel they have little chance of advancement .

reducing nonmarital pregnancies is one of the explicit goals that were stipulated in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) .

the 1996 welfare reform law also provided funding for and spearheaded the abstinence - only approach for preventing and reducing teen pregnancy .

although the pregnancy rate , birth rate , and abortion rate for teens have all dropped in recent years , the teen birth rate in the united states is still far above that of most industrialized countries .

the u.s. teen birth rate was 1.4 times that of the united kingdom and eight times that of switzerland .

according to the united nations demographic yearbook for 2014 , teen birth rates were 3.0 births per 1,000 teens ages 15-19 in switzerland ; 4.3 births per 1,000 teens ages 15-19 in denmark ; 4.4 births per 1,000 teens ages 15-19 in japan , 7.8 per 1,000 in germany ; 14.1 per 1,000 in canada ( 2009 data ) ; 17.3 per 1,000 in the united kingdom ; and 24.2 per 1,000 in the united states .

until recently , there was a great divide in the teen pregnancy prevention arena with one group maintaining that "abstinence - only education" programs ( sometimes referred to as sexual risk avoidance programs ) are the best and healthiest strategy to prevent unintended teen pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections among teenagers ( see " 1996-2009: abstinence only " section below for additional arguments ) .

the other group claims a comprehensive approach to sex education provides today's youth with the information and decisionmaking skills needed to make realistic , practical decisions about whether to engage in sexual activities .

they contend that such an approach allows young people to make informed decisions regarding abstinence , gives them the information they need to set relationship limits and to resist peer pressure , and also provides them with information on the use of contraceptives and the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases .

given that 47.4% ( 2011 data ) of high school students have experienced sexual intercourse , advocates argue that abstinence - only messages provide no protection against the risks of pregnancy and disease for these youth .

they further point out that according to one study , teens who break their virginity pledges were less likely to use contraception the first time than teens who had never made such a promise .

in addition , the high number of females under age 25 with sexually transmitted infections ( stis ) has re - energized efforts to persuade girls and young women to abstain from sexual activity or to use condoms ( along with other forms of contraceptives ) to prevent or reduce pregnancy and reduce their risk of getting stis .

a nationally representative survey conducted in 2012 found that ( 1 ) 93% of adults and 87% of teens agree that young people should get a strong message that they should not have sex until they are at least out of high school , and ( 2 ) a majority of adults ( 74% ) and many teens ( 49% ) want teens to get more information about both abstinence and contraception .

specifically with regard to federally funded programs , 62% of parents of teens indicated that teens should be provided with information about both postponing sex and about birth control or protection .

the american public — both adults and teens — support encouraging teens to delay sexual activity and providing young people with information about contraception .

they see encouraging teens to delay sex and providing teens with information about contraception as complementary , not contradictory strategies .

in 2010 , hhs secretary kathleen sebelius stated: "teen pregnancy is a serious national problem and we need to use the best science of what works to address it .

this investment will help bring evidence - based initiatives to more communities across the country while also testing new approaches so we can expand our toolkit of effective interventions. .

the cdc has identified teen pregnancy prevention as a winnable battle .

according to the cdc: through our experience , we know that we can prevent teen pregnancies by promoting teen - friendly interventions aimed at both increasing the number of teens who abstain from or delay sexual activity , and increasing the number of sexually active teens who consistently and correctly use effective contraceptive methods .

this can be accomplished by involving more teens in evidence - based programs and linking prevention programs to clinical services .

the following section examines federal strategies to reduce teen pregnancy by focusing on three time periods: 1981-1996 , 1996-2009 , and 2009 to the present .

there is a growing body of literature on effective interventions for reducing teen pregnancy .

these evidence - based programs have demonstrated impacts on sexual activity ( including delaying initiation of sexual activity ) , contraceptive use , stds / stis , and pregnancy or births .

many analysts and researchers agree that effective teen pregnancy prevention programs ( 1 ) convince teens that not having sex or that using contraception consistently and carefully is the right thing to do ; ( 2 ) last a sufficient length of time ( i.e. , more than a few weeks ) ; ( 3 ) are operated by leaders who believe in their programs and who are adequately trained ; ( 4 ) actively engage participants and personalize the program information ; ( 5 ) address peer pressure issues ; ( 6 ) teach communication skills ; and ( 7 ) reflect the age , sexual experience , and culture of young persons in the programs .

others indicate that effective teen pregnancy prevention programs are often developed in cooperation with teens and experts , help clarify the teen's values and develop the coping skills of teens , provide medically accurate information , have clear goals , focus on specific health behaviors , address psychological risk and protective factors , use trained educators , and provide ongoing support .

the office of adolescent health ( oah ) , established within hhs in fy2010 , coordinates adolescent health programs and initiatives across hhs related to adolescent health promotion and disease prevention .

the oah supports multi - disciplinary projects focused on improving adolescent health , collects and disseminates information on adolescent health to health professionals and the general public , and works in partnership with other hhs agencies to support evidence - based approaches to improving the health of adolescents .

oah provides a list of 41 programs / initiatives / interventions that it deems to be effective and suitable for replication .

the list of 41 evidence - based models showcases a wide range of programs , including those that are curriculum - based ( aimed at educating teens on responsible behaviors ) and those that are clinic - based ( aimed at teens seeking contraceptive services ) , in several types of settings ( eg , schools , community centers ) .

the evidence - based programs vary in the types of program models used and the populations targeted ( eg , african american youth , hispanic youth , persons in the juvenile justice system ) .

they include programs that focus on abstinence as a way to prevent teen pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections and programs that focus on improving contraceptive use among sexually active teens .

the evidence - based approach to teen pregnancy prevention is based on the principle that services or programs that work ( i.e. , are proven to be effective ) should be replicated or expanded upon by entities seeking federal dollars to prevent pregnancy among young people .

the list of 41 includes three abstinence - only education programs .

prior to those three programs , which were found to be effective , it was widely held that the abstinence - only approach was ineffective .

moreover , another study of the abstinence - only strategy , not counted in the 41 , also found positive results .

the scientifically based study assigned african american students in the 6 th and 7 th grades to ( 1 ) an 8-hour abstinence - only intervention to reduce sexual intercourse ; ( 2 ) an 8-hour safer sex intervention to increase condom use ; ( 3 ) 8-hour and 12-hour comprehensive interventions to reduce sexual intercourse and / or increase condom use ; or ( 4 ) a control group wherein an 8-hour health promotion intervention was used to improve healthy behaviors unrelated to sexual behavior ( i.e. , informed students about behaviors associated with heart disease , hypertension , stroke , diabetes , and certain cancers ) .

the study found that only about 34% of the student participants in the abstinence - only intervention said that they had engaged in sexual intercourse , whereas about 49% of the students in the control group reported ( during the two - year follow - up interview ) that they had engaged in sexual intercourse .

the authors also reported that among the participants in the abstinence - only intervention who had engaged in sexual activity during the demonstration , there was no significant difference between the abstinence - only intervention participants and the control group participants regarding consistent condom use .

the authors further noted that none of the interventions had significant effects on consistent condom use .

the teen pregnancy prevention arena has grown substantially with respect to program evaluation .

there is a growing evidence base of activities and services that have been shown to be effective in reducing teen pregnancy , delaying sexual activity among young people , and reducing sexually transmitted infections .

moreover , the number of evaluations / studies that have used a scientific approach with experimental and control groups ( an approach that most analysts agree provides more reliable , valid , and objective information than other types of evaluations ) have also increased .

a recent report states: the movement to shift public and philanthropic funding to support "what works" has made real gains in the last few years .

government and philanthropy are seeking to identify high - impact programs that have been tested in rigorous trials and found to deliver superior results for society .

however , it is not enough to identify what works — we also have to identify how it works so that other organizations can replicate the implementation of the program and get similar results .

the teen pregnancy prevention programs ( i.e. , tier 1 tpp and state formula and competitive prep ) are federally mandated to replicate evidence - based programs .

tier 2 tpp and preis are mandated to implement innovative strategies to prevent teen pregnancy and stis .

both the tpp program and prep provide funding for evaluation .

replication of programs and evaluation of new programs will add to the evidence base regarding what works and what does not work with regard to teen pregnancy prevention .

oah supports several evaluation activities to continue to build the evidence base for what works to prevent teenage pregnancy .

oah currently provides funding to 41 teen pregnancy prevention ( tpp ) grantees to conduct an independent , rigorous evaluation of their programs ; 19 grantees are evaluating their efforts to replicate evidence - based programs and 22 grantees are evaluating new and innovative teen pregnancy prevention programs .

in addition , oah funds two large multi - site federal evaluations focused on teen pregnancy prevention .

according to an office of adolescent health ( oah , hhs ) announcement , on september 30 , 2016 , the american journal of public health released a special supplement which focuses on findings from the teen pregnancy prevention ( tpp ) program… the supplement , funded by oah , reports on the results of more than half of the studies conducted in the first cohort of oah tpp program grantees..the tpp program rigorously evaluated evidence - based and promising teen pregnancy prevention programs to learn more about what works , for whom , and under what conditions… .

the journal supplement highlights findings from a subset of grantees of the oah teen pregnancy program's 41 studies… .

a number of editorials discuss the teen pregnancy prevention program , lessons learned , and expert commentary .

for detailed information on findings from the first cohort of oah tpp grantees , see the september 30 , 2016 , special supplement to the american journal of public health .

upon authorizing the prep program , congress required that it be evaluated .

the evaluation will help the federal government , states , tribes and tribal communities , and local service providers learn more about program design , implementation , and outcomes .

the administration for children and families ( acf ) within hhs contracted with mathematica policy research ( and its subcontractors — child trends , twin peaks partners , decision information resources , public strategies , and chapin hall ) to document and assess this large - scale replication effort .

the evaluation will study prep programs nationwide , collecting data from all grantees , and will also conduct an in - depth examination of a few selected prep sites .

appendix a .

federal teen pregnancy prevention program funding: fy1998-fy2016 appendix b .

teen birth rates for females ages 15 through 1 .

