on september 12 , 1972 , the defense property disposal service ( the forerunner to dla disposition services ) was established under the defense supply agency ( now dla ) .

defense property disposal offices were established worldwide on or near major military installations .

dla disposition services is responsible for property reuse ( including the disposal and sale of surplus and excess defense equipment and supplies ) , precious metal recovery , recycling , hazardous property disposal , and the demilitarization of military equipment .

over the past four years , according to dla's website , over $2.2 billion of property was reutilized .

dla disposition services provides support at major u.s. military installations worldwide .

headquartered in battle creek , mi , the dla disposition services personnel serve in 16 foreign countries ( including the middle east and southwestern asia ) , 2 u.s. territories ( guam and puerto rico ) , and 41 states .

dla disposition services are provided in field offices in afghanistan , iraq , and kuwait with teams deploying out to forward operating bases to assist combat units .

with over 90 field offices , dla disposition services employs about 1,500 people .

the reutilization / transfer / donation program establishes a process for inventory considered no longer needed by the department of defense ( dod ) to be redistributed among various groups .

property disposal means redistributing , transferring , donating , selling , demilitarizing , destroying , or other "end of life cycle" activities .

disposal is the final stage before the property leaves dod's control .

in some cases , the act of demilitarization — destroying the item's military offensive and defensive capability — accomplishes the intent of disposal .

property is considered excess when one particular federal agency determines it is not needed for its particular use , while property is considered surplus when it is no longer needed by the federal government .

most property turned in to dla disposition services by the military services is offered for use in other dod activities and to other federal agencies .

property considered surplus can be reused , transferred , donated , or sold ; potential recipients may include law enforcement agencies , school systems , medical institutions , civic and community organizations , libraries , homeless assistance providers , state and local government agencies , and the public .

during fy2008 , about 56,000 military organizations and components turned in over 3.5 million items to dla disposition services .

about half of all surplus items are designated for the foreign military sales program , and about half are made available to other government agencies , eligible donees , or sold to the public .

on july 31 , 2008 , dla awarded liquidity services , inc. a contract to be the primary manager for the receipt , storage , marketing , and disposition of virtually all usable defense surplus property approved by dod for sale to the public .

the contract had a base term of three years with two one - year renewal options .

the contract was later extended through february 15 , 2013 .

on september 13 , 2012 , liquidity services announced that dla had exercised the second of ( potentially ) two 12-month extension periods , under its "surplus useable property sales contract" to sell dod surplus property .

the surplus contract's performance period was extended through february 13 , 2014 .

authority for the disposal of surplus defense property can be found in p.l .

94-519 , 10 u.s.c .

381 , which amends the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 ( 40 u.s.c .

484 ) , p.l .

107-117 , and dod directive 4140.1 , supply chain materiel management policy ; dod 4160.21-m defense materiel disposition manual , and dod 4160.21-m - 1 defense demilitarization manual .

dla disposition services manages the reutilization , transfer , donation and sale of surplus military property .

the reutilization / transfer / donation program through dla disposition services establishes a process for property considered no longer needed by dod to be redistributed among various groups .

property considered surplus can be reused , transferred , donated , or sold ; potential recipients may include law enforcement agencies , school systems , medical institutions , civic and community organizations , libraries , homeless assistance providers , state and local government agencies , veteran's organizations , and the public .

finally , dla disposition services manages the dod surplus property sales program .

property that is no longer needed by the government may be acquired through public sales , if the property is appropriate and safe for sale to the general public .

there are other programs which may assist organizations which may fail to qualify for dla disposition services property as a dod , federal , or donation customer .

such programs include ( but are not limited to ) museums , educational institutions , national guard and senior reserve officer training corps units , and the civil air patrol .

p.l .

112-239 ( h.r .

4310 , 112 th congress ) contained at least three provisions that my impact the policy governing the distribution of dod surplus or excess property .

section 1051 expanded the secretary of the army's authority to loan or donate small firearms , determined to be excess , for use during funerals and other ceremonial purposes ; section 1053 granted the secretary of defense the authority to transfer mine - resistant , ambush - protected vehicles and spare parts , to nonprofit u.s. humanitarian , demining organizations for training purposes , and section 1091 granted dod the authority to transfer certain aircraft , with exceptions , to the secretary of agriculture and the secretary of homeland security for use by the forest service and the u.s. coast guard .

p.l .

112-81 ( h.r .

1540 , 112 th congress ) contained a provision ( section 361 ) that clarified a previously enacted provision ( section 346 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 , p.l .

111-383 ) which made available for sale any small arms ammunition and small ammunition components which were in excess of military requirements .

section 361 amended the conditions that would govern the commercial sale of small arms ammunition components and fired cartridge cases .

h.rept .

112-329 , the conference report that accompanied h.r .

1540 , offered the following clarification .

the conferees note that the intent of section 346 of p.l .

111-383 , as amended , is to clarify that the only fired cartridge cases ( referred to as expended small arms cartridge cases ) subject to the provision are intact expended small arms cartridge cases and that the provision does not apply outside the continental united states or overrides established department of defense ( dod ) trade security controls or explosives safety controls .

the conferees note that the dod would be permitted to demilitarize and recycle expended small arms cartridge cases covered by the provision so long as there is not a significant decrease in intact expended small arms cartridge cases being made available for sale and there is no evidence that commercial demands are not generally being met .

the conferees note that based on its current force structure and training requirements , the dod currently makes approximately 6-8 million pounds of intact ( non - demilitarized ) expended small arms cartridge cases available each year for commercial sales .

the conferees recognize that the amount made available may change as the dod's force structure or training requirements change .

the conferees note that the dod would be responsible for assessing commercial demands for the purpose of implementing this requirement ; the conferees understand that the dod may choose to conduct market surveys or studies to assess commercial demands for this purpose .

in the 111 th congress , the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( p.l .

111-383 , h.r .

6523 ) contained a provision ( section 1072 ) that amended title 10 section 2576a to broaden the categories of state and local organizations that would be eligible for surplus military equipment to include state and local law enforcement , firefighting , homeland security , and emergency management agencies .

also , the affordable reloaded munitions supply ( arms ) act of 2009 ( h.r .

2193 ) was introduced in the house on april 30 , 2009 .

the bill would have prohibited the secretary of defense from implementing any policy that prevents or places undue restriction on the sale of "intact spent military small arms ammunition casings" to certain domestic suppliers .

the bill had 41 co - sponsors , and was referred to the house armed services committee .

the dla customer contact center is open 24 hours a day , 7 days a week , at [phone number scrubbed] , or at [email address scrubbed] .for more information about dla disposition services , see http: / / www.dispositionservices.dla.mil / index.shtml .

