this report provides background information and potential oversight issues for congress on the gerald r. ford ( cvn - 78 ) class aircraft carrier program .

the navy's proposed fy2019 budget requests a total of $2,347 million ( i.e. , about $2.3 billion ) in procurement funding for the cvn - 78 program .

congress's decisions on the cvn - 78 program could substantially affect navy capabilities and funding requirements and the shipbuilding industrial base .

the navy's fy2020 budget submission also proposed to not fund the mid - life nuclear refueling overhaul ( called a refueling complex overhaul , or rcoh ) for the aircraft carrier cvn - 75 ( harry s. truman ) , and to instead retire the ship around fy2024 and also deactivate one of the navy's carrier air wings at about the same time .

on april 30 , 2019 , however , the administration announced that it was effectively withdrawing this proposal from the navy's fy2020 budget submission .

the administration now supports funding the cvn - 75 rcoh and keeping cvn - 75 ( and by implication its associated air wing ) in service past fy2024 .

for additional discussion of this withdrawn budget proposal , see appendix a .

for an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the cvn - 78 class program and other navy shipbuilding programs may be considered , see crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

 table 3 summarizes congressional action on the fy2020 procurement funding request for the cvn - 78 program .

as shown in table 1 , of the $2,347.0 million requested for fy2020 , $1,062 million is for cvn - 80 and $1,285 million is for cvn - 81 .

appendix a. withdrawn proposal to not fund cvn - 75 rcoh the navy's fy2020 budget submission proposed to not fund the mid - life nuclear refueling overhaul ( called a refueling complex overhaul , or rcoh ) for the aircraft carrier cvn - 75 ( harry s. truman ) , and to instead retire the ship around fy2024 and also deactivate one of the navy's carrier air wings at about the same time .

on april 30 , 2019 , however , the administration announced that it was effectively withdrawing this proposal from the navy's fy2020 budget submission .

the administration now supports funding the cvn - 75 rcoh and keeping cvn - 75 ( and by implication its associated air wing ) in service past fy2024 .

this appendix presents , for reference purposes , additional background information on this withdrawn budget proposal .

following the administration's april 30 withdrawal of its proposal to not fund the cvn - 75 rcoh , the navy states that the cvn - 75 rcoh can no longer begin in fy2024 , as planned prior to the navy's fy2020 budget submission , because the navy spent the months prior to april 30 planning for the ship's deactivation rather than for giving it an rcoh .

as a result , the navy states , the cvn - 75 will now begin a year later , in fy2025 .

as a consequence of this one - year shift in the schedule for the rcoh , the navy states , the funding stream for the cvn - 75 shown in table a - 1 will also now shift one year to the right , and the cvn - 75 rcoh can be reinstated without any funding in fy2020 , because fy2020 is now effectively the same as fy2019 in table a - 1 .

performing an rcoh on a carrier is needed for the carrier to be able to operate for the second half of its intended 50-year service life .

not performing an rcoh on cvn - 75 would mean that , instead of remaining in service for the second half of its intended 50-year service life , the ship would be decommissioned , permanently removed from service , and eventually dismantled .

 ( cvn - 75 was commissioned into service on july 25 , 1998 , and will be 26 years old in 2024. ) .

the navy's fy2020 budget submission shows that , for the period fy2022-fy2047 , this would have reduced the size of the carrier force by one ship compared to what it would otherwise be .

more specifically , the navy's fy2020 30-year ( fy2020-fy2049 ) shipbuilding plan , reflecting the proposal to not fund the cvn - 75 rcoh , projected that the carrier force would remain at 11 ships through fy2024 , decline to 10 ships in fy2025 , and remain at 10 ships for the remainder of the 30-year period , except for a few years ( fy2027 , fy2040 , fy2042-fy2044 , and fy2046-fy2048 ) when it would temporarily decline to 9 ships .

consequently , beginning in fy2025 and extending through the end of the 30-year period , the carrier force would not be in compliance with the requirement under 10 u.s.c .

8062 ( b ) for the navy to maintain a force of not less than 11 operational aircraft carriers .

as an associated action , the navy's fy2020 budget submission also proposed deactivating one of the navy's carrier air wings around fy2024 .

this would reduce the number of carrier air wings from nine to eight , meaning that the navy beginning around fy2024 would no longer be in compliance with the requirement under 10 u.s.c .

8062 ( e ) to maintain a minimum of nine carrier air wings .

table a - 1 shows funding for the cvn - 75 rcoh in the navy's fy2019 budget submission .

as shown in the table , the estimated total cost of the cvn - 75 rcoh in the fy2019 budget submission was $5,578 million ( i.e. , about $5.6 billion ) .

the figure of about $5.6 billion shown in table a - 1 does not include the cost of the two nuclear fuel cores that would be installed as part of the rcoh .

 ( cvn - 75 , like all nimitz - class carriers , has two nuclear reactors , each of which would receive a new fuel core as part of an rcoh. ) .

fuel cores for aircraft carrier rcohs are procured through the other procurement , navy ( opn ) appropriation account .

the navy states that it procured the cores for the cvn - 75 rcoh — one of them in fy2008 and the other in fy2011 — for a total cost of about $538 million .

adding this $538 million cost to the total cost shown in table a - 1 would increase the total estimated cost of the cvn - 75 rcoh to about $6.1 billion .

the fuel cores for the planned future rcohs for cvn - 76 and cvn - 77 ( the final two nimitz - class carriers ) have also been procured — the cvn - 76 rcoh cores were funded in fy2012 and fy2013 , and the cvn - 77 rcoh cores were funded in fy2015 and fy2019 .

thus , if cvn - 75 were to not receive an rcoh , and if it were not possible or cost effective to rescind the funding for the core funded in fy2019 , then two of the six nimitz - class fuel cores that have been procured since fy2008 for anticipated use in rcohs would not in the end be used in an rcoh and would in effect become surplus to the rcoh effort .

the navy indicated that if that were to occur , these two cores would be placed in storage for potential future use as emergency replacement cores for a nimitz - class ship until all nimitz - class ships complete their service lives .

if cvn - 75 were to not receive an rcoh and is instead be decommissioned , the savings from not funding the rcoh would be partially offset by the cost to deactivate and dismantle cvn - 75 .

the navy estimated the cost to deactivate and dismantle cvn - 75 at about $1.5 billion .

the initial increments of this approximate $1.5-billion cost would have occurred in fy2023 ( $130.3 million ) and fy2024 ( $247.2 million ) .

the estimated net savings from not funding the rcoh and instead deactivating and dismantling the ship would thus have been about $4.1 billion ( i.e. , about $5.6 billion less about $1.5 billion ) .

the navy stated that there would also be 20 to 25 years of additional annual savings of about $1 billion per year in the form of avoided annual operation and support ( o&s ) costs for cvn - 75 and the deactivated carrier air wing .

dod officials reportedly wanted to redirect the estimated net rcoh - related savings of about $4.1 billion and the estimated recurring savings of about $1 billion per year to navy investments for technologies that will add to future navy capabilities .

rcohs are done primarily by huntington ingalls industries / newport news shipbuilding ( hii / nns ) in newport news , va , and form a significant part of hii / nns's business base , along with construction of new nuclear - powered aircraft carriers and construction of new nuclear - powered submarines .

rcohs in recent years have been scheduled in a more - or - less heel - to - toe fashion at hii / nns — when one rcoh is done , the next one is scheduled to begin soon thereafter .

rcohs are done in a particular dry dock at hii / nns , so a carrier undergoing an rcoh in that dry dock must be ready to depart the dry dock before the following carrier can be moved into the dry dock for its rcoh .

until it was withdrawn , the proposal in the navy's fy2020 budget submission to not fund cvn - 75's rcoh and instead decommission the ship ( and a carrier air wing ) raised a number of potential oversight issues for congress , including the following: compliance with congressional direction .

the central purposes of 10 u.s.c .

8062 ( b ) and 8062 ( e ) are to act as mandates to the executive branch to support a force of not less than 11 carriers and a minimum of 9 carrier air wings in executive branch planning .

they represent directions from congress for the navy to provide the funding needed to maintain an 11-carrier , 9-carrier - air - wing force , regardless of limitations on the navy's overall budget or other considerations .

a proposed budget from the navy that is inconsistent with these provisions might thus be viewed as a challenge to congress's article 1 power to set policy and to determine the composition of federal spending ( i.e. , congress's constitutional power of the purse ) .

if dod were to treat the requirements in 10 u.s.c .

8062 ( b ) and 8062 ( e ) as optional matters rather than mandates , would this create a precedent for the executive branch to treat similar provisions in the u.s. code as optional matters rather than mandates ? .

for example , would it create a precedent for dod , if it so desired , to begin treating as an optional matter the long - standing requirement in 10 u.s.c .

8063 ( a ) that the marine corps "shall be so organized as to include not less than three combat divisions and three air wings , and such other land combat , aviation , and other services as may be organic therein ? .

if the executive branch were to begin treating statutory provisions like 10 u.s.c .

8062 ( b ) and 8062 ( e ) as optional matters rather than mandates , what implications might this have for policy and program execution , for congress's power to legislatively establish policy and program goals , and for congress's power of the purse ? .

alternative capabilities to be funded ; net impact on navy capabilities .

what were osd's plans for redirecting the savings associated with deactivating cvn - 75 and a carrier air wing around fy2024 ? .

what types of capabilities would have been created or maintained by these redirected funds ? .

how would these capabilities compare in nature and timing to the capabilities that are to be provided by the continued operation of cvn - 75 and the carrier air wing ? .

taking these factors into account , what would have been the net operational impact for the navy of deactivating cvn - 75 and a carrier air wing around fy2024 and redirecting the resulting savings toward these other investments ? .

requirement for 12-carrier force .

the navy's 2016 force structure assessment ( fsa ) led to a navy force - level requirement for a fleet of 355 ships that includes 12 aircraft carriers .

osd allowed the navy to present that fsa to the congress , and to program shipbuilding and other actions in support of achieving the 355-ship force - level goal .

osd did not publicly object to the fsa's 12-carrier requirement ( or any other part of the 355-ship force - level goal ) .

what was the analytical basis for an action that would reduce the size of the carrier from 11 to 10 , instead of helping it to eventually increase from 11 to 12 ? .

next force structure assessment ( fsa ) .

the navy states that it is currently conducting a new fsa as the successor to the 2016 fsa , and that this new fsa is to be completed by the end of 2019 .

this new fsa could change the 355-ship figure , the planned mix of ships , or both .

did the navy's proposal to not fund the cvn - 75 rcoh , and thereby reduce the carrier force from 11 ships to 10 ships , prejudge the outcome of the new fsa ? .

would the new fsa be tainted by the knowledge that the navy had already proposed reducing the carrier force to 10 ships ? .

how well could the analysts performing the new fsa have avoided being influenced by the navy's proposed action ? .

was the navy prepared to go ahead with the cvn - 75 rcoh if the new fsa concludes that there is a requirement for 11 or more carriers ? .

likelihood of need for emergency replacement cores .

how likely was it that the nimitz - class program would need to use an emergency replacement set of fuel cores during the remainder of the nimitz - class life cycle ? .

what set of circumstances might lead to a need for an emergency replacement set of fuel cores ? .

how often have such circumstances previously arisen for a nuclear - powered u.s. navy ship whose fuel cores are intended to be sufficient for powering the ship for at least one - half of its expected service life ? .

given the assessed likelihood of the nimitz - class program needing to use an emergency replacement set of fuel cores during the remainder of the nimitz - class life cycle , what would have been the government's resulting return on investment of the several hundred million dollars used to procure the two fuel cores that would be placed in storage ? .

acting secretary of defense .

the proposal to not fund the cvn - 75 rcoh and to deactivate a carrier air wing represented a notable change from prior dod force - structure planning and budgeting .

was it appropriate for such a change to be proposed by dod during a time when dod has an acting secretary of defense rather than a secretary who was confirmed specifically for that position ? .

impact on industrial base and cost of other work .

what would have been the impact on hii / nns and the other parts of the aircraft carrier industrial base if cvn - 75 were inactivated rather than given an rcoh ? .

what impact , if any , would this have had on the cost of other work performed at hii / nns and other parts of the aircraft carrier industrial base during these years , and on the eventual cost of the cvn - 76 rcoh ? .

for further reference , it can be noted that the navy's fy2015 budget submission proposed not funding the rcoh for the aircraft carrier cvn - 73 ( george washington ) .

the proposal raised oversight issues for congress broadly similar to those listed above .

congress , in acting on the navy's proposed fy2015 budget , rejected the proposal to not fund cvn - 73's rcoh .

the rcoh was funded and is currently underway .

appendix b .

background information on two - ship block buy for cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 this appendix presents additional background information on the two - ship block buy contract for cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 .

the option for procuring two cvn - 78 class carriers under a two - ship block buy contract had been discussed in this crs report since april 2012 .

in earlier years , the discussion focused on the option of using a block buy contract for procuring cvn - 79 and cvn - 80 .

in more recent years , interest among policymakers focused on the option of using a block buy contract for procuring cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 .

on march 19 , 2018 , the navy released a request for proposal ( rfp ) to huntington ingalls industries / newport news shipbuilding ( hii / nns ) regarding a two - ship buy of some kind for cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 .

a march 20 , 2018 , navy news service report stated the following: the navy released a cvn 80 / 81 two - ship buy request for proposal ( rfp ) to huntington ingalls industries — newport news shipbuilding ( hii - nns ) march 19 to further define the cost savings achievable with a two - ship buy .

with lethality and affordability a top priority , the navy has been working with hii - nns over the last several months to estimate the total savings associated with procuring cvn 80 and cvn 81 as a two - ship buy .

"in keeping with the national defense strategy , the navy developed an acquisition strategy to combine the cvn 80 and cvn 81 procurements to better achieve the department's objectives of building a more lethal force with greater performance and affordability," said james f. geurts , assistant secretary of the navy , research development and acquisition .

"this opportunity for a two - ship contract is dependent on significant savings that the shipbuilding industry and government must demonstrate .

the navy is requesting a proposal from hii - nns in order to evaluate whether we can achieve significant savings. .

the two - ship buy is a contracting strategy the navy has effectively used in the 1980s to procure nimitz - class aircraft carriers and achieved significant acquisition cost savings compared to contracting for the ships individually .

while the cvn 80 / 81 two - ship buy negotiations transpire , the navy is pursuing contracting actions necessary to continue cvn 80 fabrication in fiscal year ( fy ) 2018 and preserve the current schedule .

the navy plans to award the cvn 80 construction contract in early fy 2019 as a two - ship buy pending congressional approval and achieving significant savings .

section 121 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 ( h.r .

5515 / p.l .

115-232 of august 13 , 2018 ) permitted the navy , after the department of defense ( dod ) made certain certifications to congress , to add cvn - 81 to the existing contract for building cvn - 80 .

dod provided the required certification on december 31 , 2018 .

on january 31 , 2019 , the navy announced that it had awarded a two - ship fixed - price incentive ( firm target ) ( fpif ) contract for cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 to hii / nns .

the two - ship contract for cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 can be viewed as a block buy contract because the two ships are being procured in different fiscal years ( cvn - 80 was procured in fy2018 and cvn - 81 is shown in the navy's fy2020 budget submission as a ship procured in fy2020 ) .

the navy's previous two - ship aircraft carrier procurements occurred in fy1983 ( for cvn - 72 and cvn - 73 ) and fy1988 ( for cvn - 74 and cvn - 75 ) .

in each of those two earlier cases , however , the two ships were fully funded within a single fiscal year , making each of these cases a simple two - ship purchase ( akin , for example , to procuring two virginia - class attack submarines or two ddg - 51 class destroyers in a given fiscal year ) rather than a two - ship block buy ( i.e. , a contract spanning the procurement of end items procured across more than one fiscal year ) .

compared to dod's estimate that the two - ship block buy contract for cvn - 80 and cvn - 81 would produce savings of $3.9 billion ( as measured from estimated costs for the two ships in the december 2017 navy business case analysis ) , dod states that "the department of defense's office of cost assessment and program evaluation ( cape ) developed an independent estimate of savings for the two - ship procurement and forecast savings of $3.1 billion ( [in] then - year [dollars] ) , or approximately 11 percent... .

the primary differences between [the] cape and navy estimates of savings are in government furnished equipment and production change orders. .

within the total estimated combined reduction in cost , hii / nns reportedly expects to save up to $1.6 billion in contractor - furnished equipment .

a november 2018 dod report to congress that was submitted as an attachment to dod's december 31 , 2018 , certification stated the following regarding the sources of cost reduction for the two - ship contract: the cvn 80 and cvn 81 two - ship buy expands and improves upon the affordability initiatives identified in the annual report on cost reduction efforts for john f. kennedy ( cvn 79 ) and enterprise ( cvn 80 ) as required by section 126 ( c ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( p.l .

114-328 ) .

production saving initiatives for single - ship buys included use of unit families in construction , pre - outfitting and complex assemblies which move work to a more efficient workspace environment , reduction in the number of superlifts , and facility investments which improve the shipbuilder trade effectiveness .

a two - ship buy assumes four years between ship deliveries which allows more schedule overlap , and therefore more shop - level and assembly - level production efficiencies than two single - ship buys .

procuring two ships to a single technical baseline reduces the requirement for engineering labor hours when compared to single - ship estimates .

the ability to rollover production support engineering and planning products maximizes savings while recognizing the minimum amount of engineering labor necessary to address obsolescence and regulatory changes on cvn 81 .

the two - ship agreement with the shipbuilder achieves a 55 percent reduction in construction support engineering hours on cvn 81 and greater than 18 percent reduction in production support and planning hours compared to single ship procurements .

the two - ship procurement strategy allows for serial production opportunities that promote tangible learning and reduced shop and machine set - up times .

it allows for efficient use of production facilities , re - use of production jigs and fixtures , and level loading of key trades .

the continuity of work allows for reductions in supervision , services and support costs .

the result of these efficiencies is a production man - hours step down that is equivalent to an 82 percent learning curve since cvn 79 .

key to achieving these production efficiencies is integrated digital shipbuilding ( ids ) .

the navy's research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) and the shipbuilder's investment in ids , totaling $631 million , will reduce the amount of production effort required to build ford class carriers .

the two - ship buy will accelerate the benefits of this approach .

the ability to immediately use the capability on cvn 81 would lead to a further reduction in touch labor and services in affected value streams .

the two - ship agreement with the shipbuilder represents a production man - hours reduction of over seven percent based on ids efficiencies .

contractual authority for two ships allows the shipbuilder to maximize economic order quantity material procurement .

this allows more efficient ordering and scheduling of material deliveries and will promote efficiencies through earlier ordering , single negotiations , vendor quotes , and cross program purchase orders .

these efficiencies are expected to reduce material costs by about six percent more when compared to single - ship estimates .

improved material management and flexibility will prevent costly production delays .

furthermore , this provides stability within the nuclear industrial base , de - risking the columbia and virginia class programs .

the two - ship buy would provide economic stability to approximately 130,000 workers across 46 states within the industrial base .

change order requirements are likewise reduced as government furnished equipment ( gfe ) providers will employ planning and procurement strategies based on the common technical baseline that minimize configuration changes that must be incorporated on the follow ship .

change order budget allocations have been reduced over 25 percent based on two - ship strategies .

in addition to the discrete savings achieved with the shipbuilder , the two - ship procurement authority provides our partner gfe providers a similar opportunity to negotiate economic order quantity savings and achieve cross program savings when compared to single - ship estimates .

an april 16 , 2018 , press report stated the following: if the navy decides to buy aircraft carriers cvn - 80 and 81 together , newport news shipbuilding will be able to maintain a steady workload that supports between 23,000 and 25,000 workers at the virginia yard for the next decade or so , the shipyard president told reporters last week .

part of the appeal of buying the two carriers together is that the navy would also buy them a bit closer together: the ships would be centered about three - and - a - half or four years apart , instead of the five - year centers for recent carrier acquisition , newport news shipbuilding president jennifer boykin told reporters .

boykin said the closer ship construction centers would allow her to avoid a "labor valley" where the workforce levels would dip down after one ship and then have to come back up , which is disruptive for employees and costly for the company .

if this two - carrier buy goes through , the company would avoid the labor valley altogether and ensure stability in its workforce , boykin said in a company media briefing at the navy league's sea air space 2018 symposium .

that workforce stability contributes to an expected $1.6 billion in savings on the two - carrier buy from newport news shipbuilding's portion of the work alone , not including government - furnished equipment.... boykin said four main things contribute to the expected $1.6 billion in savings from the two - carrier buy .

first , "if you don't have the workforce valley , there's a labor efficiency that represents savings. .

second , "if you buy two at once , my engineering team doesn't have to produce two technical baselines , two sets of technical products ; they only have to produce one , and the applicability is to both , so there's savings there .

when we come through the planning , the build plan of how we plan to build the ship , the planning organization only has to put out one plan and the applicability is to both , so there's savings there. .

the third savings is a value of money over time issue , she said , and fourth is economic order quantity savings throughout the entire supply chain .

discussions of the option of using a block buy contract for procuring carriers have focused on using it to procure two carriers in part because carriers have been procured on five - year centers , meaning that two carriers could be included in a block - buy contract spanning six years — the same number of years originally planned for the two block buy contracts that were used to procure mnay of the navy's littoral combat ships .

it can be noted , however , that there is no statutory limit on the number of years that a block buy contract can cover , and that the lcs block buy contracts were subsequently amended to cover lcss procured in a seventh year .

this , and the possibility of procuring carriers on 3- or 3.5-year centers , raises the possibility of using a block buy contract to procure three aircraft carriers: for example , if procurement of aircraft carriers were shifted to 3- or 3.5-year centers , a block buy contract for procuring cvn - 80 , cvn - 81 , and cvn - 82 could span seven years ( with the first ship procured in fy2018 , and the third ship procured in fy2024 ) or eight years ( with the first ship procured in fy2018 and the third ship procured in fy2025 ) .

the percentage cost reduction possible under a three - ship block buy contract could be greater than that possible under a two - ship block buy contract , but the offsetting issue of reducing congressional flexibility for changing aircraft carrier procurement plans in coming years in response to changing strategic or budgetary circumstances could also be greater .

appendix c. cost growth and managing costs within program cost caps this appendix presents additional background information on cost growth in the cvn - 78 program , navy efforts to stem that growth , and navy efforts to manage costs so as to stay within the program's cost caps .

october 2018 cbo report an october 2018 cbo report on the potential cost of the navy's 30-year shipbuilding plan states the following regarding the cvn - 78 program: the navy's current estimate of the total cost of the gerald r. ford , the lead ship of the cvn - 78 class , is $13.0 billion in nominal dollars appropriated over the period from 2001 to 2018 , an amount that is equal to the cost cap set in law .

cbo used the navy's inflation index for naval shipbuilding to convert that figure to $15.5 billion in 2018 dollars , or 23 percent more than the corresponding estimate when the ship was first authorized in 2008 .

neither the navy's nor cbo's estimate includes the $5 billion in research and development costs that apply to the entire class .

because construction of the lead ship is finished , cbo used the navy's estimate for that ship to estimate the cost of successive ships in the class .

but not all of the cost risk has been eliminated ; in particular , the ship's power systems and advanced arresting gear ( the system used to recover fixed - wing aircraft landing on the ship ) are not yet working properly .

it is not clear how much those problems will cost to fix , but current navy estimates suggest that it will be several tens of millions of dollars or more .

cbo does not have enough information to estimate those final repair costs .

the next carrier after the cvn - 78 will be the cvn - 79 , the john f. kennedy .

funding for that ship began in 2007 , the congress officially authorized its construction in 2013 , and the planned appropriations for it were completed in 2018 .

the shipbuilder expects to complete construction of the cvn - 79 in 2024 and deploy it for the first time in 2026 .

the navy estimates that the ship will cost $11.3 billion in nominal dollars ( or $11.6 billion in 2018 dollars ) .

the navy's selected acquisition report on the cvn - 79 states that "the navy and shipbuilder have made fundamental changes in the manner in which the cvn 79 will be built to incorporate lessons learned from cvn 78 and eliminate the key contributors to cost performance challenges realized in the construction of cvn 78. .

nevertheless , the navy informed cbo that there is a greater than 60 percent chance that the ship's final cost will be more than the current estimate .

although cbo expects the navy to achieve a considerable cost reduction in the cvn - 79 compared with the cvn - 78 , as is typical with the second ship of a class , cbo's estimate is higher than the navy's .

specifically , cbo estimates that the ship will cost $11.7 billion in nominal dollars ( or $12.0 billion in 2018 dollars ) , about 4 percent more than the navy's estimate .

in 2018 , the congress authorized the third carrier of the class , the enterprise ( cvn - 80 ) .

appropriations for that ship began in 2016 and are expected to be complete by 2023 .

the navy estimates that the ship will cost $12.6 billion in nominal dollars ( or $11.5 billion in 2018 dollars ) .

however , as with cvn - 79 , the navy told cbo that there is a greater than 60 percent chance that the ship's final cost will be more than the current estimate .

cbo estimates that the ship will cost $13.0 billion in nominal dollars ( or $11.8 billion in 2018 dollars ) , about 3 percent more than the navy's estimate .

the navy estimates an average cost of $12.4 billion ( in 2018 dollars ) for the 7 carriers ( cvn - 81 through cvn - 87 ) in the 2019 shipbuilding plan .

cbo's estimate is $12.8 billion per ship... .

the gap between the estimates has narrowed since the 2017 plan: the navy's has increased by $500 million per ship , and cbo's has dropped by $200 million per ship .

it is not clear why the navy's estimates increased , but cbo's estimates fell mainly because the agency projects somewhat less growth in real costs of the shipbuilding industry in future years .

august 2018 press report an august 17 , 2018 , press report states the following: huntington ingalls industries inc. , the sole u.s. builder of aircraft carriers , continues to fall short of the navy's demand to cut labor expenses to stay within an $11.39 billion cost cap mandated by congress on the second in a new class of warships .

with about 47 percent of construction complete on the uss john f. kennedy , navy figures show the contractor isn't yet meeting the goal it negotiated with the service: reducing labor hours by 18 percent from the first carrier , the uss gerald ford... .

it took about 49 million hours of labor to build the ford , according to the u.s. government accountability office .

the navy's goal for the kennedy is to reduce that to about 40 million hours .

huntington ingalls's performance "remains stable at approximately 16 percent" less , william couch , spokesman for the naval sea systems command , said in an email .

he said "key production milestones and the ship's preliminary acceptance date remain on track" and there are "ample opportunities" for improvement "with nearly four years until contract delivery and over 70 percent of assembly work" remaining on the vessel's superstructure .

but the pentagon's naval warfare division , which reports to ellen lord , the defense department's chief weapons buyer , is less sanguine .

it said in a july assessment that huntington ingalls "is unlikely to fully recover the needed 18 percent" reduction.... on the effort to meet the 18 percent labor - hour reduction for the kennedy , the navy's program manager "assesses that although difficult , the shipbuilder can still attain" it , couch said .

beci brenton , a spokeswoman for newport news , virginia - based huntington ingalls , said "we are seeing the benefits associated with significant build strategy changes and incorporation of lessons learned" from the first vessel .

brenton said "the current production performance" is 16 percent less than the ford's estimate at the time of contract award for the second vessel but the reduction is 17 percent when compared with the first vessel's current cost... .

but shelby oakley , a director with the gao who monitors navy shipbuilding , said "with so much of the program underway , it is unlikely that the navy will regain efficiency. .

in later phases of a shipbuilding contract , she said , "performance typically degrades , not improves. .

it's also "unclear how the lessons learned" from the first ship "could help regain efficiency when they are already baked in to the navy's overly optimistic estimate for the program," she said .

june 2018 press report a june 19 , 2018 , press report stated the following: huntington ingalls industries inc. is asking general electric co. to compensate it for damage caused by flawed workmanship during installation of propulsion system components on the u.s. navy's $13 billion aircraft carrier gerald r. ford .

the problem , which forced the most expensive u.s. warship back to port in january , has yet to be fully resolved although the carrier is once again at sea.... huntington ingalls , a shipbuilder based in newport news , virginia , "has notified the original manufacturer of the shipyard's intent to seek compensation," naval sea systems command spokesman william couch said in an email .

beci brenton , a spokeswoman for huntington said , "we continue to work with appropriate stakeholders to support resolution of this situation. .

perry bradley , a spokesman for boston - based ge , said "we're not going to comment on specifics other than to say" that "ge is working closely with" huntington's newport news shipyard unit and "the u.s. navy to resolve the issue.".. .

the episode in january was the second failure in less than a year with a "main thrust bearing" that's part of the carrier's propulsion system .

the first occurred in april 2017 , during sea trials a month before the vessel's delivery .

the ship has been sailing in a shakedown period to test systems and work out bugs .

it's now scheduled to be ready for initial combat duty in 2022 .

the navy's carrier program office said in an assessment that an inspection of the carrier's four main thrust bearings after the january failure revealed "machining errors" by ge workers at a lynn , massachusetts , facility during the original manufacturing as "the actual root cause. .

the bearing overheated , the navy said in a march 8 memo to congress , and "after securing the equipment to prevent damage , the ship safely returned to port. .

a failure review board is identifying "modifications required to preclude recurrence," it said .

the bearing is one of four that transfers thrust from the ship's four propeller shafts .

"the costs associated with repairing" the thrust bearings "are currently being assessed" and "this will include recovery of costs from the manufacturer of the main reduction gear , general electric ( lynn ) , as appropriate," the navy said in the memo .

couch said the navy doesn't expect similar propulsion problems with the next vessel in the class , the john f. kennedy , because a different manufacturer made that carrier's propulsion train components .

"any propulsion train deficiencies identified" with the ford "will be corrected and implemented" in "future ships of the class as necessary," he said .

may 2018 press report a may 11 , 2018 , press report stated the following: the navy's costliest vessel ever just got pricer , breaching a $12.9 billion cap set by congress by $120 million , the service told lawmakers this week .

the extra money for the u.s.s .

gerald r. ford built by huntington ingalls industries inc. is needed to replace faulty propulsion components damaged in a january failure , extend the vessel's post - delivery repair phase to 12 months from the original eight months and correct deficiencies with the "advanced weapons elevators" used to move munitions from deep in the ship to the deck .

the elevators on the ship , designated cvn 78 , need to be fixed "to preclude any effect on the safety of the ship and personnel," the naval sea systems command said in a statement to bloomberg news on friday .

"once the adjustment is executed , the cost for cvn 78 will stand at $13.027" billion , the navy said .

in addition to informing congress that the spending lid has been breached , the navy will have to let lawmakers know how it will shift funds to make up the difference .

navy officials didn't disclose the propulsion failure or elevator problems during budget hearings before congress in recent weeks , and house and senate lawmakers didn't ask about it... .

the ford's propulsion system and elevator flaws are separate from reliability issues on its troubled aircraft launch and recovery systems .

after its delivery last may , the ship operated for 70 days and completed 747 shipboard aircraft launches and recoveries , exceeding the goal of about 400 , the navy said .

none of the 11 weapons elevators are operational but at least two are being used for testing "to identify many of the remaining developmental issues for this first - of - class system," the navy has said .

the command said all 11 elevators "should have been complete and delivered with the ship delivery" in may 2017 .

april 2018 press report an april 16 , 2018 , press report stated the following: huntington ingalls industries' newport news shipbuilding president jennifer boykin provided an update on the various stages of construction on several major navy shipbuilding programs during the navy league's sea air space expo last week .

the future uss john f. kennedy ( cvn - 79 ) is about 43 percent complete , with launch planned for the fourth quarter of 2019 and delivery set for 2022 .

boykin said the company has achieved about 75 percent of the ship erected and they are on track for an 18 percent man - hour budget reduction .

boykin provided these updates during a press briefing at the conference .

boykin revealed that undocking of cvn - 79 in the fourth quarter of 2019 will occur three months earlier than originally planned .

september 2017 press report a september 26 , 2017 , press report states the following: huntington ingalls industries inc. is falling short of a u.s. navy goal to reduce hours of labor on the second ship in the new ford class of aircraft carriers in a drive to reduce costs , according to service documents .

with 34 percent of construction complete on the uss john f. kennedy , huntington ingalls estimates it will be able to reduce labor hours by 16 percent from the hours needed to construct the first vessel , the gerald r. ford .

that's less than the 17 percent reduction reported at the end of last year and the 18 percent goal the navy negotiated in the primary construction contract for the carrier .

the "recent degradation in cost performance stems largely from the delayed availability of certain categories of material," such as pipe fittings , controllers , actuators and valves , according to the navy's annual report on the program and updated figures obtained by bloomberg news.... "we acknowledge that the cost reduction target for cvn - 79," relative to the first carrier , "is challenging," huntington ingalls spokeswoman beci brenton said in an email , referring to the kennedy by its navy designation .

"while it is still early in the ship's schedule , we are seeing positive results from" new initiatives to keep costs in check , she said.... navy secretary richard spencer told reporters last week that he will stay involved in monitoring the cvn - 79's construction trends .

"this is my personal approach — the ceo has to be involved. .

a close watch is required "because there are so many moving parts and so many opportunities to do things in a more efficient manner," spencer said .

the navy has been working with the contractors "to mitigate technical risks and impacts of late material," navy spokesman victor chen in an email .

"the overall volume of late material items and associated impact to construction performance is declining .

the navy has hired third - party experts who are working collaboratively with the shipbuilder to identify manufacturing opportunities for efficiency gains" and to assist in implementing improvements... .

the 18 percent reduction in labor hours was "quite optimistic" from the start , michele mackin , a government accountability office director who oversees its shipbuilding assessments , said in an email .

"even based on that assumption , the $11.4 billion cost cap was unlikely to be met," she said .

"if those labor - hour efficiencies are in fact not materializing , costs will go higher .

also , "with the ship being over 30 percent complete , it's unlikely the shipbuilder can get back enough efficiencies to further reduce labor hours — the more complicated work is yet to come," she said .

june 2017 navy testimony at a june 15 , 2017 , hearing before the senate armed services committee on the department of the navy's proposed fy2018 budget , the following exchange occurred: senator john mccain ( chairman ) ( continuing ) : secretary stackley , the navy broached a cost cap for cvn - 78 .

do you believe that it has ? .

sean stackley , acting secretary of the navy: sir , right now our estimate for cvn - 78 , we're trying to hold it within the $12.887 billion number that was established several years ago .

we have included a $20 million [procurement funding] request in this budget pending our determination regarding repairs that required for the... mccain: is that a breach of nunn - mccurdy ? .

stackley: not at this point in time , sir , we're continuing to evaluate whether that additional funding will be required .

we're doing everything we can to stay within the existing cap and we'll keep congress informed as we complete our post - delivery assessment .

mccain: problem is we haven't been informed .

so either you bust the cap and breach nunn - mccurdy — nunn - mccurdy or you notify us .

you haven't done either one .

stackley: sir , we've been submitting monthly reports regarding the carrier , we've alerted the concern regarding the repairs that are being required for the motor turbine generator set and we've acknowledged the risk associated with those repairs .

however , what we're trying to do is not incur those costs , avoid cost by other means , and as of right now we're not ready to trip that cost cap .

mccain: well , it's either not allowable or it's allowable .

it's not allowable , then you take a certain course of action .

if it's allowable then you're required to notify congress .

you have done neither .

stackley: if we need to incur those costs , they will be allowable costs .

we're trying to avoid that at this stage of time , sir .

mccain: i agree , but we were supposed to be notified — ok .

i can tell you that you are either in violation of nunn - mccurdy or you are in violation of the requirement that we be notified .

you have done neither .

there's two scenarios .

stackley: sir , we have not broached the cost cap .

if it becomes apparent that we'll need to go above the cost cap , we will notify congress within — within the terms that you all have established .

mccain: ok. well , i'll get it to you in writing but you still haven't answered the question because when there's a $20 million cost overrun , it's either allowable and then we have to be notified in one way .

if it's not allowable , nunn - mccurdy is — is reached .

but anyway , maybe you can give us a more satisfactory explanation in writing , mr. secretary .

june 2017 gao report a june 2017 gao report states the following: the cost estimate for the second ford - class aircraft carrier , cvn 79 , is not reliable and does not address lessons learned from the performance of the lead ship , cvn 78 .

as a result , the estimate does not demonstrate that the program can meet its $11.4 billion cost cap .

cost growth for the lead ship was driven by challenges with technology development , design , and construction , compounded by an optimistic budget estimate .

instead of learning from the mistakes of cvn 78 , the navy developed an estimate for cvn 79 that assumes a reduction in labor hours needed to construct the ship that is unprecedented in the past 50 years of aircraft carrier construction.... after developing the program estimate , the navy negotiated 18 percent fewer labor hours for cvn 79 than were required for cvn 78 .

cvn 79's estimate is optimistic compared to the labor hour reductions calculated in independent cost reviews conducted in 2015 by the naval center for cost analysis and the office of cost assessment and program evaluation .

navy analysis shows that the cvn 79 cost estimate may not sufficiently account for program risks , with the current budget likely insufficient to complete ship construction .

the navy's current reporting mechanisms , such as budget requests and annual acquisition reports to congress , provide limited insight into the overall ford class program and individual ship costs .

for example , the program requests funding for each ship before that ship obtains an independent cost estimate .

during an 11-year period prior to 2015 , no independent cost estimate was conducted for any of the ford class ships ; however , the program received over $15 billion in funding .

in addition , the program's selected acquisition reports ( sar ) — annual cost , status , and performance reports to congress — provide only aggregate program cost for all three ships currently in the class , a practice that limits transparency into individual ship costs .

as a result , congress has diminished ability to oversee one of the most expensive programs in the defense portfolio .

february 2016 navy testimony the navy testified in 2016 that the navy is committed to delivering the lead ship of the class , gerald r ford ( cvn 78 ) within the $12.887 billion congressional cost cap .

sustained efforts to identify cost reductions and drive improved cost and schedule performance on this first - of - class aircraft carrier have resulted in highly stable cost performance since 2011 .

based on lessons learned on cvn 78 , the approach to carrier construction has undergone an extensive affordability review and the navy and the shipbuilder have made significant changes on cvn 79 to reduce the cost to build the ship .

the benefits of these changes in build strategy and resolution of first - of - class impacts experienced on cvn 78 are evident in early production labor metrics on cvn 79 .

these efforts are ongoing and additional process improvements continue to be identified .

alongside the navy's efforts to reduce the cost to build cvn 79 , the fy 2016 national defense authorization act reduced the cost cap for follow ships in the cvn 78 class from $11,498 million to $11,398 million .

to this end , the navy has further emphasized stability in requirements , design , schedule , and budget , in order to drive further improvement to cvn 79 cost .

the fy 2017 president's budget requests funding for the most efficient build strategy for this ship and we look for congress' full support of this request to enable cvn 79 procurement at the lowest possible cost.... .. .

the navy will deliver the cvn 79 within the cost cap using a two - phased strategy wherein select ship systems and compartments that are more efficiently completed at a later stage of construction - to avoid obsolescence or to leverage competition or the use of experienced installation teams - will be scheduled for completion in the ship's second phase of production and test .

enterprise ( cvn 80 ) began construction planning and long lead time material procurement in january 2016 and construction is scheduled to begin in 2018 .

the fy 2017 president's budget request re - phases cvn 80 funding to support a more efficient production profile , critical to performance , below the cost cap .

cvn 80 planning and construction will continue to leverage class lessons learned to achieve cost and risk reduction , including efforts to accelerate production work to earlier phases of construction , where work is more cost efficient .

october 2015 senate armed services committee hearing cost growth and other issues in the cvn - 78 program were reviewed at an october 1 , 2015 , hearing before the senate armed services committee .

below are excerpts from the prepared statements of the witnesses at the hearing .

osd asd testimony the prepared statement of the assistant secretary of defense ( acquisition ) within the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) states the following in part: by 2000 , the cvn ( x ) acquisition strategy that had been proposed by the navy was an evolutionary , three - step development of the capabilities planned for the cvn .

this evolutionary strategy intending to mature technology and align risk with affordability originally involved using the last ship of the cvn 68 nimitz class , uss george h. w. bush ( cvn 77 ) , as the starting point for insertion of some near term technology improvements including information network technology and the new dual band radar ( dbr ) system from the dd ( x ) ( now ddg 1000 ) program , to create an integrated warfare system that combined the ship's combat system and air wing mission planning functions .

however , the then incoming secretary of defense donald rumsfeld in 2002 directed re - examination of the cvn program , among others , to reduce the overall spend of the department and increase the speed of delivery to the warfighters .

as a result of the secdef's direction , the navy proposed to remove the evolutionary approach and included a new and enlarged flight deck , an increased allowance for future technologies ( including electric weapons ) , and an additional manpower reduction of 500 to 800 fewer sailors to operate .

on december 12 , 2002 , a program decision memorandum approved by then deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz codified this navy proposal and gave this direction back to the dod enterprise .

the ship was renamed the cvn - 21 to highlight these changes .

by milestone b in april 2004 , the navy had evaluated the technologies intended for three ships , removed some of them , and consolidated the remaining ones into a single step of capability improvement on the lead ship .

the new plan acknowledged technological , cost , and schedule challenges were being put on a single ship , but assessed this was achievable .

the acting usd at&l ( michael wynne ) at that milestone also directed the navy to use a hybrid of the service cost position and independent cost estimate ( ice ) to baseline the program funding in lieu of the ice , ( although one can easily argue even the ice was optimistic given these imposed circumstances ) .

by 2004 , dod and congressional leadership had lost confidence in the acquisition system , and deputy secretary of defense gordon england established the defense acquisition performance assessment ( dapa ) panel to conduct a sweeping and integrated assessment of "every aspect" of acquisition .

the result was the discovery that the industrial base had consolidated , that excessive oversight and complex acquisition processes were cost and schedule drivers , and a focus on requirements stability was key to containing costs .

from this , a review of the requirements of the cvn resulted in a revised and solidified "single ship" operational requirements document ( ord ) for the ford class as defined today , with the cvn 78 as lead ship .

on the heels of a delay because of the budgetary constraints in 2006 , the start of the construction of cvn 78 was delayed until 2008 , but the schedule for delivery was held constant , further compounding risks and costs .

the navy's testimony covers these technical and schedule risks and concurrency challenges well .

by 2009 , this committee had issued a floor statement in support of the weapon systems acquisition reform act ( wsara ) .

congress was now united in its pursuit of acquisition reform and , in concert , usd at&l re - issued and updated the department of defense's acquisition instruction ( dodi 5000.2 ) in 2008 .

wsara included strengthening of the 'nunn - mccurdy" process with requires dod to report to congress when cost growth on a major program breaches a critical cost growth threshold .

this legislation required a root - cause assessment of the program and assumed program termination within 60 days of notification unless dod certified in writing that the program remained essential to national security .

wsara had real impact on the cvn 78 , as by 2008 and 2009 the results of all the previous decisions were instantiated in growth of cost and schedule .

then usd at&l john young required the navy to provide a list of descoping efforts and directed the navy to have an off - ramp back to steam catapults if the electromagnetic aircraft launching system ( emals ) remained a problem for the program .

he also directed an independent review of all of the cvn 78 technologies by a defense support team ( dst ) .

prior to the dst , the navy had chartered a program assessment review ( par ) with usd ( at&l ) participation of emals / advanced arresting gear ( aag ) versus steam .

one of the key par findings was converting the emals and aag production contracts to firm , fixed price contracts to cap cost growth and imposed negative incentives for late delivery .

the dual band radar ( dbr ) cost and risk growth was a decision by - product of the ddg 1000 program nunn - mccurdy critical unit cost breach in 2010 .

faced with a need to reduce cost on the ddg 1000 program and the resultant curtailment of the program , the expectation of development costs being borne by the ddg 1000 program was no longer the case and all of the costs associated with the s - band element development and a higher share of the x - band element then had to be supported by the cvn 78 program .

the design problems encountered with aag development have had the most deleterious effects on cvn 78 construction of any of the three major advanced technologies including emals and dbr .

our view of aag is that these engineering design problems are now in the past and although delivery of several critical components have been delayed , the system will achieve its needed capabilities before undergoing final operational testing prior to deployment of the ship .

again , reliability growth is a concern , but this cannot be improved until a fully functional system is installed and operating at the lakehurst , new jersey land based test site , and on board cvn 78 .

with the 2010 introduction by then usd at&l ashton carter ( now in its third iteration by under usd at&l frank kendall ) of the continuous process improvement initiative that was founded in best business practices and wsara called "better buying power," the cvn underwent affordability , "should cost," and requirements assessment .

navy's use of the "gate" process has stabilized the cost growth and reset good business practices .

however , there is still much to do .

we are in the testing phase of program execution prior to deployment and we had been concerned about the timing of the full ship shock trial ( fsst ) .

after balancing the operational and technical risks , the department decided to execute fsst on cvn 78 prior to deployment .

emals and aag are also a concern with regard to final operational testing stemming from the development difficulties that each experienced .

the navy still needs to complete a significant amount of land - based testing to enable certification of the systems to launch and recover the full range of aircraft that it is required to operate under both normal and emergency conditions .

this land - based testing is planned to complete before the final at - sea operational testing for these systems begins.... usd at&l continues to work with navy to tailor the program and ensure appropriate oversight at both the navy staff level as well as osd .

our review of the navy's plan for maintaining control of the cost for cvn 79 included an understanding of the application of lessons learned from the construction of cvn 78 along with the application of a more efficient construction plan for the ship including introduction of competition where possible .

we have established an excellent relationship with the navy to work together to change process and policies that have impacted the ability of the program to succeed , to include revitalizing the acquisition workforce and their skills .

we are confident in the navy's plan for cvn 79 and cvn 80 and , as such , under secretary kendall recently authorized the navy to enter into the detail design and construction phase for cvn 79 and to enter into advanced procurement for long lead time materials for cvn 80 construction .

osd and the navy are committed to delivering cvn 79 within the limits of the cost cap legislated for this ship .

osd dot&e testimony the prepared statement of the director , operational test & evaluation ( dot&e ) , within osd states the following in part: the navy intends to deliver cvn 78 early in calendar year 2016 , and to begin initial operational test and evaluation ( iot&e ) in late calendar year 2017 .

however , the navy is in the process of developing a new schedule , so some dates may change .

based on the current schedule , between now and the beginning of iot&e , the cvn 78 program is proceeding on an aggressive schedule to finish development , testing , troubleshooting , and correction of deficiencies for a number of new , complex systems critical to the warfighting capabilities of the ship .

low or unknown reliability and performance of the advanced arresting gear ( aag ) , the electromagnetic aircraft launch system ( emals ) , the dual band radar ( dbr ) , and the advanced weapons elevators ( awe ) are significant risks to a successful iot&e and first deployment , as well as to achieving the life - cycle cost reductions the navy has estimated will accrue for the ford - class carriers .

the maturity of these systems is generally not at the level that would be desired at this stage in the program ; for example , the cvn 78 test program is revealing problems with the dbr typical of discoveries in early developmental testing .

nonetheless , aag , emals , dbr , and awe equipment is being installed on cvn 78 , and in some cases , is undergoing shipboard checkout .

consequently , any significant issues that testing discovers before cvn 78's schedule - driven iot&e and deployment will be difficult , or perhaps impossible , to address .

resolving the uncertainties in the reliability and performance of these systems is critical to cvn 78's primary function of conducting combat operations .

cvn 78 has design features intended to enhance its ability to launch , recover , and service aircraft .

emals and aag are key systems planned to provide new capabilities for launching and recovering aircraft that are heavier and lighter than typically operated on nimitz - class carriers .

dbr is intended to enhance radar coverage on cvn 78 in support of air traffic control and ship self - defense .

dbr is planned to reduce some of the known sensor limitations on nimitz - class carriers that utilize legacy radars .

the data currently available to my office indicate emals is unlikely to achieve the navy's reliability requirements .

 ( the navy indicates emals reliability is above its current growth curve , which is true ; however , that growth curve was revised in 2013 , based on poor demonstrated performance , to achieve emals reliability on cvn 78 a factor of 15 below the navy's goal. ) .

i have no current data regarding dbr or awe reliability , and data regarding the reliability of the re - designed aag are also not available .

 ( poor aag reliability in developmental testing led to the need to re - design components of that system. ) .

in addition , performance problems with these systems are continuing to be discovered .

if the current schedule for conducting the ship's iot&e and first deployment remain unchanged , reliability and performance shortfalls could degrade cvn 78's ability to conduct flight operations .

due to known problems with current aircraft carrier combat systems , there is significant risk cvn 78 will not achieve its self - defense requirements .

although the cvn 78 design incorporates several combat system improvements relative to the nimitz - class , these improvements ( if achieved ) are unlikely to correct all of the known shortfalls .

testing on other ships with similar combat systems has highlighted deficiencies in weapon employment timelines , sensor coverage , system track management , and deficiencies with the recommended engagement tactics .

most of these limitations are likely to affect cvn 78 and i continue to view this as a significant risk to the cvn 78's ability to defend itself against attacks by the challenging anti - ship cruise missile and other threats proliferating worldwide .

the navy's previous decision to renege on its original commitment to conduct the full ship shock trial ( fsst ) on cvn 78 before her first deployment would have put cvn 78 at risk in combat operations .

this decision was reversed in august 2015 by the deputy secretary of defense .

historically , fssts for new ship classes have identified for the first time numerous mission - critical failures the navy had to address to ensure the new ships were survivable in combat .

we can expect that cvn 78's fsst results will have significant and substantial implications on future carriers in the ford - class and any subsequent new class of carriers .

i also have concerns with manning and berthing on cvn 78 .

the navy designed cvn 78 to have reduced manning to reduce life - cycle costs , but navy analyses of manning on cvn 78 have identified problems in manning and berthing .

these problems are similar to those seen on other recent ship classes such as ddg 1000 and the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) ... .

there are significant risks to the successful completion of the cvn 78 iot&e and the ship's subsequent deployment due to known performance problems and the low or unknown reliability of key systems .

for aag , emals , awe and dbr , systems that are essential to the primary missions of the ship , these problems , if uncorrected , are likely to affect cvn 78's ability to conduct effective flight operations and to defend itself in combat .

the cvn 78 test schedule leaves little or no time to fix problems discovered in developmental testing before iot&e begins that could cause program delays .

in the current program schedule , major developmental test events overlap iot&e .

this overlap increases the likelihood problems will be discovered during cvn 78's iot&e , with the attendant risk to the successful completion of that testing and to the ship's first deployment .

the inevitable lessons we will learn from the cvn 78 fsst will have significant implications for cvn 78 combat operations , as well as for the construction of future carriers incorporating the ship's advanced systems ; therefore , the fsst should be conducted on cvn 78 as soon as it is feasible to do so .

navy testimony the prepared statement of the navy witnesses at the hearing states the following in part: in june 2000 , the department of defense ( dod ) approved a three - ship evolutionary acquisition approach starting with the last nimitz class carrier ( cvn 77 ) and the next two carriers cvnx1 ( later cvn 78 ) and cvnx2 ( later cvn 79 ) .

this approach recognized the significant risk of concurrently developing and integrating new technologies into a new ship design incrementally as follows: • the design focus for the evolutionary cvn 77 was to combine information network technology with a new suite of multifunction radars from the ddg 1000 program to transform the ship's combat systems and the air wing's mission planning process into an integrated warfare system .

• the design focus for the evolutionary cvnx1 ( future cvn 78 ) was a new hull , mechanical and electrical ( hm&e ) architecture within a nimitz class hull that included a new reactor plant design , increased electrical generating capacity , new zonal electrical distribution , and new electrical systems to replace steam auxiliaries under a redesigned flight deck employing new electromagnetic aircraft launch system ( emals ) catapults together with aircraft ordnance and fueling "pit - stops" .

design goals for achieving reduced manning and improved maintainability were also defined .

• the design focus for the evolutionary cvnx2 ( future cvn 79 ) was a potential "clean - sheet" design to "open the aperture" for capturing new but immature technologies such as the advanced arresting gear ( aag ) and advanced weapons elevators ( awe ) that would be ready in time for the third ship in the series ; and thereby permit the experience gained from design and construction of the first two ships ( cvn 77 and cvn 78 ) to be applied to the third ship ( cvn 79 ) .

early in the last decade , however , a significant push was made within dod for a more transformational approach to delivering warfighting capability .

as a result , in 2002 , dod altered the program acquisition strategy by transitioning to the new aircraft carrier class in a single transformational leap vice an incremental three ship strategy .

under the revised strategy , cvn 77 reverted back to a "modified - repeat" nimitz class design to minimize risk and construction costs , while delaying the integrated warfare system to cvn 78 .

further , due to budget constraints , cvn 78 would start construction a year later ( in 2007 ) with a nimitz class hull form but would entail a major re - design to accommodate all the new technologies from the three ship evolutionary technology insertion plan .

this leap ahead in a single ship was captured in a revised operational requirements document ( ord ) in 2004 , which defined a new baseline that is the ford class today , with cvn 78 as the lead ship .

the program entered system development and demonstration , containing the shift to a single ship acquisition strategy .

the start of cvn 78 construction was then delayed by an additional year until 2008 due to budget constraints .

as a result , the traditional serial evolution of technology development , ship concept design , detail design , and construction – including a total of 23 developmental systems incorporating new technologies originally planned across cvn 77 , cvnx1 , cvnx2 - were compressed and overlapped within the program baseline for the cvn 78 .

today , the navy is confronting the impacts of this compression and concurrency , as well as changes to assumptions made in the program planning more than a decade ago... .

given the lengthy design , development , and build span associated with major warships , there is a certain amount of overlap or concurrency that occurs between the development of new systems to be delivered with the first ship , the design information for those new systems , and actual construction .

since this overlap poses cost and schedule risk for the lead ship of the class , program management activities are directed at mitigating this overlap to the maximum extent practicable .

in the case of the ford class , the incorporation of 23 developmental systems at various levels of technical maturity ( including emals , aag , dbr , awe , new propulsion plant , integrated control systems ) significantly compounded the inherent challenges associated with accomplishing the first new aircraft carrier design in 40-years .

the cumulative impact of this high degree of concurrency significantly exceeded the risk attributed to any single new system or risk issue and ultimately manifested itself in terms of delay and cost growth in each element of program execution ; development , design , material procurement ( government and contractor ) , and construction.... shipbuilder actions to resolve first - of - class issues retired much of the schedule risks to launch , but at an unstable cost .

first - of - class construction and material delays led the navy to revise the launch date in march 2013 from july 2013 to november 2013 .

nevertheless , the four - month delay in launch allowed increased outfitting and ship construction that were most economically done prior to ship launch , such as completion of blasting and coating operations for all tanks and voids , installation of the six dbr arrays , and increased installations of cable piping , ventilation , electrical boxes , bulkheads and equipment foundations .

as a result , cvn 78 launched at 70 percent complete and 77,000 tons displacement – the highest levels yet achieved in aircraft carrier construction .

this high state of completion at launch enabled improved outfitting , compartment completion , an efficient transition into the shipboard test program , and the on - time completion of key milestones such as crew move aboard .

with the advent of the shipboard test program , first time energization and grooming of new systems have required more time than originally planned .

as a result , the navy expects the sea trial schedule to be delayed about six to eight weeks .

the exact impact on ship delivery will be determined based on the results of these trials .

the navy expects no schedule delays to cvn 78 operational testing and deployability due to the sea trials delay and is managing schedule delays within the $12.887 billion cost cap .

additionally , at delivery , aag will not have completed its shipboard test program .

the program has not been able to fully mitigate the effect of a two - year delay in aag equipment deliveries to the ship .

all aag equipment has been delivered to the ship and will be fully installed on cvn 78 at delivery .

the aag shipboard test and certification program will complete in time to support aircraft launch and recovery operations in summer 2016... .

the navy , in coordination with the shipbuilder and major component providers , implemented a series of actions and initiatives in the management and oversight of cvn 78 that crossed the full span of contracting , design , material procurement , gfe , production planning , production management and oversight .

the secretary of the navy directed a detailed review of the cvn 78 program build plan to improve end - to - end aircraft carrier design , material procurement , production planning , build and test , the results of which are providing benefit across all carriers .

these corrective measures include: • cvn 78 design was converted from a 'level of effort , fixed fee' contract to a completion contract with a firm target and incentive fee .

shipbuilder cost performance has been on - target or better since this contract change .

• cvn 78 construction fee was reduced , consistent with contract provisions .

however , the shipbuilder remains incentivized by the contract shareline to improve upon current cost performance .

• contract design changes are under strict control ; authorized only for safety , damage control , and mission - degrading deficiencies .

• following a detailed "nunn - mccurdy - like" review in 2008-2009 , the navy converted the emals and aag production contract to a firm , fixed price contract , capping cost growth to each system .

• in 2011 , naval sea systems command completed a review of carrier specifications with the shipbuilder , removing or improving upon overly burdensome or unneeded specifications that impose unnecessary cost on the program .

periodic reviews continue .

much of the impact to cost performance was attributable to shipbuilder and government material cost overruns .

the navy and shipbuilder have made significant improvements upon material ordering and delivery to the shipyard to mitigate the significant impact of material delays on production performance .

these actions include: • the navy and shipbuilder instituted optimal material procurement strategies and best practices ( structuring procurements to achieve quantity discounts , dual - sourcing to improve schedule performance and leveraging competitive opportunities ) from outside supply chain management experts .

• the shipbuilder assigned engineering and material sourcing personnel to each of their key vendors to expedite component qualifications and delivery to the shipyard .

• the shipbuilder inventoried all excess material procured on cvn 78 for transfer to cvn 79 .

• the program executive officer ( carriers ) has conducted quarterly flag - level gfe summits to drive cost reduction opportunities and ensure on - time delivery of required equipment and design information to the shipbuilder .

the cvn 78 build plan , consistent with the nimitz class , had focused foremost on completion of structural and critical path work to support launching the ship on - schedule .

achieving the program's cost improvement targets required that cvn 78 increase its level of completion at launch , from 60 percent to 70 percent .

to achieve this and drive greater focus on system completion: • the navy fostered a collaborative build process review by the shipbuilder with other tier 1 private shipyards in order to benchmark its performance and identify fundamental changes that are yielding marked improvement .

• the shipbuilder established specific launch metrics by system and increased staffing for waterfront engineering and material expediters to support meeting those metrics .

this ultimately delayed launch , but drove up pre - outfitting to the highest levels for cvn new construction which has helped stabilize cost and improve test program and compartment completion performance relative to cvn 77 .

• the shipbuilder linked all of these processes within a detailed integrated master schedule that has provided greater visibility to performance and greater ability to control cost and schedule performance across the shipbuilding disciplines .

these initiatives , which summarize a more detailed list of actions being implemented and tracked as a result of the end - to - end review , were accompanied by important management changes .

• in 2011 , the navy assigned a second tour flag officer with considerable carrier operations , construction , and program management experience as the new program executive officer ( peo ) .

• the new peo established a separate program office , pms 379 , to focus exclusively on cvn 79 and cvn 80 , which enables the lead ship program office , pms 378 , to focus on cost control , schedule performance and the delivery of cvn 78 .

• in 2012 , the shipbuilder assigned a new vice president in charge of cvn 78 , a new vice president in charge of material management and purchasing , and a number of new general ship foremen to strengthen cvn 78 performance .

• the new peo and shipyard president began conducting bi - weekly launch readiness reviews focused on cost performance , critical path issues and accomplishment of the targets for launch completion .

these bi - weekly reviews will continue through delivery .

• assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development , and acquisition ) ( asn ( rd&a ) ) conducts quarterly reviews of program progress and performance with the peo and shipbuilder to ensure that all that can be done to improve on cost performance is being done .

the series of actions taken by the navy and the shipbuilder are achieving the desired effect of arresting cost growth , establishing stability , and have resulted in no changes in the government's estimate at completion over the past four years .

the department of the navy is continuing efforts to identify cost reductions , drive improved cost and schedule performance , and manage change .

the navy has established a rigorous process with the shipbuilder that analyzes each contract change request to approve only those change categories allowed within the 2010 asn ( rd&a ) change order management guidance .

this guidance only allows changes for safety , contractual defects , testing and trial deficiencies , statutory and regulatory changes that are accompanied by funding and value engineering change proposals with instant contract savings .

while the historical average for contractual change level is approximately 10 percent of the construction cost for the lead ship of a new class , cvn 78 has maintained a change order budget of less than four percent to date despite the high degree of concurrent design and development .

finally , the navy has identified certain areas of the ship whose completion is not required for delivery , such as berthing spaces for the aviation detachment , and has removed this work from the shipbuilder's contract .

this deferred work will be completed within the ship's budgeted end cost and is included within the $12,887 million cost estimate .

by performing this deferred work in the post - delivery period using cvn 78 end cost funding , it can be competed and accomplished at lower cost and risk to the overall ship delivery schedule... .

the cvn 79 cost cap was established in 2006 and adjusted by the secretary of the navy in 2013 , primarily to address inflation between 2006 and 2013 plus $325 million of the allowed increase for non - recurring engineering to incorporate design improvements for the cvn 78 class construction .

the navy and the shipbuilder conducted an extensive affordability review of carrier construction and made significant changes to deliver cvn 79 at the lowest possible cost .

these changes are focused on eliminating the largest impacts to cost performance identified during the construction of cvn 78 as well as furthering improvements in future carrier construction .

the navy outlined cost savings initiatives in its report to congress in may , 2013 , and is executing according to plan .

stability in requirements , design , schedule , and budget , are essential to controlling and improving cvn 79 cost , and therefore is of highest priority for the program .

requirements for cvn 79 were "locked down" prior to the commencement of cvn 79 construction .

the technical baseline and allocated budget for these requirements were agreed to by the chief of naval operations and asn ( rd&a ) and further changes to the baseline require their approval , which ensures design stability and increases effectiveness during production .

at the time of construction contract award , cvn 79 has 100 percent of the design product model complete ( compared to 65 percent for cvn 78 ) and 80 percent of initial drawings released .

further , cvn 79 construction benefits from the maturation of virtually all new technologies inserted on cvn 78 .

in the case of emals and aag , the system design and procurement costs are understood , and cvn 79 leverages cvn 78 lessons learned.... a completed ford class design enabled the shipbuilder to fully understand the "whole ship" bill of materials for cvn 79 construction and to more effectively manage the procurement of those materials with the knowledge of material lead times and qualified sources accrued from cvn 78 construction .

the shipbuilder is able to order ship - set quantities of material , with attendant cost benefits , and to ensure cvn 79 material will arrive on time to support construction need .

extensive improvements have been put in place for cvn 79 material procurement to drive both cost reductions associated with more efficient procurement strategies and production labor improvements associated with improved material availability .

improved material availability is also a critical enabler to many construction efficiency improvements in cvn 79 .

the shipbuilder has developed an entirely new material procurement and management strategy for cvn 79 .

this new strategy consists of eight separate initiatives... .

the shipbuilder and the navy have performed a comprehensive review of the build strategy and processes used in construction of cvn 78 class aircraft carriers as well as consulted with other navy shipbuilders on best practices .

as a result , the shipbuilder has identified and implemented a number of changes in the way they build aircraft carriers , with a dedicated focus on executing construction activities where they can most efficiently be performed .

the cvn 79 build sequence installs 20 percent more parts in shop , and 30 percent more parts on the final assembly platen , as compared to cvn 78 .

this work will result in an increase in pre - outfitting and work being pulled to earlier stages in the construction process where it is most efficiently accomplished... .

in conjunction with the navy and the shipbuilder's comprehensive review of the build strategy and processes used in construction of cvn 78 class aircraft carriers , a number of design changes were identified that would result in more affordable construction .

some of these design changes were derived from lessons learned in the construction of cvn 78 and others seek to further simplify the construction process and drive cost down... .

in addition to the major focus discussed above , the shipbuilder continues to implement capital improvements to facilities that serve to reduce risk and improve productivity.... to enhance cvn 79 build efficiency and affordability , the navy is implementing a two - phase delivery plan .

the two - phase strategy will allow the basic ship to be constructed and tested in the most efficient manner by the shipbuilder ( phase i ) while enabling select ship systems and compartments to be completed in phase ii , where the work can be completed more affordably through competition or the use of skilled installation teams... .

the cvn 80 planning and construction will continue to leverage class lessons learned in the effort to achieve cost and risk reduction for remaining ford class ships .

the cvn 80 strategy seeks to improve on cvn 79 efforts to frontload as much work as possible to the earliest phases of construction , where work is both predictable and more cost efficient... .

while delivery of the first - of - class ford has involved challenges , those challenges are being addressed and this aircraft carrier class will provide great value to our nation with unprecedented and greatly needed warfighting capability at overall lower total ownership cost than a nimitz class cvn .

the navy has taken major steps to stem the tide of increasing costs and drive affordability into carrier acquisition .

gao testimony the prepared statement of the gao witness at the hearing states the following in part: the ford - class aircraft carrier's lead ship began construction with an unrealistic business case .

a sound business case balances the necessary resources and knowledge needed to transform a chosen concept into a product .

yet in 2007 , gao found that cvn 78 costs were underestimated and critical technologies were immature — key risks that would impair delivering cvn 78 at cost , on - time , and with its planned capabilities .

the ship and its business case were nonetheless approved .

over the past 8 years , the business case has predictably decayed in the form of cost growth , testing delays , and reduced capability — in essence , getting less for more .

today , cvn 78 is more than $2 billion over its initial budget .

land - based tests of key technologies have been deferred by years while the ship's construction schedule has largely held fast .

the cvn 78 is unlikely to achieve promised aircraft launch and recovery rates as key systems are unreliable .

the ship must complete its final , more complex , construction phase concurrent with key test events .

while problems are likely to be encountered , there is no margin for the unexpected .

additional costs are likely .

similarly , the business case for cvn 79 is not realistic .

the navy recently awarded a construction contract for cvn 79 which it believes will allow the program to achieve the current $11.5 billion legislative cost cap .

clearly , cvn 79 should cost less than cvn 78 , as it will incorporate lessons learned on construction sequencing and other efficiencies .

while it may cost less than its predecessor , cvn 79 is likely to cost more than estimated .

as gao found in november 2014 , the navy's strategy to achieve the cost cap relies on optimistic assumptions of construction efficiencies and cost savings — including unprecedented reductions in labor hours , shifting work until after ship delivery , and delivering the ship with the same baseline capability as cvn 78 by postponing planned mission system upgrades and modernizations until future maintenance periods .

today , with cvn 78 over 92 percent complete as it reaches delivery in may 2016 , and the cvn 79 on contract , the ability to exercise oversight and make course corrections is limited .

yet , it is not too late to examine the carrier's acquisition history to illustrate the dynamics of shipbuilding — and weapon system — acquisition and the challenges they pose to acquisition reform .

the carrier's problems are by no means unique ; rather , they are quite typical of weapon systems .

such outcomes persist despite acquisition reforms the department of defense and congress have put forward — such as realistic estimating and "fly before buy. .

competition with other programs for funding creates pressures to overpromise performance at unrealistic costs and schedules .

these incentives are more powerful than policies to follow best acquisition practices and oversight tools .

moreover , the budget process provides incentives for programs to be funded before sufficient knowledge is available to make key decisions .

complementing these incentives is a marketplace characterized by a single buyer , low volume , and limited number of major sources .

the decades - old culture of undue optimism when starting programs is not the consequence of a broken process , but rather of a process in equilibrium that rewards unrealistic business cases and , thus , devalues sound practices .

july 2015 press report a july 2 , 2015 , press report states the following: the navy plans to spend $25 million per year beginning in 2017 as a way to invest in lowering the cost of building the services' new ford - class aircraft carriers , service officials said .

"we will use this design for affordability to make new improvements in cost cutting technologies that will go into our ships," said rear adm. michael manazir , director , air warfare.... "we just awarded a contract to buy long lead item materials [for cvn - 79] and lay out an allocated budget for each of the components of that ship .

we want to build the ship in the most efficient manner possible," rear adm. thomas moore , program executive officer , carriers , said .

navy leaders say the service is making positive strides regarding the cost of construction for the uss kennedy and plans to stay within the congressional cost cap of $11.498 billion... .

the $25 million design for affordability initiative is aimed at helping to uncover innovative shipbuilding techniques and strategies that will accomplish this and lower costs .

moore said the goal of the program is to , among other things , remove $500 million from the cost of the third ford - class carrier , the uss enterprise , cvn 80 .

"it is finding a million here and a million there and eventually that is how you get a billion dollars out of the ship from ( cvn ) 78 to ( cvn ) 79 .

the goal is to get another $500 million out of cvn 80 .

the $25 million dollars is a pretty prudent investment if we can continue to drive the cost of this class of ship down," moore told reporters recently .

moore explained that part of the goal is to get to the point where a ford - class carrier can be built for the same amount of man - hours it took to build their predecessor ships , the nimitz - class carriers .

"we want to get back to the goal of being able to build it for historical nimitz class levels in terms of man hours for a ship that is significantly more capable and more complex to build," moore added .

the money will invest in new approaches and explore the processes that a shipyard can use to build the ship , moore added .

"they've made a significant investment in these new welding machines .

these new welding machines allow the welder to use different configurations .

this has significantly improved the throughput that the shipyard has," moore said , citing an example of the kind of thing the funds would be used for .

the funds will also look into whether new coatings for the ship or welding techniques can be used and whether millions of feet of electrical cabling can be installed in a more efficient manner , moore added .

other cost saving efforts assisted by the funding include the increased use of complex assemblies , common integrated work packages , automated plate marking , weapons elevator door re - design and vertical build strategies , navy officials said .

shipbuilders could also use a new strategy of having work crews stay on the same kind of work for several weeks at a time in order to increase efficiency , moore said .

also , some of the construction work done on the uss ford while it was in dry dock is now being done in workshops and other areas to improve the building process , he added .

june 2015 press reports a june 29 , 2015 , press report states the following: newport news shipbuilding will see cost reduction on the order of 18 percent fewer man hours overall from the first ford - class aircraft carrier to the second , according to a company representative .

ken mahler , newport news vice president of navy programs , touted the shipyard's cost savings on the john f. kennedy ( cvn - 79 ) during a june 15 interview with inside the navy .

this reduction was facilitated by the investments the shipyard is making in carrier construction , as well as lessons learned from the first ship , the gerald r. ford ( cvn - 78 ) , which will deliver next year .

a june 23 , 2015 , press report states the following: the pentagon's cost - assessment office now says the navy's second aircraft carrier in a new class will exceed a congressionally mandated cost cap by $235 million .

that's down from an april estimate that the uss john f. kennedy , the second warship in the new ford class , would bust a $11.498 billion cap set by lawmakers by $370 million .

the navy maintains that it can deliver the ship within the congressional limit .

"the original figure was a draft based on preliminary information," navy commander bill urban , a spokesman for the pentagon's cost assessment and program evaluation office , said in an e - mail .

as better information , such as updated labor rates , became available , the office "revised its estimate to a more accurate number," he said .

a june 15 , 2015 , press report states the following: [rear admiral tom] moore [program executive officer for aircraft carriers] .

said the program would save a billion dollars by decreasing the man hours needed to construct the ship by 18 percent from cvn - 78 to 79 — down to about 44 million manhours .

he said this reduction is only a first step in taking cost ouot of the carrier program .

the future enterprise ( cvn - 80 ) will take about 4 million manhours out , or another 10 percent reduction , for a savings of about $500 million .

but beyond seeking ways to take cost out , the contract itself reduces the risk to the government , moore said .

"the main construction of the ship is now in a fixed price environment , so that switchover really limits the government's liability," he said .

without getting into specific dollar amounts due to business sensitivities , moore explained that "this is the lowest target fee we've ever had on any cvn new construction .

look at tghe shape of the share [government - contractor cost] share lines , because the share lines at the end of the day are a measure of risk .

so where we'd like to get quickly to [a] 50 / 50 [share line] , in past carrier contracts we've been out at 85 / 15 , 90 / 10 — which basically means for every dollar over [the target cost figure , up to the ceiling cost figure] , the government picks up 85 cents on the dollar .

and this contract very quickly gets to 50 / 50 .

the other thing is ceiling price — on a fixed - price contract , the ceiling price is the government's maximum liability .

and on this particular contract , again , it is the lowest ceiling price we've ever had [for a cvn]. .

february 2015 navy testimony at a february 25 , 2015 , hearing on department of the navy acquisition programs , department of the navy officials testified the following: the navy is committed to delivering cvn 78 within the $12.887 billion congressional cost cap .

sustained efforts to identify cost reductions and drive improved cost and schedule on this first - of - class aircraft carrier have resulted in highly stable performance since 2011 .

parallel efforts by the navy and shipbuilder are driving down and stabilizing aircraft carrier construction costs for the future john f kennedy ( cvn 79 ) and estimates for the future enterprise ( cvn 80 ) .

as a result of the lessons learned on cvn 78 , the approach to carrier construction has undergone an extensive affordability review .

the navy and the shipbuilder have made significant changes on cvn 79 to reduce the cost to build the ship as detailed in the 2013 cvn 79 report to congress .

the benefits of these changes in build strategy and resolution of first - of - class impacts on cvn 79 are evident in metrics showing significantly reduced man - hours for completed work from cvn 78 .

these efforts are ongoing and additional process improvements continue to be identified .

the navy extended the cvn 79 construction preparation contract into 2015 to enable continuation of ongoing planning , construction , and material procurement while capturing lessons learned associated with lead ship construction and early test results .

the continued negotiations of the detail design and construction ( dd&c ) contract afford an opportunity to incorporate further construction process improvements and cost reduction efforts .

award of the dd&c contract is expected in third quarter fy 2015 .

this will be a fixed price - type contract .

additionally , the navy will deliver the cvn 79 using a two - phased strategy .

this enables select ship systems and compartments to be completed in a second phase , wherein the work can be completed more efficiently through competition or the use of skilled installation teams responsible for these activities .

this approach , key to delivering cvn 79 at the lowest cost , also enables the navy to procure and install shipboard electronic systems at the latest date possible .

the fy 2014 ndaa adjusted the cvn 79 and follow ships cost cap to $11,498 million to account for economic inflation and non - recurring engineering for incorporation of lead ship lessons learned and design changes to improve affordability .

in transitioning from first - of - class to first follow ships , the navy has maintained ford class requirements and the design is highly stable .

similarly , we have imposed strict interval controls to drive changes to the way we do business in order to ensure cvn 79 is delivered below the cost cap .

to this same end , the fy 2016 president's budget request aligns funding to the most efficient build strategy for this ship and we look for congress' full support of this request to enable cvn 79 to be procured at the lowest possible cost .

enterprise ( cvn 80 ) will begin long lead time material procurement in fy 2016 .

the fy 2016 request re - phases cvn 80 closer to the optimal profile , therefore reducing the overall ship cost .

the navy will continue to investigate and will incorporate further cost reduction initiatives , engineering efficiencies , and lessons learned from cvn 78 and cvn 79 .

future cost estimates for cvn 80 will be updated for these future efficiencies as they are identified .

may 2013 navy testimony in its prepared statement for a may 8 , 2013 , hearing on navy shipbuilding programs before the seapower subcommittee of the senate armed services committee , the navy stated that in 2011 , the navy identified spiraling cost growth [on cvn - 78] associated with first of class non - recurring design , contractor and government furnished equipment , and ship production issues on the lead ship .

the navy completed an end - to - end review of cvn 78 construction in december 2011 and , with the shipbuilder , implemented a series of corrective actions to stem , and to the extent possible , reverse these trends .

while cost performance has stabilized , incurred cost growth is irreversible.... as a result of lessons learned on cvn 78 , the approach to carrier construction has undergone an extensive affordability review ; and the navy and the shipbuilder have made significant changes on cvn 79 that will reduce the cost to build the ship .

cvn 79 construction will start with a complete design , firm requirements , and material economically procured and on hand in support of production need .

the ship's build schedule also provides for increased completion levels at each stage of construction with resulting improved production efficiencies.... inarguably , this new class of aircraft carrier brings forward tremendous capability and life - cycle cost advantages compared to the nimitz - class it will replace .

however , the design , development and construction efforts required to overcome the technical challenges inherent to these advanced capabilities have significantly impacted cost performance on the lead ship .

the navy continues implementing actions from the 2012 detailed review of the ford - class build plan to control cost and improve performance across lead and follow ship contracts .

this effort , taken in conjunction with a series of corrective actions with the shipbuilder on the lead ship , will not recover costs to original targets for gerald r. ford [cvn - 78] , but should improve performance on the lead ship while fully benefitting cvn 79 and following ships of the class .

in the discussion portion of the hearing , sean stackley , the assistant secretary of the navy for research , development and acquisition ( i.e. , the navy's acquisition executive ) , testified that first , the cost growth on the cvn - 78 is unacceptable .

the cost growth dates back in time to the very basic concepts that went into take in the nimitz - class and doing a total redesign of the nimitz class to get to a level of capability and to reduce operating and support cost for the future carrier .

far too much risk was carried into the design of the first of the ford - class .

cost growth stems to the design was moving at the time production started .

the vendor base that was responsible for delivering new components and material to support the ship production was ( inaudible ) with new developments in the vendor base and production plan do not account for the material ordering difficulties , the material delivery difficulties and some of the challenges associated with building a whole new design compared to the nimitz.... sir , for cvn - 79 , we have — we have held up the expenditures on cvn - 79 as we go through the details of — one , ensuring that the design of the 78 is complete and repeated for the 79s [sic] that we start with a clean design .

two , we're going through the material procurement .

we brought a third party into assessment material - buying practices at newport news to bring down the cost of material .

and we're metering out the dollars for buying material until it hits the objectives that we're setting for cvn - 79 through rewriting the build plan on cvn - 79 .

if you take a look at how the 78 is being constructed , far too much work is being accomplished late in the build cycle .

so we are rewriting the build plan for cvn - 79 , do more work in the shops where it's more efficient , more work in the buildings where it's more efficient , less work in the dry dock , less work on the water .

and then we're going after the rates — the labor rates and the investments needed by the shipbuilder to achieve these efficiencies .

later in the hearing , stackley testified that the history in shipbuilding is since you don't have a prototype for a new ship , the first of class referred to as the lead ship is your prototype .

and so you carry a lot of risk into the construction of that first of class .

also , given the nature that there's a lengthy design development and build span associated with ships , so there is a certain amount of overlap or concurrency that occurs between the development of new systems that need to be delivered with the first ship , the incorporation of the design of those new systems and the actual construction .

and so to the extent that there is change in a new ship class then the risk goes up accordingly .

in the case of the cvn - 78 , the degree of change compared to the nimitz was fairly extraordinary all for good reasons , good intentions , increased capability , increased survivability , significant reduction in operating and support costs .

so there was a determination that will take on this risk in order to get those benefits , and the case of the cvn - 78 , those risks are driving a lot of the cost growth on the lead ship .

when you think about the follow ships , now you've got a stable design , now your vendor base has got a production line going to support the production .

now you've got a build plan and a workforce that has climbed up on the learning curve to drive cost down .

so you can look at — you can look at virtually every shipbuilding program and you'll see a significant drop - off in cost from that first of class to the follow ships .

and then you look for a stable learning curve to take over in the longer term production of a ship class .

carriers are unique for a number of reasons , one of which we don't have an annual procurement of carriers .

they're spread out over a five and , in fact , in the case of 78 as much as seven - year period .

so in order to achieve that learning , there are additional challenges associated with achieving that learning .

and so we're going at it very deliberately on the cvn - 79 through the build plan with the shipbuilder to hit the line that we've got to have — the cost reductions that we've got to have on the follow ships of the class .

march 2013 navy report a march 2013 report to congress on the navy's plan for building cvn - 79 that was released to the public on may 16 , 2013 , states the following in its executive summary: as a result of the lessons learned on cvn 78 , the approach to carrier construction has undergone an extensive affordability review and the navy and the shipbuilder have made significant changes on cvn 79 that will significantly reduce the cost to build the ship .

these include four key construction areas: — cvn 79 construction will start with a complete design and a complete bill of material — cvn 79 construction will start with a firm set of stable requirements — cvn 79 construction will start with the development complete on a host of new technologies inserted on cvn 78 ranging from the electromagnetic aircraft launch system ( emals ) , the dual band radar , and the reactor plant , to key valves in systems throughout the ship — cvn 79 construction will start with an 'optimal build' plan that emphasizes the completion of work and ship outfitting as early as possible in the construction process to optimize cost and ultimately schedule performance .

in addition to these fundamentals , the navy and the shipbuilder are tackling cost through a series of other changes that when taken over the entire carrier will have a significant impact on construction costs .

the navy has also imposed cost targets and is aggressively pursuing cost reduction initiatives in its government furnished systems .

a detailed accounting of these actions is included in this report .

the actions discussed in this report are expected to reduce the material cost of cvn 79 by 10-20% in real terms from cvn 78 , to reduce the number of man - hours required to build the cvn 79 by 15-25% from cvn 78 , and to reduce the cost of government furnished systems by 5-10% in real terms from cvn 78 .

for the full text of the navy's report , see the appendix d .

march 2012 navy letter to senator mccain secretary of the navy ray mabus , in a letter with attachment sent in late march 2012 to senator john mccain on controlling cost growth in cvn - 78 , stated the following: dear senator mccain: thank you for your letter of march 21 , 2012 , regarding the first - of - class aircraft carrier , gerald r. ford ( cvn 78 ) .

few major programs carry greater importance or greater impact on national security , and no other major program comprises greater scale and complexity than the navy's nuclear aircraft carrier program .

accordingly , successful execution of this program carries the highest priority within the department of the navy .

i have shared in the past my concern when i took office and learned the full magnitude of new technologies and design change being brought to the ford .

requirements drawn up more than a decade prior for this capital ship drove development of a new reactor plant , propulsion system , electric plant and power distribution system , first of kind electromagnetic aircraft launching system , advanced arresting gear , integrated warfare system including a new radar and communications suite , air conditioning plant , weapons elevators , topside design , survivability improvements , and all new interior arrangements .

cvn 78 is a near - total redesign of the nimitz class she replaces .

further , these major developments , which were to be incrementally introduced in the program , were directed in 2002 to be integrated into cvn 78 in a single step .

today we are confronting the cost impacts of these decisions made more than a decade ago .

in my august 29 , 2011 letter , i provided details regarding these cost impacts .

at that time , i reported the current estimate for the navy's share of the shipbuilder's construction overrun , $690 million , and described that i had directed an end - to - end review to identify the changes necessary to improve cost for carrier design , material procurement , planning , build and test .

the attached white paper provides the findings of that review and the steps we are taking to drive affordability into the remaining cvn 78 construction effort .

pending the results of these efforts , the navy has included the 'fact of life' portion of the stated overrun in the fiscal year 2013 president's budget request .

the review also highlighted the compounding effects of applying traditional carrier build planning to a radically new design ; the challenges inherent to low - rate , sole - source carrier procurement ; and the impact of external economic factors accrued over 15 years of cvn 78 procurement — all within the framework of cost - plus contracts .

the outlined approach for ensuring cvn 79 and follow ship affordability focuses equally upon tackling these issues while applying the many lessons learned in the course of cvn 78 procurement .

as always , if i may be of further assistance , please let me know .

sincerely , [signed] ray mabus attachment: as stated copy to: the honorable carl levin , chairman [attachment] improving cost performance on cvn 78 cvn 78 is nearing 40 percent completion .

cost growth to - date is attributable to increases in design , contractor furnished material , government furnished material ( notably , the electromagnetic aircraft launching system ( emals ) , advanced arresting gear ( aag ) , and the dual band radar ( dbr ) ) , and production labor performance .

to achieve the best case outcome , the program must execute with zero additional cost growth in design and material procurement , and must improve production performance .

the navy and the shipbuilder have implemented a series of actions and initiatives in the management and oversight of cvn 78 that cross the full span of contracting , design , material procurement , government furnished equipment , production planning , production , management and oversight .

cvn 78 is being procured within a framework of cost - plus contracts .

within this framework , however , the recent series of action taken by the navy to improve contract effectiveness are achieving the desired effect of incentivizing improved cost performance and reducing government exposure to further cost growth .

cvn 78 design has been converted from a 'level of effort , fixed fee' contract to a completion contract with a firm target and incentive fee .

shipbuilder cost performance has been on - target or better since this contract was changed .

cvn 78 construction fee has been retracted , consistent with contract performance .

however , the shipbuilder is incentivized by the contract shareline to improve upon current performance to meet agreed - to cost goals .

contract design changes are under strict control ; authorized only for safety , damage control , mission - degrading deficiencies , or similar .

adjudicated changes have been contained to less than 1 percent of contract target price .

the navy converted the emals and aag production contract to a firm , fixed price contract , capping cost growth to that system and imposing negative incentives for late delivery .

naval sea systems command is performing a review of carrier specifications with the shipbuilder , removing or improving upon overly burdensome or unneeded specifications that impose unnecessary cost on the program .

the single largest impact to cost performance to - date has been contractor and government material cost overruns .

these issues trace to lead ship complexity and cvn 78 concurrency , but they also point to inadequate accountability for carrier material procurement , primarily during the ship's advance procurement period ( 2002-2008 ) .

these effects cannot be reversed on cvn 78 , but it is essential to improve upon material delivery to the shipyard to mitigate the significant impact of material delays on production performance .

equally important , the systemic material procurement deficiencies must be corrected for cvn 79 .

to this end , the navy and shipbuilder have taken the following actions .

the navy has employed outside supply chain management experts to develop optimal material procurement strategies .

the navy and the shipbuilder are reviewing remaining material requirements to employ these best practices ( structuring procurements to achieve quantity discounts , dual - sourcing to improve schedule performance and leverage competitive opportunities , etc. ) .

the shipbuilder has assigned engineering and material sourcing personnel to each of their key vendors to expedite component qualifications and delivery to the shipyard .

the shipbuilder is inventorying all excess material procured on cvn 78 for transfer to cvn 79 ( cost reduction to cvn 78 ) , as applicable .

the program executive officer ( carriers ) is conducting quarterly flag - level government furnished equipment summits to drive cost reduction opportunities and ensure on - time delivery of required equipment and design information to the shipbuilder .

the most important finding regarding cvn 78 remaining cost is that the cvn 78 build plan , consistent with the nimitz class , focuses foremost on completion of structural and critical path work to support launching the ship on - schedule .

this emphasis on structure comes at the expense of completing ship systems , outfitting , and furnishing early in the build process and results in costly , labor - intensive system completion activity during later ; more costly stages of production .

achieving the program's cost improvement targets will require that cvn 78 increase its level of completion at launch , from current estimate of 60 percent to no less than 65 percent .

to achieve this goal and drive greater focus on system completion: the navy fostered a collaborative build process review by the shipbuilder with other tier 1 private shipyards in order to benchmark its performance arid identify fundamental changes that would yield marked improvement ; the shipbuilder has established specific launch metrics by system ( foundations , machinery , piping , power panels , vent duct , lighting , etc. ) .

and increased staffing for waterfront engineering and material expediters to support meeting these metrics ; the shipbuilder has linked all of these processes within a detailed integrated master schedule , providing greater visibility to current performance and greater ability to control future cost and schedule performance across the shipbuilding disciplines ; the navy and shipbuilder are conducting unit readiness reviews of cvn 78 erection units to ensure that the outfitted condition of each hull unit being lifted into the dry - dock contains the proper level of outfitting .

these initiatives , which summarize a more detailed list of actions being implemented and tracked as result of the end - to - end review , are accompanied by important management changes .

the shipbuilder has assigned a new vice president in charge of cvn 78 , a new vice president in charge of material management and purchasing , and a number of new general shop foreman to strengthen cvn 78 performance .

the navy has assigned a second tour flag officer with considerable carrier operations , construction , and program management experience as the new program - executive officer ( peo ) .

the peo and shipyard president conduct bi - weekly launch readiness reviews focusing on cost performance , critical path issues and accomplishment of the target for launch completion .

the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development , and acquisition ) conducts a monthly review of program progress and performance with the peo and shipbuilder , bringing to bear the full weight of the department , as needed , to ensure that all that can be done to improve on cost performance is being done .

early production performance improvements can be traced directly to these actions , however , significant further improvement is required .

to this end , the navy is conducting a line - by - line review of all 'cost to - go' on cvn 78 to identify further opportunity to reduce cost and to mitigate risk .

improving cost performance on cvn 79 cvn 79 advance procurement commenced in 2007 with early construction activities following in 2011 .

authorization for cvn 79 procurement is requested in fiscal year 2013 president's budget request with the first year of incremental funding .

two years have been added to the cvn 79 production schedule in this budget request , afforded by the fact that cvn 79 will replace cvn 68 when she inactivates .

to improve affordability for cvn 79 , the navy plans to leverage this added time by introducing a fundamental change to the carrier procurement approach and a corresponding shift to the carrier build plan , while incorporating cvn 78 lessons learned .

the two principal 'documents' which the navy and shipbuilder must ensure are correct and complete at the outset of cvn 79 procurement are the design and the build plan .

design is governed by rules in place that no changes will be considered for the follow ship except changes necessary to correct design deficiencies on the lead ship , fact of life changes to correct obsolescence issues , or changes that will result in reduced cost for the follow ship .

exceptions to these rules must be approved by the jroc , or designee .

accordingly , the navy is requesting procurement authority for cvn 79 with the design product model complete and construction drawings approximately 95 percent complete ( compared to approximately 30 percent complete at time of lead ship authorization ) .

as well , first article testing and certification will be complete for virtually all major new equipments introduced in the ford class .

at this point in time , the shipbuilder has developed a complete bill of material for cvn 79 .

the navy is working with the shipbuilder to ensure that the contractor's material estimates are in - line with navy 'should cost' estimates ; eliminating non - recurring costs embedded in lead ship material , validating quantities , validating escalation indices , incorporating lead ship lessons learned .

the navy has increased its oversight of contractor furnished material procurement , ensuring that material procurement is competed ( where competition is available ) ; that it is fixed priced ; that commodities are bundled to leverage economic order quantity opportunities ; and that the vendor base capacity and schedule for receipt supports the optimal build plan being developed for production .

in total , the high level of design maturity and material certification provides a stable technical baseline for material procurement cost and schedule performance , which are critical to developing and executing an improved , reliable build plan .

in order to significantly improve production labor performance , based on timely receipt of design and material , the navy and shipbuilder are reviewing and implementing changes to the cvn 79 build plan and affected facilities .

the guiding principles are: maximize planned work in the shops and early stages of construction ; revise sequence of structural unit construction to maximize learning curve performance through 'families of units' and work cells ; incorporate design changes to improve ford class producibility ; increase the size of erection units to eliminate disruptive unit breaks and improve unit alignment and fairness ; increase outfitting levels for assembled units prior to erection in the dry - dock ; increase overall ship completion levels at each key event .

the shipbuilder is working on detailed plans for facility improvements that will improve productivity , and the navy will consider incentives for capital improvements that would provide targeted return on investment , such as: increasing the amount of temporary and permanent covered work areas ; adding ramps and service towers for improved access to work sites and the dry - dock ; increasing lift capacity to enable construction of larger , more fully outfitted super - lifts: an incremental improvement to carrier construction cost will fall short of the improvement necessary to ensure affordability for cvn 79 and follow ships .

accordingly , the shipbuilder has established aggressive targets for cvn 79 to drive the game - changing improvements needed for carrier construction .

these targets include: 75 percent complete at launch ( 15 percent > [i.e. , 15 percent greater than] ford ) ; 85-90 percent of cable pulled prior to launch ( 25-30 percent > ford ) ; 30 percent increase in front - end shop work ( piping details , foundations , etc ) ; all structural unit hot work complete prior to blast and paint ; 25 percent increase to work package throughput ; 100 percent of material available for all work packages in accordance with the integrated master schedule ; zero delinquent engineering and planning products ; resolution of engineering problems in < 8 [i.e. , less than 8] hours .

in parallel with efforts to improve shipbuilder costs , the peo is establishing equally aggressive targets to reduce the cost of government furnished equipment for cvn 79 ; working equipment item by equipment item with an objective to reduce overall gfe costs by ~$500 million .

likewise , the naval sea systems command is committed to continuing its ongoing effort to identify specification changes that could significantly reduce cost without compromising safety and technical rigor .

the output of these efforts comprises the optimal build plan for cvn 79 and follow , and will be incorporated in the detail design and construction baseline for cvn 79 .

cvn 79 will be procured using a fixed price incentive contract .

appendix d. march 2013 navy report to congress on construction plan for cvn - 79 this appendix reprints a march 2013 navy report to congress on the navy's construction plan for cvn - 79 .

appendix e. shock trial an earlier oversight issue for congress for the cvn - 78 program was whether to conduct the shock trial for the cvn - 78 class in the near term , on the lead ship in the class , or years later , on the second ship in the class .

this appendix presents background information on that issue .

a shock trial , known formally as a full ship shock trial ( fsst ) and sometimes called a shock test , is a test of the combat survivability of the design of a new class of ships .

a shock trial involves setting off one or more controlled underwater charges near the ship being tested , and then measuring the ship's response to the underwater shock caused by the explosions .

the test is intended to verify the ability of the ship's structure and internal systems to withstand shocks caused by enemy weapons , and to reveal any changes that need to be made to the design of the ship's structure or its internal systems to meet the ship's intended survivability standard .

shock trials are nominally to be performed on the lead ship in a new class of ships , but there have also been cases where the shock trial for a new class was done on one of the subsequent ships in the class .

the question of whether to conduct the shock trial for the cvn - 78 class in the near term , on the lead ship in the class , or years later , on the second ship in the class , has been a matter of disagreement at times between the navy and the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) .

the navy has wanted to perform the shock trial on the second ship in the class , because performing it on the lead ship in the class , the navy has argued , will cause a significant delay in the first deployment of the lead ship , effectively delaying the return of the carrier force to an 11-ship force level and increasing the operational strain on the other 10 carriers .

the navy has argued that the risks of delaying the shock trial on the cvn - 78 to the second ship in the class are acceptable , because the cvn - 78 class hull design is based on the nimitz ( cvn - 68 ) class aircraft carrier hull design , whose survivability against shocks is understood , because systems incorporated into the cvn - 78 design have been shock tested at the individual component level , and because computer modeling can simulate how the cvn - 78 design as a whole will respond to shocks .

osd has argued that the risks of delaying the cvn - 78 class shock trial to the second ship in the class are not acceptable , because the cvn - 78 design is the first new u.s. aircraft carrier design in four decades ; because the cvn - 78 design has many internal design differences compared to the cvn - 68 design , including new systems not present in the cvn - 68 class design ; and because computer modeling can only do so much to confirm how a complex new platform , such as an aircraft carrier and all its internal systems , will respond to shocks .

the risk of delaying the shock trial , osd has argued , outweighs the desire to avoid a delay in the first deployment of the lead ship in the class .

osd in 2015 directed the navy to plan for conducting a shock trial on the lead ship .

the navy complied with this direction but has also sought to revisit the issue with osd .

the issue of the shock trial for the cvn - 78 class has been a matter of legislative activity — see the provisions shown earlier in " recent related legislative provisions ," particularly the most recent such provision , section 121 ( b ) of the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

2810 / p.l .

115-91 of december 12 , 2017 ) .

an april 5 , 2018 , press report states the following: the pentagon's no .

2 civilian has said the navy should perform shock - testing soon to determine how well its new $12.9 billion aircraft carrier — the costliest warship ever — could withstand an attack , affirming the service's recent decision to back down from a plan for delay .

"we agree with your view that a test in normal sequence is more prudent and pragmatic," deputy defense secretary patrick shanahan said in a newly released march 26 letter to senate armed services committee chairman john mccain .

the arizona republican and senator jack reed , the panel's top democrat , pressed for the shock - testing to go ahead as originally planned .

james guerts , the navy's chiefs weapons buyer , told reporters last month that the navy was acquiescing to the testing after initially asking defense secretary james mattis to delay it for at least six years .

in its push to maintain an 11-carrier fleet , the navy wanted to wait and perform the test on a second carrier in the class rather than on the uss gerald ford .

