the international military education and training program ( imet ) was formally established in 1976 as part of a restructuring of the united states foreign military sales ( fms ) program .

it had its antecedents in legislation passed in 1949 that created the grant military assistance program ( map ) .

imet , as currently constituted , is intended to be a low - cost policy program to provide training in u.s. defense department schools to predominantly military students from allied and friendly nations on a grant basis .

the foreign students must speak english and train to u.s. standards , alongside american military personnel and other foreign students .

they are offered courses in military skills and doctrine , exposed to the u.s. professional military establishment and the american way of life , including democratic values , respect for internationally recognized human rights , and the belief in the rule of law .

students are also exposed to u.s. military procedures and the manner in which the military functions under civilian control .

through the imet program , the united states seeks to influence students who may rise to positions of prominence in foreign governments , expose foreign students to a professional military in a democratic society , and professionalize foreign armed forces .

it also seeks to strengthen regional relationships while enhancing the self - defense capabilities of u.s. friends and allies , as well as enhancing the ability of the u.s. and participant nations to conduct military operations and peacekeeping activities together .

many nations come to participate in imet , in part , to enhance their capabilities to utilize effectively the defense articles and services they obtain from the united states .

the united states in recent years has annually trained , on average , over 10,000 students from approximately 130 countries through imet .

formal instruction involves over 2,000 courses , nearly all of which are taught in the united states at approximately 150 military schools and installations .

other activities utilized to achieve imet goals include orientation tours for key senior military and civilian officials , observer training , and on - the - job training .

the united states coast guard also provides education and training in maritime search and rescue , operation and maintenance of aids to navigation , port security , at - sea law enforcement , international maritime law , and general maritime skills .

the level of funding for imet has increased significantly since fy1995 from $26.35 million to an estimated $91.7 million for fy2004 , while overall foreign assistance program funding has continued to decline .

the recent funding levels represent a restoration of imet funding to levels more consistent with those that existed in the late 1980s and early 1990s .

it also reflects support for efforts to meet training requirements generated by 29 newly emerging democracies globally .

the defense department expects the costs associated with the imet program to increase due to inflation , to growing requirements of central europe and the newly independent states ( nis ) , to the increasing popularity of expanded imet , and efforts to maintain existing programs in africa and latin america .

in addition , since fy1994 , the united states has placed a strict limitation on the amount of technical and high - cost training in response to an earlier large reduction in imet funding .

instead emphasis has been placed on the u.s. military services' senior service school programs , professional military educational efforts , expanded imet and english language training .

as a result , there has been a notable reduction in the proportion of technical training .

in fy1995 , for example , technical training represented about 17% of the overall imet appropriation , while professional military education programs constituted over 50% of the appropriation .

these facts raise the current issue of whether or not more resources , and possibly more funds , should be made available for technical training .

this issue may become more acute as the united states attempts to advance its policy goals in nato enlargement ( which might well require training on nato interoperable systems ) , and in seeking to help imet participants enhance their ability to assume greater roles in international peacekeeping operations .

however , any decision to provide additional funding for imet would mean that those funds could come at the expense of other programs , given current budgetary constraints .

in recent years , american concerns with human rights practices of certain nations that were recipients of united states foreign aid has led to restrictions or conditions being placed on their participation in the imet program .

in the case of indonesia , for example , congress has required that the president make a number of certifications about the actions of the indonesian government before funds can be provided under the expanded imet program .

in some cases , the imet program represents the major current vehicle for contact between the united states military and its counterparts in countries with a record of human rights violations or a tradition of authoritarian or undemocratic governments .

as reductions in the united states foreign military financing program ( fmf ) continue , imet is increasingly the remaining military assistance program that congress can use to sanction nations it finds to be abusing the human rights of its people .

at the same time , imet may also be the only instrument available that might assist in changing the attitudes of military - dominated governments and lead to a reduction in human rights abuses and greater levels of democratic government .

a current issue , then , is whether using imet restrictions to sanction nations with poor human rights records can be an effective means for modifying the behavior of their governments .

