one of the primary tasks of the federal communications commission ( fcc ) is to encourage the deployment of broadband throughout the united states .

broadband technology is now available over a wide array of delivery systems including cable , wireless , telephone , and fiber optic networks .

the fcc moved , in recent years , to ease some of the regulatory burdens inherent in erecting new broadband facilities within the current legal framework .

congress has also taken steps to encourage the deployment of wireless facilities .

this report will discuss some of the important legal developments related to broadband facilities deployment .

section 704 of the telecommunications act of 1996 governs federal , state , and local regulation of the siting of "personal wireless service facilities" or cellular communication towers .

under the 1996 act , state and local governments are prohibited from unreasonably discriminating among "providers of functionally equivalent services. .

this prohibition has been interpreted to provide state and local governments with the "flexibility to treat facilities that create different visual , aesthetic , or safety concerns differently to the extent permitted under generally applicable zoning requirements even if those facilities provide functionally equivalent services. .

however , state and local governments cannot adopt policies that prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services .

this provision not only applies to outright bans on tower siting , but also to situations where a state or local government's "criteria or their administration effectively preclude towers no matter what the carrier does. .

in these cases , the carrier must show "not just that this application has been rejected but that further reasonable efforts are so likely to be fruitless that it is a waste of time even to try. .

the act also prescribes certain procedures that a state or local government must follow when reviewing a request to place , construct , or modify personal wireless service facilities .

the state or local government must "act on any request for authorization to place , construct or modify personal wireless service facilities within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed. .

if the state or local government denies the request , the denial must be in writing and supported by "substantial evidence contained in a written record. .

substantial evidence has been defined as "such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion. .

recently , section 6409 ( a ) of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 contained a provision that appears intended to streamline the local approval process by easing restrictions on what is known as "collocation. .

state and local governments now must grant the requests for modifications of existing wireless towers or base stations if the request would not substantially change the physical dimensions of the tower or base station .

no definition is provided in the statute for the terms "tower" or "base station. .

furthermore , no definition is provided for what it might mean to "substantially change the physical dimensions" of a tower .

these ambiguities may cause difficulty in applying the new provision to future collocation requests .

however , ambiguities may be resolved either by federal courts or by the fcc in a rulemaking to define the terms .

assuming that the new exception does not apply to an application to site a new tower , courts have found that aesthetics may constitute a valid basis for the denial of a wireless permit so long as there is substantial evidence of the adverse visual impact of the proposed tower .

in fact , according to one court , "nothing in the telecommunications act forbids local authorities from applying general and nondiscriminatory standards derived from their zoning codes , and ... aesthetic harmony is a prominent goal underlying almost every such code. .

federal courts therefore have routinely upheld the denials of applications to construct wireless towers where the decisions of local entities were in writing and based on evidence that the tower would diminish property values , reduce the ability of property owners in the vicinity of the proposed tower to enjoy their property , or damage the scenic qualities of the proposed location .

however , generalized aesthetic concerns will not be considered "substantial evidence" to support the denial of a permit .

for example , the seventh circuit upheld the reversal of a denial of a petition based on aesthetic concerns where the only evidence that the proposed tower would be unsightly was the testimony of a few residents that they did not like poles in general , and those residents admitted that they had no objection to flagpoles , the proposed disguise for the wireless tower .

blanket opposition to poles could not constitute "substantial evidence," in the opinion of the court .

many community groups also oppose the siting of towers based on health and environmental concerns .

however , the telecommunications act of 1996 prohibits state and local governments from regulating the placement of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the effects of radio frequency emissions if the facility in question complies with the federal communications commission's regulations concerning such emissions .

"as written , the purpose of the requirement is to prevent telecommunications siting decisions from being based upon unscientific or irrational fears that emissions from the telecommunications sites may cause undesirable health effects. .

courts have enforced this provision of the act and have noted that "concerns of health risks due to the emissions may not constitute substantial evidence in support of denial. .

the fcc announced that it would be reviewing its regulations concerning radio frequency emissions in the coming months .

the act also provides for the appeal of a state or local government's denial of a request to place , construct , or modify a facility .

section 704 ( c ) of the telecommunications act provided that within 180 days of the enactment of the act , "the president or his designee shall prescribe procedures by which federal departments and agencies may make available on a fair , reasonable , and nondiscriminatory basis , property , rights - of - way , and easements under their control for the placement of new telecommunications services. .

president clinton issued a memorandum on august 10 , 1995 , directing the administrator of general services , "in consultation with the secretaries of agriculture , interior , defense , and the heads of such other agencies as the administrator may determine , to develop procedures necessary to facilitate appropriate access to federal property for the siting of mobile services antennas. .

the general services administration published procedures for the placement of commercial antennas on federal property in the federal register on march 29 , 1996 .

on march 14 , 2007 , the general services administration published updated procedures for the placement of commercial antennas on federal property in the federal register .

the agency also declared that these replacement procedures should remain in effect indefinitely .

however , in 2012 , congress required the administrator of general services to refine the process for granting easements for wireless infrastructure on federal property .

section 6409 of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 contained provisions intended to standardize and facilitate the placement of towers on federal property .

first section 6409 ( b ) granted the authority for placing towers on buildings controlled by federal agencies to the agencies controlling that building or property .

the administrator of general services is required to develop a standard application for easements related to siting wireless towers on federally controlled property , which can be used for submission to the agency that controls that property and will be in charge of granting the easement .

the general services administration is also required by section 6409 ( c ) to develop master contracts for wireless facilities siting .

the contracts will govern the placement of wireless antenna structures on buildings and other property owned by the federal government .

in developing the contracts , the gsa is required to standardize the treatment of the placement of wireless antennae on federal property , among other considerations .

similar to the fcc's efforts to increase the deployment of wireless facilities across the country , the agency launched a similar effort to streamline the process of collocation of equipment on existing poles owned by utility companies .

section 224 of the communications act grants the commission the authority to regulate the rates , terms , and conditions for pole attachments , which are defined by the statute as "any attachment by a cable television system or provider of a telecommunications service to a pole , duct , conduit , or right - of - way owned or controlled by a utility. .

in 2011 , the fcc issued an order revising its interpretation of section 224 to allow incumbent local exchange carriers ( ilecs ) for the first time to share some of the benefits of section 224 ; reformulate ( i.e. , lower ) the rates utilities could charge telecommunications carriers bringing those rates closer to the rates charged to cable providers ; and reformulate the timing of the calculation of refunds when attachers are overcharged .

utility companies challenged the fcc's authority to make these changes , claiming that ilecs were excluded from the definition of telecommunications service providers under section 224 and could not be eligible for pole attachment rights under section 224 as a result .

the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit disagreed , upholding the fcc's interpretation of the statute .

the court found , that while section 224 did exclude ilecs from the definition of telecommunications carriers , that exclusion only applied to section 224 ( e ) which permits the fcc to regulate charges for pole attachments to telecommunications carriers when the parties fail to resolve a dispute regarding those charges .

the fcc was permitted to interpret section 224 ( a ) , which allows the commission to regulate pole attachments for providers of telecommunications services more generally , to apply to ilecs .

the utility companies also challenged the fcc's decision to adopt telecom rates that were substantially equivalent to cable rates for pole attachments and the amendments to the calculation of the so - called "refund period. .

the court accorded deference to the fcc's interpretation of section 224 in both of those instances , as well , and denied the utility companies' petition to review the fcc's order amending its regulations under section 224 in full .

