from its inception in 1947 , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , signed by the united states and ultimately by a total of 128 countries , provided for consultations and dispute resolution between gatt parties .

a party could invoke articles xxii and xxiii , the gatt consultation and dispute settlement provisions , if it believed that another party's measure , whether violative of the gatt or not , nullified or impaired benefits accruing to it under the agreement .

because the gatt did not set out specific dispute procedures , gatt parties developed a more detailed process including ad hoc panels and other practices .

over time , however , the gatt procedure was perceived to have certain deficiencies , among them a lack of deadlines , a consensus decision - making process that allowed a gatt party against whom a dispute was filed to block the establishment of a dispute panel and the adoption of a panel report by the gatt parties as a whole , and laxity in surveillance and implementation of panel reports even when reports were adopted and had the status of an official gatt decision .

congress made reform of the gatt dispute process a principal u.s. negotiating objective in the gatt uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations , begun in 1986 and concluded in 1994 with the signing of the marrakesh agreement establishing the world trade organization ( wto agreement ) .

the resulting wto understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes ( dispute settlement understanding , or dsu ) reflects the u.s. negotiating objective of creating a mechanism that is more judicial in approach ( and , it was hoped , fairer and more predictable ) than the diplomatically oriented system favored by other trading partners .

while the dsu retains diplomatic elements — for example , the goal of the process is to secure a "mutually agreed solution" and contains provisions that may foster a negotiated outcome — the dsu sets out a mechanism that is overall more "rule - bound" than the process developed under the gatt .

further , the dsu applies to disputes arising under virtually all wto agreements ( referred to in the understanding as "covered agreements" ) and thus exists in the context of the full uruguay round package of multilateral trade agreements , all of which must be accepted by a country as a condition of wto membership .

the uruguay round package not only carried forward original gatt obligations — for example , according goods of other parties most - favored - nation ( mfn ) and national treatment , not placing tariffs on goods in excess of negotiated or "bound" rates , generally refraining from imposing quantitative restrictions such as quotas and embargoes on imports and exports , and avoiding injurious subsidies — but also expanded on these obligations in new agreements such as the agreement on agriculture , the agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures , the agreement on antidumping , the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures , and the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) .

the application of the dsu to these new agreements thus created the potential not only for trade disputes on matters that had not been subject to adjudication in the past , but also for adjudication of these disputes under a more judicially styled process than had existed in the past .

congress approved and implemented the wto agreement and the other agreements negotiated in the uruguay round in section 101 of the uruguay round agreement act .

the agreements entered into force on january 1 , 1995 .

while the dsu continues past gatt dispute practice , a variety of new features are aimed at strengthening the prior system .

these include a "reverse consensus" voting rule at key points in the process , legal review of panel reports by a new appellate body , deadlines for various phases of the dispute procedure , and improved multilateral oversight of compliance .

under the integrated system of dispute settlement created by the dsu , the same dispute settlement rules apply to disputes under virtually all wto agreements , subject to any special or additional rules in an individual agreement .

the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) , created in article 2 of the dsu and consisting of representatives of all wto members , administers wto dispute settlement proceedings .

as was the case under the gatt , the dsb ordinarily operates by consensus ( i.e. , without objection ) .

the dsu reverses past practice , however , in a manner that prevents individual members from blocking certain dsb decisions that are considered critical to an effective dispute settlement system .

thus , unless it decides by consensus not to do so , the dsb will ( 1 ) approve requests to establish panels , ( 2 ) adopt panel and appellate body reports , and ( 3 ) if requested by the prevailing member in a dispute , authorize the member to impose a retaliatory measure where the defending member has not complied .

in effect , these decisions are virtually automatic .

given that panel reports would otherwise be adopted under the reverse consensus rule , wto members have a right to appeal a panel report on legal issues .

the dsu creates a standing appellate body to carry out this added appellate function .

the appellate body has seven members , three of whom serve on any one case .

notwithstanding the rule - oriented nature of the dsu , dispute settlement in the wto is primarily member - driven .

in other words , it is up to the disputing members ( complaining or defending , as the case may be ) to decide whether or not to take particular actions available to them .

these actions include initiating the dispute ; requesting a panel and , in doing so , setting out the scope of dispute ; asking the wto director - general ( dg ) to appoint panelists if the disputing members cannot agree on the wto secretariat's proposed slate ; seeking authorization to impose countermeasures against a non - complying member ; requesting that the prevailing member's retaliation proposal be arbitrated ; and imposing retaliatory measures even if the dsb has authorized them .

as stated in article 3.7 of the dsu , the preferred outcome of a dispute is "a solution mutually acceptable to the parties and consistent with the covered agreements. .

absent this , the primary objective of the process is withdrawal of a violative measure , with compensation and retaliation being avenues of last resort .

as of the date of this report , 450 complaints have been filed under the dsu .

not all of these have resulted in panels , however , and in some cases where panel proceedings were initiated , the panel process was discontinued due to a settlement of the dispute or for other reasons .

to date , 153 original panel reports have been publicly circulated .

some original panels have also issued compliance panel reports as a result of proceedings initiated by complaining members under article 21.5 of the dsu to determine whether defending members had complied in particular disputes ; 29 compliance panel reports have been issued thus far .

well over one - half of all panel reports have been appealed , resulting in 108 appellate body reports issued as of this writing .

nearly one - half of the 450 wto complaints filed to date involve the united states as complaining party or defendant .

the united states trade representative ( ustr ) manages u.s. participation and is the chief representative of the united states in the wto , including in wto disputes .

the dsu was scrutinized by wto members under a uruguay round declaration , which called for completion of a review within four years after the wto agreement entered into force ( i.e. , by january 1999 ) .

members did not agree on any revisions in the initial review and continued to negotiate on dispute settlement issues during the wto doha development round of multilateral trade negotiations initiated in 2001 , doing so on a separate track permitting an agreement to be adopted apart from any overall doha round accord .

in 2008 , the chairman of the dispute settlement negotiations prepared a consolidated draft legal text based mainly on member proposals , which members agreed to use in their negotiations ; in april and september 2011 , the chairman issued reports summarizing subsequent discussions .

although the doha round negotiations have stalled , discussions of revisions to the dsu have continued into 2012 .

the united states has proposed such revisions as greater member control over the process , guidelines for wto adjudicative bodies , and increased transparency — for example , open meetings and timely access to submissions and final reports .

other member proposals include , inter alia , a permanent roster of panelists , enabling the appellate body to remand decisions to panels for further proceedings , rules for sequencing and the termination of retaliatory measures ( see below ) , tightened time frames , enhanced third - party rights , and special treatment for developing country disputants .

the wto dispute settlement process consists of three broad stages: ( 1 ) consultations ; ( 2 ) panel and , if requested , appellate body review ; and ( 3 ) if needed , implementation .

in conducting their work , wto panels and the appellate body are guided by article 3.2 of the dsu , which provides that the wto dispute settlement system "serves to preserve the rights and obligations of members under the covered agreements , and to clarify the existing provisions of those agreements in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law," adding that "[r]ecommendations and rulings of the dsb cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided in the covered agreements. .

in an early wto dispute settlement proceeding , the wto appellate body confirmed that the "general rule of interpretation" set out in article 31 of the vienna convention on the law of treaties constitutes an interpretative rule under international law for purposes of article 3.2 .

article 31 generally states that a treaty or other international agreement "shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose. .

following are the steps in a wto dispute settlement proceeding , with the applicable dsu articles for each .

article 23 of the dsu requires that wto members invoke dsu procedures in disputes involving wto agreements and that they act in accordance with the dsu — that is , not unilaterally — when taking various dispute - related actions .

these are ( 1 ) determining if another member has violated a wto agreement ( art .

23 ( a ) ) ; ( 2 ) determining a date by which the member must comply with a wto decision ( art .

23 ( b ) ) ; and ( 3 ) taking any retaliatory action against a non - complying member ( art .

23 ( c ) ) .

regarding retaliatory action , the prevailing member must follow dsu procedures in determining the amount of trade retaliation to be imposed and must obtain authorization from the dsb in accordance with dsu procedures before suspending wto tariff concessions or other wto obligations in the event the defending member has failed to comply .

s. 239 ( klobuchar ) , the innovate america act , would , inter alia , authorize to be appropriated to the ustr $2 million for each of fy2011 , fy2012 , and fy2013 for the purpose of initiating any proceeding to resolve a dispute relating to market access barriers with wto member countries .

s. 708 ( brown , ohio ) , the trade enforcement priorities act , would establish mechanisms under the trade act of 1974 to require the ustr annually to identify particularly harmful foreign trade practices and , where appropriate , to initiate wto dispute settlement proceedings to remedy these practices .

to date , no action has been taken on either of these bills .

