sources of arsenic in water include natural sources , particularly rocks and soils , and also releases from its use as a wood preservative , in semi - conductors and paints , and from mining and agricultural operations .

elevated levels of arsenic are found more frequently in ground water than in surface water .

because small communities typically rely on wells for drinking water , while larger cities often use surface - water sources , arsenic tends to occur in higher concentrations more frequently in water used by small communities .

in the united states , the average arsenic level measured in ground - water samples is less than or equal to 1 part per billion ( ppb , or micrograms per liter [μg / l] ) ; however , higher levels are not uncommon .

compared with the rest of the united states , western states have more water systems with levels exceeding 10 ppb ; levels in some locations in the west exceed 50 ppb .

parts of the midwest and new england also have some water systems with arsenic levels exceeding 10 ppb , but most systems meet the new standard .

when issuing the rule , epa estimated that roughly 4,000 ( 5.5% ) of regulated water systems , serving a total of 13 million people , were likely to exceed the 10 ppb standard .

the previous drinking water standard for arsenic , 50 ppb , was set by the u.s. public health service in 1942 .

epa adopted that level and issued an interim drinking water regulation for arsenic in 1975 .

this standard was based on estimated total dietary intake and non - cancer health effects .

in 1986 , congress amended the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) , converted all interim standards to national primary drinking water regulations , and included arsenic on a list of 83 contaminants for which epa was required to issue new standards by 1989 .

epa's extensive review of arsenic risk assessment issues caused the agency to miss the 1989 deadline .

as a result of a citizen suit , epa entered into a consent decree with a new deadline for the rule of november 1995 .

epa continued work on risk assessment , water treatment , analytical methods , implementation , and occurrence issues , but in 1995 decided to delay the rule in order to better characterize health effects and assess cost - effective removal technologies for small utilities .

in the 1996 sdwa amendments ( p.l .

104-182 ) , congress directed epa to propose a new drinking water standard for arsenic by january 1 , 2000 , and to promulgate a final standard by january 1 , 2001 .

congress also directed epa to develop a research plan for arsenic to support the rulemaking effort and to reduce the uncertainty in assessing health risks associated with low - level exposures to arsenic .

epa was required to conduct the study in consultation with the national academy of sciences .

in 1996 , epa requested the national research council ( nrc ) to review the available arsenic toxicity data base and to evaluate the scientific validity of epa's risk assessments for arsenic .

the nrc issued its report in 1999 and recommended that the standard be reduced , but it did not recommend a particular level .

the nrc affirmed that the available data provided ample evidence for epa's classification of inorganic arsenic as a human carcinogen , but that epa's dose - response assessment , which was based on a taiwan study , deserved greater scrutiny .

the nrc explained that the data in the study lacked the level of detail needed for use in dose - response assessment .

the council also reported that research suggested that arsenic intake in food is higher in taiwan than in the united states , further complicating efforts to use the data for arsenic risk assessment .

based on findings from three countries where individuals were exposed to very high levels of arsenic ( several hundreds of parts per billion or more ) , the nrc concluded that the data were sufficient to add lung and bladder cancers to the types of cancers caused by ingestion of inorganic arsenic ; however , the nrc noted that few data addressed the risk of ingested arsenic at lower concentrations , which would be more representative of levels found in the united states .

the nrc concluded that key studies for improving the scientific validity of risk assessment were needed , and recommended specific studies to epa .

in june 2000 , epa published its proposal to revise the arsenic standard from 50 ppb to 5 ppb and requested comment on options of 3 ppb , 10 ppb , and 20 ppb .

epa stated that the proposal relied primarily on the nrc analysis and some recently published research , and that it would further assess arsenic's cancer risks before issuing the final rule .

as proposed , the standard would have applied only to community water systems .

non - transient , non - community water systems ( eg , schools with their own wells ) would have been required only to monitor and then report if arsenic levels exceeded the standard .

in the final rule , published on january 22 , 2001 ( 66 fr 6976 ) , epa set the standard at 10 ppb and applied it to non - transient , non - community water systems , as well as community water systems .

the agency gave the water utilities five years to comply ( the maximum amount of time allowed under sdwa ) .

epa estimated that 3,000 ( 5.5% ) of the 54,000 community water systems , and 1,100 ( 5.5% ) of the 20,000 non - transient , non - community water systems , would need to take measures to meet the standard .

since the arsenic standard was revised , congress repeatedly has expressed concern over the cost of this regulation , especially to small , rural communities .

the 107 th congress directed epa to review its affordability criteria and how the small system variance and exemption programs should be implemented for arsenic ( p.l .

107-73 , h.rept .

107-272 , p. 175 ) .

the conferees directed the agency to report on its affordability criteria , administrative actions , funding mechanisms for small system compliance , and possible legislative actions .

in 2002 , epa submitted its report to congress , small systems arsenic implementation issues , on actions epa was taking to address these directives .

major activities included developing and implementing a small community assistance plan to improve access to financial and technical assistance , improve compliance capacity , and simplify the use of exemptions .

epa also has sponsored research on low - cost arsenic treatment technologies and has issued guidance to help states grant exemptions .

the 108 th congress again expressed concern over the economic impact that the revised standard could have in many communities .

in the conference report for the omnibus appropriations act for fy2005 ( p.l .

108-447 ) , congress provided $8.2 million for arsenic removal research .

the conferees expressed concern that the new requirements could pose a "huge financial hardship" for many rural communities .

congress directed epa to report on the extent to which communities were being affected by the rule and to propose compliance alternatives and make recommendations to minimize costs .

this report is pending .

in the 110 th congress , as in the 109 th congress , legislative efforts focused on helping economically struggling communities comply with the arsenic rule and other drinking water standards .

various bills were offered to promote small system compliance by providing technical assistance , financial assistance , and / or compliance flexibility .

the senate environment and public works committee reported several bills that would have authorized new funding for drinking water infrastructure .

the water infrastructure financing act ( s. 3617 , s.rept .

110-509 ) , which paralleled the committee bill from the 109 th congress , proposed to increase funding authority for epa's drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) program and clean water state revolving fund ( cwsrf ) program and to create a grant program at epa for small or economically disadvantaged communities for critical drinking water and water quality projects .

s. 1933 ( s.rept .

110-475 ) would have authorized a new grant program for small water systems , and s. 1429 ( s.rept .

110-242 ) and h.r .

6313 would have reauthorized funding authority for small system technical assistance under sdwa .

other bills included s. 2509 , which proposed to require epa to promote the use of affordable technologies ( eg , point - of - use technologies and bottled water ) , revise its affordability criteria , and provide more compliance assistance for high - priority rules including the arsenic rule .

s. 2509 also would have required epa or a state to ensure that funds have been made available to small systems before taking enforcement actions .

h.r .

2141 would have required states to grant exemptions to eligible small systems for rules covering naturally occurring contaminants ( such as arsenic and radium ) .

none of these bills was enacted .

arsenic - specific legislation has again been offered in the 111 th congress , although broader infrastructure bills have received wider attention .

in july 2009 , the senate committee on environment and public works reported the water infrastructure financing act ( s. 1005 , s.rept .

111-47 ) , similar to the committee's bill from the 110 th congress .

this legislation would authorize appropriations for the dwsrf program in the amount of $14.7 billion over five years .

it also would establish a drinking water infrastructure grant program with funding priority to be given to small and economically disadvantaged communities .

in the house , the water protection and reinvestment act of 2009 , h.r .

3202 , has been introduced to establish a water infrastructure trust fund and to provide a source of funding for drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects based on the imposition of an excise tax on a wide range of beverages , pharmaceuticals , and other products .

additionally , h.r .

2206 would amend sdwa to reauthorize technical assistance to small public water systems to help them comply with federal drinking water standards generally .

bills that specifically address arsenic in drinking water include h.r .

4798 and s. 3038 .

the house bill would amend the exemption provisions to require states to grant exemptions to small , nonprofit public water systems from naturally occurring contaminants , including arsenic and other specified contaminants , provided that the water system finds that compliance is not economically feasible .

s. 3038 , which is similar to s. 2509 from the 110 th congress , addresses several small system issues .

this bill would require epa to convene a work group to study barriers to using point - of - entry and other specified treatment technologies , to develop guidance to assist states in regulating and promoting these treatment options , and to revise affordability criteria for variance technologies to give extra weight to poorer households and communities .

the bill also would require epa or a state to ensure that funds have been made available to smaller systems before taking enforcement actions , and would establish a research pilot program .

safe drinking water act compliance and , more broadly , drinking water safety and infrastructure issues , have long held a place on the congressional agenda .

however , severe competition for federal resources and uncertainty in the policy agenda make the prospects for new funding legislation unclear .

 ( for more information on sdwa issues , see crs report rl34201 , safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) : selected regulatory and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

