the united states fire administration ( usfa ) is currently an entity within the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

its mission is to provide leadership , coordination , and support for the nation's fire prevention and control , fire training and education , and emergency medical services activities , and to prepare first responders and health care leaders to react to hazard and terrorism emergencies of all kinds .

one of usfa's key objectives is to significantly reduce the nation's loss of life from fire , while also achieving a reduction in property loss and nonfatal injury due to fire .

although fire loss has improved significantly over the past 25 years , the fire problem in the united states remains serious .

the united states still has one of the highest fire death rates in the industrialized world .

according to the national fire protection association ( nfpa ) , in 2015 there were 1,345,500 total fires reported , 3,280 civilian fire deaths , 15,700 civilian fire injuries , and an estimated $14.3 billion in direct property loss .

there were 69 on - duty firefighter deaths in 2016 .

the genesis of usfa and fema's fire prevention and control activities can be found in the landmark 1973 report of the national commission on fire prevention and control , entitled america burning .

the commission recommended the creation of a federal fire agency which would provide support to state and local governments and private fire organizations in their efforts to reduce fire deaths , injuries , and property loss .

the commission recommended that this new agency be placed within the department of housing and urban development .

congress instead opted to place the agency in the department of commerce , and with the passage of the federal fire prevention and control act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-498 ) , the national fire prevention and control administration ( nfpca ) was established .

in 1978 , congress changed the name of nfpca to usfa ( p.l .

95-422 ) , and in 1979 , president carter's reorganization plan no .

3 placed the usfa within the newly created fema .

also in 1979 , the national fire academy ( nfa ) in emmitsburg , md , was opened , offering courses and training to fire service personnel and other persons engaged in fire prevention and control .

during the early 1980s , the reagan administration proposed the elimination of the usfa ( while preserving the fire academy ) .

although congress did not allow the termination of the usfa , the agency suffered severe staff reductions and the fire academy was separated from the usfa and housed organizationally with other fema emergency training programs .

in 1991 , the nfa was subsequently reorganized back into the usfa , where it remains today .

currently , the usfa is located on the grounds of the national emergency training center in emmitsburg , md .

usfa programs include the following: data collection — usfa's national fire data center ( nfdc ) administers a national system ( the national fire incident reporting system or nfirs ) used for collecting , analyzing , and disseminating data and information on fire and other emergency incidents to state and local governments and the fire community .

the nfdc provides a national analysis of the fire problem , identifying problem areas for which prevention and mitigation strategies are needed .

public education and awareness — through partnerships and special initiatives , usfa involves the fire service , the media , other federal agencies , and safety interest groups in the development and delivery of fire safety awareness and education programs .

these programs are targeted at those groups most vulnerable to the hazards of fire , including the young , elderly , and disabled .

training — usfa's national fire academy ( nfa ) offers educational opportunities for the advanced professional development of the mid - level and senior fire / ems officers and allied professionals involved in fire prevention and life safety activities .

the academy develops and delivers educational and training programs with a national focus that supplement and support state and local fire service training .

the nfa also offers training to support the national incident management system integration center ( nic ) and nationwide implementation of the national incident management system ( nims ) .

research and technology — through research , testing , and evaluation , usfa works with public and private entities to promote and improve fire and life safety .

research and special studies are conducted on fire detection , suppression , and notification systems , as well as issues related to firefighter and emergency responder health and safety .

research results are published and made available to the public free of charge through the usfa publications center .

in fulfilling its mission , the usfa uses the assets of the national fire academy , the national emergency training center ( netc ) facilities and support services , and the national fire programs division .

on may 18 , 2017 , president trump announced his intention to appoint chief g. keith bryant as the usfa administrator .

g. keith bryant was sworn in as the u.s. fire administrator on august 4 , 2017 .

the usfa receives its annual appropriation through the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on homeland security .

table 1 shows recent and proposed appropriated funding for usfa .

the assistance to firefighters grant ( afg ) program , also known as the fire act grant program , was established by title xvii of the fy2001 floyd d. spence national defense authorization act ( p.l .

106-398 ) .

the program provides federal grants directly to local fire departments and unaffiliated emergency medical services ( ems ) organizations to help address a variety of equipment , training , and other firefighter - related and ems needs .

a related program is the staffing for adequate fire and emergency response firefighters ( safer ) program , which provides grants for hiring , recruiting , and retaining firefighters .

since its inception , the fire grant program has been administered by fema / usfa ( fy2001-fy2003 ) , the office for domestic preparedness ( fy2004 ) , the office of state and local government coordination preparedness ( fy2005 ) , and the office of grants and training in the dhs directorate for preparedness ( fy2006 ) .

the fy2007 dhs appropriations act ( p.l .

109-295 ) transferred usfa to fema and the fire and safer grants to the grants programs directorate in fema .

congressional appropriations reports have consistently instructed dhs to maintain usfa involvement in the grant administration process for afg and safer grants .

in september 2016 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report entitled fire grants: fema could enhance program administration and performance assessment .

among its findings , gao concluded that fema has not defined and documented usfa's specific role or responsibilities with the fire grants program , and that there is no formalized relationship or policy regarding how the two organizations' programs could work together .

according to gao although a level of informal coordination exists between gpd [grant programs directorate] and usfa , enhancing these efforts by using collaborative mechanisms that our work across the federal government has identified as key features and issues to consider during implementation — such as clearly defining and agreeing upon usfa's role and responsibilities and documenting agreement regarding how they will be collaborating — could help gpd further leverage usfa expertise and resources in support of the fire grants programs , which could also help gpd manage the integration of fire grants into broader national preparedness efforts .

in december 2016 , the usfa signed an agreement with fema's grant programs directorate to provide a framework for each entity's roles and responsibilities for improving the management of the fire grants .

concerns over the federal budget deficit could impact future funding levels for the usfa .

debate over the usfa budget has focused on whether the usfa is receiving an appropriate level of funding to accomplish its mission , given that appropriations for usfa have consistently been well below the agency's authorized level , and given that usfa's budget has remained flat over recent years .

the 116 th congress may also consider whether the role of usfa might be expanded .

for example , h.r .

1646 , the helping emergency responders overcome act of 2019 ( the hero act ) , introduced by representative bera on march 8 , 2019 , would direct usfa , in coordination with the secretary of health and human services , to develop and make publicly available resources that may be used by the federal government and other entities to educate mental health professionals about the mental health issues and challenges faced by firefighters and emergency medical services personnel .

finally , an ongoing issue is the viability and status of the usfa and national fire academy within the department of homeland security .

while supportive of the reorganization of fema into dhs , many in the fire service community have cautioned that usfa and nfa programs — which address the day - to - day challenges faced by fire departments — should not be overshadowed in an organization which focuses on homeland security and counterterrorism .

since the establishment of dhs in march 2003 , fire service groups have opposed a number of actions dhs has taken with respect to the usfa and nfa .

these included the abolishment of the presidentially appointed position of u.s. fire administrator ( subsequently reestablished by enactment of the usfa reauthorization act of 2003 ) ; proposed cancellations of some nfa courses in 2003 due to an across - the - board fema budget cut ( those nfa courses were subsequently restored after fire service protests ) ; and the transfer of the fire grant program from the usfa to the dhs office for domestic preparedness .

