the national park system contains 412 units throughout the nation .

they are administered by the national park service ( nps ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

the system encompasses 84.6 million acres of land — 80.6 million acres federally owned and 4.0 million acres of private and other public land ( eg , state land ) within nps unit boundaries .

units range in size from less than one acre to millions of acres .

nearly two - thirds of the total acreage is in alaska .

in 1872 , congress designated yellowstone as the world's first national park .

subsequently , the nation slowly developed a system of national parks .

while some new areas were administered by doi , others were managed by different agencies .

a 1916 law created the nps within doi to protect existing and future parks , monuments , and other areas .

it charged nps with promoting and regulating the use of those areas both to conserve them and to provide for their enjoyment by the public .

a 1933 executive order furthered the development of a national system by transferring dozens of sites to nps from other agencies .

the general authorities act of 1970 made explicit that all areas managed by nps were part of a single system , and gave all units of the system equal standing with regard to resource protection .

statutes authorizing particular units sometimes provide additional management direction for those units .

units of the national park system generally are managed to preserve resources in their natural or historical conditions for the benefit of future generations .

thus , hunting , mining , and other consumptive resource uses generally are not allowed .

however , in the laws creating units , congress sometimes has specified that some of those uses are allowed .

today , there are more than 20 different designations ( i.e. , titles ) for units of the national park system , reflecting the diversity of the areas .

there is no statute that sets out and defines all the designations , and congress has discretion in choosing the type of designation for a unit being established .

while some designations are descriptive and possibly self - explanatory , such as "battlefield," others have been used in different ways .

for instance , the designation "national monument" has been given to a variety of areas , including natural reservations , historic military forts , prehistoric ruins , fossil sites , and the statue of liberty .

some classifications ( such as "national park" ) are unique to nps , while others ( such as "national recreation area" ) also are used by other land management agencies .

of the 412 units within the national park system , 59 are national parks , the so - called crown jewels of the park system .

other commonly used titles include national historic sites ( 78 ) , national monuments ( 83 ) , national historical parks ( 50 ) , national memorials ( 30 ) , national recreation areas ( 18 ) , and national preserves ( 19 ) .

national park system units are created by acts of congress , except that national monuments also may be added by presidential proclamation .

the antiquities act of 1906 ( 54 u.s.c .

§320301 et seq. ) .

authorizes the president to create national monuments on land that is already federally owned or controlled , and that contains historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , or other objects of historic or scientific interest .

presidents have designated 150 monuments since 1906 .

congress has subsequently converted many of them , such as the grand canyon , to national parks .

most monuments are managed by nps , with many newer monuments managed by the bureau of land management or other agencies .

an act of congress creating a national park system unit may explain the unit's purpose ; set its boundaries ; provide specific directions for land acquisition , planning , uses , and operations ; and authorize appropriations for acquisition and development .

bills to create units generally are within the jurisdiction of the house committee on natural resources and the senate committee on energy and natural resources , with appropriations typically contained in interior , environment , and related agencies' appropriations acts .

congress sometimes has enacted free - standing legislation to add units to the national park system .

congress also has authorized units as part of omnibus public land laws containing dozens of measures related to lands and recreation .

legislation creating a new unit is often preceded by legislation to authorize an nps study of the area , as described below .

provisions of law govern congress's consideration of measures to create units of the national park system .

in 1998 , congress amended existing law pertaining to creating units ( p.l .

105-391 ) to standardize procedures , improve the information about potential additions , prioritize areas , focus on outstanding areas , and ensure congressional support for area studies .

current law does not appear to explicitly require an nps area study before congress adds a unit to the national park system , but any such study requires "specific authorization of an act of congress" ( 54 u.s.c .

§100507 ) .

before 1998 , studies were prepared at the initiative of nps , individual members of congress , and other entities , as well as required by authorization and appropriations laws .

the 1998 statutory change sought to eliminate these separate sources for initiating studies , on the grounds that in some years funding was insufficient to cover all studies , and ongoing studies sometimes were not completed because funds were earmarked for other studies .

however , nps has standing authority to take certain actions , provided that they cost less than $25,000 .

these actions include preliminary activities , such as resource assessments of areas , "reconnaissance surveys" of areas , and updates of previous studies .

after funds are available , nps must complete a study of an area within three fiscal years .

in practice , studies have taken longer to prepare .

this is due to the large number of studies authorized by congress and the extent of available resources .

the length of time for completing studies generally ranges from three to six years , depending on the complexity , such as the number of stakeholders and whether any environmental issues may be involved .

the cost of preparing a study also depends on its complexity , with the average cost estimated at roughly $500,000 .

studies must include public involvement , with at least one public meeting held in the local area , and reasonable efforts to notify affected state and local governments and landowners .

studies also must comply with the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) , which requires an assessment of the potential impact of the proposed action on the human environment .

p.l .

105-391 also requires the secretary of the interior to recommend annually to congress a list of areas for study for potential inclusion in the national park system .

nps must consider three issues in developing for congress the list of areas recommended for study: ( 1 ) whether an area is nationally significant and would be a suitable and feasible addition to the national park system ; ( 2 ) whether an area represents or includes themes , sites , or resources "not already adequately" represented in the national park system ; and ( 3 ) requests for studies in the form of public petitions and congressional resolutions ( the "popular demand" factor ) .

the nps also must submit to congress a list of areas previously studied that contain primarily historical resources and a list of areas with natural resources .

these previously studied areas are to be ranked in order of priority for addition to the park system and supported by current data .

in the past , nps has ranked areas that passed the initial screening and recommended the highest - priority areas to congress for study .

however , the george w. bush administration did not submit the annual lists , partially because that administration generally did not support expanding the national park system .

like the bush administration , the obama administration has in most years not submitted lists of areas for potential study or addition to the park system .

the obama administration submitted the lists once , in august 2012 .

the addition of units to the national park system sometimes has been controversial .

some discourage adding units , asserting that the system is "mature" or "complete," while others assert that the system should evolve and grow to reflect current events , new information , and reinterpretations .

a related issue is how to properly maintain existing and new units given limited fiscal and staffing resources .

as noted , the george w. bush administration generally did not support the creation of new park units and the expansion of existing units , as it sought instead to focus funds on maintaining current units .

the bush administration supported some expansions on the grounds that they could be accomplished for relatively little cost .

supporters of new units have charged that the older units are the most costly .

initially , the obama administration also expressed a need to focus attention and resources on the current system , including the maintenance backlog , "rather than continuing the rapid expansion of new nps responsibilities. .

subsequently , in a number of instances the administration has testified in favor of creating new units of the national park system , studying additional areas , and expanding existing units .

differences exist as to the relative importance of including areas reflecting u.s. natural , cultural , and social history .

the adequacy of standards and procedures for assuring that the most outstanding areas are included in the system also has been debated .

critics contend that the system has been weakened by including inappropriate areas , especially where authoritative information was unavailable , incomplete , or disregarded in favor of political considerations .

others counter that there will always be disagreement over the worth of areas , and that recently added areas have been held to the same high standards as older units .

another issue has been whether particular resources are better protected outside the national park system , and how to secure the best alternative protection .

it is generally regarded as difficult to meet the criteria and to secure congressional support and funding for expanding the national park system .

while there is often considerable interest in establishing new units , usually no more than a handful of units are created each congress .

many areas are preserved outside the national park system .

some of these are protected with recognition or assistance by the nps .

certain areas that receive technical or financial aid from the nps , but are neither federally owned nor directly administered by the nps , have been classified by the nps as affiliated areas .

affiliated areas are nationally significant but do not meet the other criteria for inclusion in the park system .

under nps policy , they are worthy of special nps recognition or assistance beyond existing programs , are managed in accordance with standards applicable to park units , and are to receive sustained resource protection as detailed in an agreement between the nps and the nonfederal manager of the area .

in the past , the affiliated areas have included properties primarily recognized for cultural or commemorative worth .

affiliated areas have been created by act of congress and by designation of the secretary of the interior .

currently , there are about two dozen affiliated areas .

congress has established national heritage areas containing land and properties that reflect the history of their people .

typically , heritage areas consist mainly of private properties and may include natural , scenic , historic , cultural , or recreation resources .

conservation , interpretation , and other activities are handled by partnerships among federal , state , and local governments and nonprofit organizations , and for each area congress has recognized a "management entity" to coordinate efforts .

the nps supports these efforts through technical and financial assistance , and such support is not intended to be permanent .

supporters of heritage areas have asserted that they reduce pressure to add new , costly , and possibly inappropriate areas to the national park system , while opponents have feared that they could be used to extend federal control over non - federal land .

differences also have existed over whether to create a comprehensive heritage program containing priorities and standards for establishing heritage areas .

some programs give places honorary recognition .

cultural resources may be listed by the nps in the national register of historic places , as meriting preservation and special consideration in planning for federal or federally assisted projects .

the secretary of the interior may designate natural areas as national natural landmarks , and cultural areas as national historic landmarks .

national parks , monuments , and other areas of international worth may , at the request of the united states , be recognized by the united nations as world heritage sites or biosphere reserves .

congress or the secretary of the interior may designate rivers as components of the national wild and scenic rivers system , and trails as part of the national trails system .

the nps also supports local and state governments in protecting resources .

the agency may provide grants for projects ( including acquisition and development of recreational facilities ) and technical assistance ( for conserving rivers , trails , natural areas , and cultural resources ) .

in addition to this range of nps programs , resources are protected by the private sector , state and local governments , and other federal agencies .

