following the 1980s debt crisis , much of latin america embraced broad economic policy reform that included major strides toward trade liberalization .

this trend raised the prospect of a previously unrealized idea — a free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) among 34 nations of the region .

latin america's trade reform was christened the "new regionalism" to reflect the evolution from an "old" system of closed subregional agreements that dominated in the post - war era , to one based on more open and deeper commitments both within and outside the region .

examples include the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , the southern common market ( mercosur ) , the andean community of nations ( can ) , the revitalized central american common market ( cacm ) , and the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) .

combined with unilateral , bilateral , and multilateral efforts , these subregional agreements have fostered trade opening , with average applied tariff rates for the region falling from 40% in the mid - 1980s to under 10% by 2002 .

despite noted progress in latin america's trade liberalization , the multiple free trade agreements ( ftas ) that this "new regionalism" cultivated also created complicated rules and discriminatory trading patterns .

the impetus to simplify this situation , combined with the conviction that trade liberalization is a cornerstone for broader reform and development , initially generated widespread interest in an ftaa .

the united states has led the ftaa effort in expectation that it not only would open markets for u.s. goods and services , but would provide benefits to the entire region by: 1 ) increasing latin american trade with the large u.s. market ; 2 ) fostering reciprocal trade among latin american countries ; and 3 ) encouraging more foreign direct investment in latin america .

the ftaa negotiation process is organized into nine working groups responsible for: market access ; agriculture ; investment ; services ; government procurement ; intellectual property rights ; subsidies , antidumping , and countervailing duties ; competition policy ; and dispute settlement .

the groups are directed by the trade negotiations committee ( tnc ) and each is chaired by a different country on a rotating basis .

there is also a consultative group on smaller economies , a committee on civil society to provide input from non - government parties ( eg , labor , academia , and environmental groups ) , a technical committee on institutional issues , and a joint government - private sector committee of experts on electronic commerce .

draft ftaa texts are released in all four official languages , with "bracketed text" reflecting areas of disagreement .

since 1994 , there have been four summits and eight trade ministerial meetings .

the first draft of the ftaa was adopted at the quebec city summit in 2001 and a second draft at the quito ministerial in november 2002 .

at that time , brazil and the united states became co - chairs of the tnc and were charged with guiding the negotiating process to completion .

the third draft text was accepted at the november 2003 ftaa ministerial in miami .

soon thereafter the negotiations stalled and the january 1 , 2005 completion deadline was missed , exposing more clearly challenges to the negotiation process , especially the need to resolve differences between the united states and brazil if the ftaa is to move forward .

the breadth of an emerging resistance to the ftaa became clearer at the fourth summit of the americas held on november 4-5 , 2005 , in mar del plata , argentina .

amid dramatic and sometimes violent protests against president george w. bush and the ftaa , which was not scheduled as the major topic of this summit , it became evident that the hemisphere was divided over how to proceed .

a total of 29 countries supported renewing negotiations , and the united states pushed to set a specific date in 2006 .

brazil , argentina , uruguay , and paraguay ( the mercosur countries ) rejected this idea , arguing that the conditions for achieving a balanced and equitable agreement did not yet exist .

venezuela went one step further , lobbying to end any further effort on the ftaa and to unify resistance against u.s. policies and presence in latin america .

the summit declaration called for a time to explore problems in the ftaa process , while awaiting the outcome of the world trade organization ( wto ) doha development round , indicating that there was ( and still is ) no unified vision on how to proceed with the proposed ftaa .

the ftaa began as a commitment by 34 countries to consider a comprehensive trade agreement that would be accepted as a single undertaking , meaning all parties would have to agree to it as a whole .

this proved to be a challenging task given that u.s. priorities differ from those of key latin american countries , making a balanced and mutually acceptable agreement difficult to define , as a short review of the negotiating issues suggests .

four years ago , formal ftaa negotiations stalled .

as the tnc co - chairs , brazil and the united states have continued to meet to discuss the details of a framework for moving ahead , but negotiators face a huge challenge in trying to reconcile their divergent priorities .

when the ftaa negotiations began , they were predicated on the assumption that all countries could gain from a comprehensive and inclusive agreement , one that would address everything from market access to trade remedies and rules - based issues .

currently , it is unclear how many countries may be ready to accept such broad obligations .

this issue is highlighted in the debate between brazil and the united states and formed the basis for the november 2003 miami ministerial compromise .

brazil's leadership role among developing countries is a cornerstone of its foreign policy , which for its trade strategy means acting as a counterweight to u.s. influence in the region .

tension between the united states and brazil heightened in may 2003 when brazil challenged three u.s. policy initiatives .

first was u.s. pursuit of subregional and bilateral trade arrangements , which brazil suggested isolates mercosur in the context of the ftaa negotiations .

second , brazil argued that u.s. refusal to address agricultural subsidies and antidumping disciplines in the ftaa affected its key export sectors .

third , the u.s. offer of "differentiated" market access gave brazil the least favorable treatment .

brazil responded with its "three track proposal" requesting the united states: 1 ) conduct separate market access discussions with mercosur ( the "4+1" arrangement ) ; 2 ) jettison investment , services , government procurement , and ipr issues along with agricultural subsidies and antidumping ( per u.s. wishes ) to the doha wto round ; and 3 ) include some rules - based issues in the ftaa discussions .

the united states rejected this so - called "ftaa lite" proposal and continued to argue for a more comprehensive agreement .

brazil's tactics include , on the offensive , to support its growing agricultural export sector by insisting on prioritizing market access and subsidy issues .

equally important is its defensive position toward opening its less competitive sectors of the economy to developed countries ( services , ipr , government procurement , and investment ) , while prioritizing mercosur trade and domestic market development .

although the private sector may be more open to engagement with the united states , brazil's economy is one of the least dependent in latin america on the u.s. market and has no u.s. preferential arrangement at stake to protect ( e.g .

caribbean basin initiative — cbi ) .

therefore , there is no pressure to accept a deeper ftaa in place of unilateral preferences and brazil has instead pressed to begin u.s. - mercosur market access talks .

u.s. - brazil differences were the major factor determining the outcome of the 2003 jointly - authored ministerial declaration .

although the ministerial declaration reaffirms the commitment to complete a "comprehensive and balanced" agreement , it does so in the context of a rather unorthodox compromise .

the declaration states that " countries may assume different levels of commitments...[with a] common set of rights and obligations applicable to all countries...[and may also] choose , within the ftaa , to agree to additional obligations and benefits. .

the additional obligations may be defined in plurilateral negotiations , with a country's benefits being linked to the obligations it undertakes .

the trade negotiating committee ( tnc ) was instructed to clarify the differences , which so far has not been possible .

the fourth , and last , summit of the americas at mar del plata in november 2005 was punctuated by violent protests against president bush and u.s. policy in general , as well as a failure to set a date for restarting ftaa talks .

some interpreted this as a sign of diminished u.s. influence in the region , which could bode poorly for any hope of resurrecting the ftaa in the near future .

the united states , however , remains committed to the two - tier framework and is continuing to work with brazil to forge a solution to the impasse .

in the meantime , latin america's new regionalism is thriving in the form of a growing number of bilateral and plurilateral trade deals , many anchored to the economies of brazil and the united states — the de facto default approach to a stalled ftaa .

the united states implemented cafta - dr on august 2 , 2005 , and has concluded bilateral fta negotiations with peru ( approved by congress in 2007 ) , panama , and colombia .

the ustr framework for negotiating these ftas relies on similar language for many of the chapters , with detailed market access and other schedules developed for each country .

this approach allows for considerable flexibility in addressing sensitive products and disciplines within a comprehensive agreement that includes many of the critical u.s. issues such as services trade , investment , government procurement , intellectual property rights , labor , and environmental concerns , but avoids any mention of domestic subsidies and antidumping .

as well as this approach has worked on a bilateral basis ( opinions differ on this , but ftas are being implemented ) , the united states has so far not been able to replicate it for the ftaa .

nor has brazil stood still in the regional integration game .

mercosur has four associate members and succeeded in consummating a long - awaited political and economic pact with the andean community in october 2004 .

brazil pushed the regional integration effort further on december 9 , 2004 , when twelve countries agreed to form the south american community of nations , a loose agreement calling for lower tariffs and improved political dialogue .

the most significant development occurred on july 2 , 2006 , when venezuela became the first country to join mercosur as a full member , although its membership has not been ratified by all mercosur countries .

president chávez's staunch anti - americanism and determined opposition to an ftaa bodes poorly for restarting the negotiations at any point in time .

bolivia has since sought to join mercosur , which would unite in one trade pact nearly all opposition to the ftaa .

as the ftaa negotiations continue to flounder , the trade dynamics of the region appear to be shifting .

the region may be heading toward a competitive if not bifurcated approach toward economic integration , with the united states and its ftas on one side and an expanding mercosur customs union approach on the other .

those countries still not committed to either , such as the caribbean nations , which support restarting the ftaa talks , would seem to be in an awkward middle position .

given that developing country trade preference programs such as the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) and the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) are due to expire during the second session of the 110 th congress , the u.s. trade strategy for the region may be up for reconsideration , particularly if the wto doha round fails to reach a "successful" conclusion .

the ftaa was initially proposed to simplify trade relations with a balanced , comprehensive , single undertaking in which all countries would be treated equally .

this approach proved to be too difficult to reconcile , slowing progress and giving way to a host of subregional agreements that will likely further complicate trade and investment decisions , if not the ftaa negotiations themselves .

the lack of movement has created an opportunity for anti - ftaa forces , so that getting the ftaa back on track in 2009 or later is one of the major challenges to u.s. - latin america trade policy .

recent political realignments in latin america suggest this task may only become more difficult .

