at the beginning of a congress , or at the early organization meetings prior to the new congress , committees organize .

members are assigned to full committees , committee chairs and ranking minority members are determined , subcommittees are created and members are assigned , and committee rules are adopted .

once panels are organized they can begin the work of holding hearings and considering legislative proposals .

all hearings , whether legislative or oversight , have a similar , formal purpose and follow similar procedures: to gather information for use by a committee in its activities .

further , each committee has authority to hold hearings whether the house is in session , has recessed , or has adjourned .

hearings can be held in washington or elsewhere .

however , house rules require that all committee chairs , except the chair of the rules committee , must give at least one week's notice to the public of the date , place , and subject of hearings , although a hearing may be held with less notice if either the chair , with the concurrence of the ranking minority member , or the committee by majority vote , determines a need to hold the hearing sooner .

hearings are open to the public unless the committee votes in open session to close a hearing .

although the chair determines the agenda and selects witnesses , the minority is entitled to one day of related hearings to call its own witnesses , if a majority of minority members so notify the chair .

witnesses before house committees generally must file with the committee an advance copy of their written testimony , and then limit their oral testimony to a brief summary .

a question - and - answer period , with rules generally allowing each committee member five minutes to question each witness , usually follows a witness's opening statement .

under house rules , a committee may adopt a rule , or agree by motion , to allow an equal number of its majority and minority party members to question a witness for up to 30 minutes , and may also adopt a rule or motion allowing its staff to question a witness , with time divided equally between majority and minority staff .

the essential purpose of a committee markup is to determine whether a measure pending before a committee should be amended in any substantive way .

of course , committees do not actually amend measures ; instead , a committee votes on which amendments , if any , it wishes to recommend to the house .

how a panel conducts a markup for the most part reflects procedures used in the house's committee of the whole ( parliamentary device to consider amendments ) , as possibly modified by an individual committee's rules .

there is also a widespread feeling that the level of formality in markup often reflects the level of contention over the measure being marked up .

a markup begins with a chair calling up a particular measure for consideration by the committee .

the next action depends on the nature of the "markup vehicle" ( i.e. , the text that a chair intends for the committee to amend and report ) , which may be different from the measure laid before the panel for consideration .

a vehicle can come before a committee in several different forms , each of which has its own procedural and political consequences .

a chair may lay before a committee either a bill that has been previously introduced and referred , or the text of a draft measure that has not been formally introduced , such as a subcommittee - reported version or a chairman ' s mark .

in each case , the text laid before the committee is itself the markup vehicle , but , in the second case , at the end of the markup process , the text must be incorporated or converted into a measure for reporting to the house .

alternatively , the markup vehicle may be placed before the committee as an amendment in the nature of a substitute for the bill or text initially called up .

at the end of a markup , a chair normally entertains a motion to report a measure favorably to the house .

by house rule , a majority of the committee must be physically present .

the committee can report the measure as introduced , with a series of amendments , with a single amendment in the nature of a substitute , or as a so - called clean bill .

a clean bill would be introduced in the house and referred back to the committee .

such a measure would also have a number different from that of the measure as introduced .

once agreed to , a measure is "ordered reported ; " it is actually "reported" when the committee report is filed in the house .

a committee report is the committee's work product that accompanies a measure that is reported .

when a committee orders a bill reported , it is incumbent upon the chair , pursuant to house rule , to report it "promptly" and take all other steps necessary to secure its consideration by the full house .

house rules and statutes detail several substantive requirements of items to be included in reports accompanying measures reported from committees .

for example , most reports explain a measure's purpose and the need for the legislation , its cost , committee votes on amendments and the measure itself , the position of the executive branch , and the specific changes the bill would make in existing law .

as well , all committee members may file , within two calendar days , supplemental , minority , or additional views , which are then included in the committee report .

committees periodically conduct reviews of agency performance in the implementation of legislation , called oversight , or conduct investigations into perceived wrongdoing , referred to as investigations .

conducting oversight or an investigation is traditionally done initially by staff , followed by committee hearings .

legislation may result from a committee's work .

house committees publish a variety of documents dealing with legislative issues , investigations , and internal committee matters .

usually these publications are available on - line or from the issuing committee .

printed hearings contain the edited transcripts of testimony .

they often are not published for months after the hearing , but are usually available for inspection in committee offices ; witness testimony is often available on - line .

committee reports accompany legislation provide an explanation of a measure , the committee's action in considering it , and certain cost and other findings .

activity reports published at the end of a congress provide a description of a committee's actions over the course of that congress .

committee calendars are a comprehensive record of a committee's actions , including committee rules , membership , a brief legislative history of each measure referred to it , a list of hearings and markups held , and often a list of other committee publications .

finally , committees also publish other information as "committee prints. .

a committee print might include committee rules or a report on a policy issue that the panel wants to distribute widely .

