federal law provides that all aliens must enter the united states pursuant to the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

the two major categories of aliens in the ina are ( 1 ) immigrants , who are admitted to the united states permanently , and ( 2 ) nonimmigrants , who are admitted for temporary reasons ( eg , students , tourists , temporary workers , or business travelers ) .

foreign nationals who lack prope r immigration authorization generally fall into three categories: ( 1 ) those who are admitted legally and then overstay their nonimmigrant visas , ( 2 ) those who enter the country surreptitiously without inspection , and ( 3 ) those who are admitted on the basis of fraudulent documents .

in all three instances , the aliens are in violation of the ina and subject to removal .

temporary protected status ( tps ) , codified by ina section 244 , provides temporary relief from removal and work authorization to foreign nationals in the united states from countries experiencing armed conflict , natural disaster , or other extraordinary circumstances that prevent their safe return .

this report begins by situating tps in the context of humanitarian responses to migration .

another form of blanket relief from removal — deferred enforced departure ( ded ) — is also described , as is the historical use of these relief mechanisms .

this report then provides data on the countries currently designated for tps , including the conditions that have contributed to their designation .

past legislation to provide lawful permanent resident status to certain tps - designated foreign nationals is also described .

the report concludes with examples of activity in the 115 th and 116 th congresses related to tps .

as a state party to the 1967 united nations protocol relating to the status of refugees ( hereinafter , u.n. protocol ) , the united states agrees to the principle of nonrefoulement , which asserts that a refugee should not be returned to a country where he / she faces serious threats to his / her life or freedom .

 ( this is now considered a rule of customary international law. ) .

nonrefoulement is embodied in several provisions of u.s. immigration law .

most notably , it is reflected in ina provisions requiring the government to withhold the removal of a foreign national to a country in which his or her life or freedom would be threatened on the basis of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

the legal definition of a refugee in the ina , which is consistent with the u.n. protocol , specifies that a refugee is a person who is unwilling or unable to return to his / her country of nationality or habitual residence because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

this definition also applies to individuals seeking asylum .

under the ina , refugees and asylees differ on the physical location of the persons seeking the status .

those who are displaced abroad to a country other than their home country apply for refugee status , while those who are in the united states or at a u.s. port of entry apply for asylum .

other foreign nationals in the united states who may elicit a humanitarian response do not meet the legal definition for asylum ; under certain circumstances these persons may be eligible for relief from removal through tps or ded .

tps is a blanket form of humanitarian relief .

it is the statutory embodiment of safe haven for foreign nationals within the united states who may not meet the legal definition of refugee or asylee but are nonetheless fleeing — or reluctant to return to — potentially dangerous situations .

tps was established by congress as part of the immigration act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-649 ) .

the statute gives the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , in consultation with other government agencies ( most notably the department of state ) , the authority to designate a country for tps under one or more of the following conditions: ongoing armed conflict in a foreign state that poses a serious threat to personal safety ; a foreign state request for tps because it temporarily cannot handle the return of its nationals due to an environmental disaster ; or extraordinary and temporary conditions in a foreign state that prevent its nationals from safely returning .

a foreign state may not be designated for tps if the secretary of dhs finds that allowing its nationals to temporarily stay in the united states is against the u.s. national interest .

the secretary of dhs can designate a country for tps for periods of 6 to 18 months and can extend these periods if the country continues to meet the conditions for designation .

to obtain tps , eligible foreign nationals within the united states must pay specified fees and submit an application to dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) before the deadline set forth in the federal register notice announcing the tps designation .

the application must include supporting documentation as evidence of eligibility ( eg , a passport issued by the designated country and records showing continuous physical presence in the united states since the date established in the tps designation ) .

the statute specifies grounds of inadmissibility that cannot be waived , including those relating to criminal convictions , drug offenses , terrorist activity , and the persecution of others .

individuals granted tps are eligible for employment authorization , cannot be detained on the basis of their immigration status , and are not subject to removal while they retain tps relief .

they may be deemed ineligible for public assistance by a state and may travel abroad with the prior consent of the dhs secretary .

tps does not provide a path to lawful permanent residence or citizenship , but a tps recipient is not barred from adjusting to nonimmigrant or immigrant status if he or she meets the requirements .

dhs has indicated that information it collects when an individual registers for tps may be used to enforce immigration law or in any criminal proceeding .

in addition , withdrawal of an alien's tps may subject the alien to exclusion or deportation proceedings .

in addition to tps , there is another form of blanket relief from removal known as deferred enforced departure ( ded ) , formerly known as extended voluntary departure ( evd ) .

ded is a temporary , discretionary , administrative stay of removal granted to aliens from designated countries .

unlike tps , a ded designation emanates from the president's constitutional powers to conduct foreign relations and has no statutory basis .

ded was first used in 1990 and has been used a total of five times ( see " historical use of blanket relief " ) .

liberia is the only country currently designated under ded , and that designation is scheduled to end on march 30 , 2020 .

ded and evd have been used on a country - specific basis to provide relief from removal at the president's discretion , usually in response to war , civil unrest , or natural disasters .

when presidents grant ded through an executive order or presidential memorandum , they generally provide eligibility guidelines , such as demonstration of continuous presence in the united states since a specific date .

unlike tps , the secretary of state does not need to be consulted when ded is granted .

in contrast to recipients of tps , individuals who benefit from ded are not required to register for the status with uscis unless they are applying for work authorization .

instead , ded is triggered when a protected individual is identified for removal .

in 1990 , when congress enacted the tps statute , it also granted tps for 18 months to salvadoran nationals who were residing in the united states .

since then , the attorney general ( and , later , the secretary of dhs ) , in consultation with the state department , granted and subsequently terminated tps for foreign nationals in the united states from the following countries: angola , bosnia - herzegovina , burundi , guinea , lebanon , liberia , the kosovo province of serbia , kuwait , rwanda , and sierra leone .

rather than extending the initial salvadoran tps when it expired in 1992 , the george h. w. bush administration granted ded to an estimated 190,000 salvadorans through december 1994 .

this administration also granted ded to about 80,000 chinese nationals in the united states following the tiananmen square massacre in june 1989 , and these individuals retained ded status through january 1994 .

in december 1997 , president bill clinton instructed the attorney general to grant ded to haitian nationals in the united states for one year , providing time for the administration to work with congress on long - term legislative relief for haitians .

president george w. bush directed that ded be provided to liberian nationals whose tps was expiring in september 2007 ; this status was extended several times by president obama .

president trump has terminated ded for liberians , with an effective date of march 30 , 2020 ( for more details , see " liberia " ) .

approximately 417,000 foreign nationals from the following 10 countries have tps: el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , nicaragua , somalia , south sudan , sudan , syria , and yemen .

in addition , certain liberian nationals are covered by a designation of ded ( see " liberia " section below ) .

the administration has announced terminations of temporary protections for seven of these countries ( six with tps and one with ded ) .

several lawsuits have been filed challenging these decisions .

table 1 lists the current tps - designated countries , the most recent decision — to extend or terminate — by the secretary of dhs , the date from which individuals are required to have continuously resided in the united states , and the designation's expiration date .

in addition , table 1 shows the approximate number of individuals from each country who registered during the previous registration period and the number of individuals with tps as of november 29 , 2018 .

individuals with tps reside in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories .

the highest populations live in traditional immigrant gateway states: california , florida , texas , and new york .

in addition to these four , six other states had at least 10,000 tps recipients as of november 2018: virginia , maryland , new jersey , massachusetts , north carolina , and georgia .

hawaii , wyoming , vermont , and montana had fewer than 100 individuals with tps .

see figure 1 and table a - 1 .

a grant of tps does not provide a recipient with a designated pathway to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status ; however , a tps recipient is not barred from adjusting to nonimmigrant or immigrant status if he or she meets the requirements .

there are statutory limitations on congress providing adjustment of status to tps recipients .

over the years , congress has provided eligibility for lpr status to groups of nationals who had been given temporary relief from removal .

in 1992 , congress enacted legislation allowing chinese nationals who had ded following the tiananmen square massacre to adjust to lpr status ( p.l .

102-404 ) .

the nicaraguan adjustment and central american relief act ( nacara ) ( title ii of p.l .

105-100 ) , which became law in 1997 , provided eligibility for lpr status to certain nicaraguans , cubans , guatemalans , salvadorans , and nationals of the former soviet bloc who had applied for asylum and had been living in the united states for a certain period of time .

the 105 th congress passed the haitian refugee immigration fairness act , enabling haitians who had filed asylum claims or who were paroled into the united states before december 31 , 1995 , to adjust to legal permanent residence ( p.l .

105-277 ) .

legislation that would have allowed nationals from various countries that have had tps to adjust to lpr status received action in past congresses , but was not enacted .

for instance , the senate - passed comprehensive immigration reform bill in the 113 th congress ( s. 744 ) did not include specific provisions for foreign nationals with tps to adjust status , but many would have qualified for the registered provisional immigrant status that s. 744 would have established .

various proposals related to tps have been introduced in the 115 th and 116 th congresses .

some bills would extend or expand tps designations for certain countries ( eg , venezuela ) , prohibit federal funds from being used to implement recent tps terminations , or provide adjustment to lpr status for tps recipients who have been living in the united states for several years .

other bills variously seek to limit the program by transferring authority from dhs to congress to designate foreign states ; making unauthorized aliens and members of criminal gangs ineligible ; restricting the criteria for designating a foreign state ; making tps recipients subject to detention and expedited removal ; or phasing out the program .

