rs20553 - - air quality and electricity: initiatives to increase pollution controls updated october 25 , 200 .

since the mid - 1990s , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has initiated actions that have resulted in regulatorymandates and enforcement actions that would , if implemented , substantially reduce air pollutants ( particularlynitrogenoxides - nox ) emitted by some electric generating facilities .

an ozone transport assessment group ( otag ) ,formed byepa in may 1995 , laid the groundwork for the regulatory initiatives ; it directly led to the ozone transport rule ( also calledthe nox sip call ) .

in a supplementary action , 12 states petitioned epa under section 126 of the caa , concerninginterstate pollution , alleging that nox originating in upwind states prevented their attainment of ozone standards .

an epaoffice of enforcement & compliance assurance audit of new source review ( nsr ) applications requiredunderprovisions of the clean air act ( caa ) that began in late 1996 was the precursor to the enforcement initiative ; itled innovember 1999 to lawsuits against seven utilities in the midwest and south and an administrative order against thetennessee valley authority alleging violations of nsr requirements of the caa .

 ( 1 ) the first two initiatives , the ozone transport rule and the section 126 petitions , are related to each other substantively .

 ( 2 ) these initiatives would further control nox to assist states in the northeast in meeting the existing , statutory 1-hourozonenational ambient air quality standard ( naaqs ) .

the ozone transport rule includes all or part of 19 easternstates andthe district of columbia .

based on the eight petitions epa has ruled on , epa's section 126 determinations wouldinvolvea subset of the nox sip call's 19 states - 12 states and the district of columbia .

the enforcement initiative is not legally or procedurally related to the above initiatives ; however , the nsr enforcementaction by epa has substantive associations with them in that nox is a primary ( but not sole ) focus , and many oftheutilities named as defendants in these cases would also have to reduce emissions under the nox sip call andsection 126determinations .

unlike the other actions , the nsr action does not involve new regulatory action , but enforcementofexisting law and regulations .

as such , it is handled by the epa's office of enforcement & complianceassurance , not aregulatory office , and involves other pollutants electric generators emit besides nox ( specifically sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) andparticulates ) .

the primary focus of the regulatory initiatives and a primary effect of epa's enforcement action is to reduce noxemissions in the eastern part of the united states .

the environmental purpose for doing so is to reduce the interstatetransportation of this ozone precursor , thus assisting localities along the eastern seaboard in attaining the ozonenaaqs .

the actions would also mitigate acid rain .

the initiatives and enforcement action by epa focus on coal - firedelectricgenerating facilities both because they are major sources of emissions - in 1997 they emitted 24% of the country'snox ( and also 62% of its so 2 , 31% of its carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , and approximately one - thirdof the country's mercury ( hg ) ) - and because they represent the most cost - effective sources of large emission reductions for nox andso 2 .

in the case of the section 126 determinations and the nsr enforcement action , coal - fired powerplants are explicitlytargeted for emissions reductions .

in the case of the nox sip call , epa cannot explicitly target sources ( that is theresponsibility of each affected state ) , but the allocation scheme used by epa to determine the allowable emissionsbudgetfor individual states is based primarily on substantial reductions from coal - fired powerplants .

in general , theinitiativesidentified here would require affected powerplants to reduce their nox emissions by about 75% - 85% .

althoughthesection 126 determinations and the nsr enforcement action target individual sources , epa provides flexibility forutilitiesto achieve the mandated reduction by means other than simply installing nox control equipment on affected units .

asindicated by epa's nsr settlement with tampa electric discussed later , the consent decree involves severaldifferent noxcontrol strategies to reduce nox emissions by over 85% , as well as controls to reduce so 2 emissionsby almost 80% , by theyear 2010 .

figure 1 indicates the states affected by the initiatives identified here .

in line with the initiatives' focus on coal - firedelectric generating facilities , the midwest is the primary location of affected powerplants .

five states - indiana,kentucky,north carolina , ohio , and west virginia - would be affected by all three initiatives .

in contrast , mississippi andfloridahave utilities targeted only under the nsr enforcement initiatives ; missouri , connecticut , rhode island , andmassachusettsare targeted only under the ozone transport rule .

the other states have utilities targeted under the ozone transportruleand either a section 126 determination or nsr enforcement .

pdf version the costs and benefits of these initiatives could be substantial , as indicated by table 1 .

the nox sip call is the most wideranging of the initiatives , with estimated costs of $1.7 billion annually and estimated quantifiable benefits of$1.1-$4.2billion annually .

because epa's methodology uses cost - effectiveness for determining emission budgets , the lion'sshare ofthe costs would be borne by the utility industry .

the smaller scope of the section 126 determinations reducesemissionsabatement and benefits , but also costs .

of course , this scope could increase if additional petitions submitted to eparesultin more states being implicated as sources of transported ozone .

finally , the evolving scope of epa's nsr actionmakesestimates of its costs and benefits difficult , if not impossible , at this time .

table 1 .

estimated costs and benefits of initiatives n / a = not available source: crs report 98-236 .

since january 2000 significant actions have occurred with all three of the initiatives .

the status of these initiatives as ofjanuary 22 , 2002 , is summarized in table 2 .

perhaps the most significant action has been the decision of a 3-judgepanel ofthe d.c .

circuit court of appeals to uphold epa's ozone transport rule with respect to the 1-hour ozone naaqs ( michigan v. epa , no .

98-1497 ( d.c. cir .

march 3 , 2000 ) ) , and to lift the stay on implementation .

in upholding epa'sauthority and methodology in developing the nox sip call , the court did make some modifications ; in particular,thatepa's methodology did not support the inclusion of wisconsin or all of missouri and georgia in the rule ( adecisionreflected in figure 1 ) .

in lifting the stay , the court ordered affected states to submit revised state implementationplans ( sips ) within 4 months of its june 22 , 2000 , order .

in a subsequent ruling issued august 30 , 2000 , the court orderedepato move its original may 2003 , compliance deadline to may 31 , 2004 .

in march 2001 , the supreme court denieda hearingto opponents of the sip call , effectively affirming the appeals court decision .

in december 2000 , epa declaredthat 11states and the district of columbia failed to submit revised sips by the extended october 30 , 2000 deadline .

bynovember2002 , all the affected states had submitted revised sips except michigan , which has submitted a draft sip revision .

none of these proceedings , however , affect the indefinite stay of epa findings with respect to the 8-hour ozone standard .

in february 2001 , the supreme court ruled that although epa has the authority to set a new 8-hour ozone standard,itsinterpretation of the relationship between the 1-hour standard's statutory implementation strategy and its new 8-hourstandard implementation strategy was unreasonable and unlawful .

the court left it to epa to "develop a reasonableinterpretation" of the statutory provisions as they relate to the implementing the new 8-hour standard ( whitman v. americantrucking associations , 531 u.s. 457 ( 2001 ) decided february 27 , 2001 ) .

table 2 .

status of initiatives with respect to the section 126 petitions , epa announced its 1-hour ozone findings on the 8 original petitions on january18 , 2000 .

 ( 3 ) epa granted four of the eight petitionsfor the 1-hour ozone standard: connecticut , massachusetts , new york,and pennsylvania .

petitions from four other states were denied as these states no longer had areas that were not inattainment with the 1-hour standard .

the rule specifies nox allocations for 392 facilities in 12 states and thedistrict ofcolumbia , and implemented through a cap - and - trade program .

the d.c .

circuit court of appeals upheld epa'sauthorityto issue the rule on may 15 , 2001 , but ordered epa to reconsider factors used in setting emission limits ( appalachianpower co. v. epa ) .

epa responded to the court's order on august 3 , 2001 .

on january 15 , 2002 , the epaannounced itwould delay the compliance deadline for the section 126 rule from may 1 , 2003 , to may 31 , 2004 , in line with thedeadlinefor the nox sip call .

epa argues that a court order issued august 24 , 2001 , had already suspended the compliancedeadline for powerplants , and it would be unfair to make other emission sources meet an earlier deadline .

in january 2000 , epa decided to indefinitely stay its original final determinations with respect to the 8-hour standard , givenlitigation regarding that standard .

it also announced that findings with respect to petitions by the district ofcolumbia,delaware , maryland , and new jersey would be determined in the future .

since the filing of the nsr lawsuits in november 1999 ( and subsequent lawsuits filed in 2000 ) , several significant actionshave occurred .

first , in february 2000 , epa announced that it had come to an agreement with tampa electriccompany ona consent decree that will settle the nsr lawsuit against that utility .

the agreement will reduce nox emissions byover85% ( and so 2 emissions by almost 80% ) through a combination of fuel switching to natural gas,pollution controlequipment optimization , and other techniques .

the estimated $1 billion program is expected by tampa electric tohave a"small" impact on its customers' bills .

 ( 4 ) second , on november 16 , 2000 , epa and virginia power announced that an "agreement in principle" had been reach tosettle epa's nsr suit against virginia power .

over 12 years , virginia will spend $1.2 billion to reduce nox andso2emissions by about 70% through a combination of pollution control equipment and fuel switching .

thisannouncement wasfollowed on december 21 , 2000 by a similar agreement in principle between epa and cinergy involving a $1.4billioninvestment in control technology .

third , on january 24 , 2002 , epa and the state of new jersey announced the filing and settlement of an nsr suit againstpseg fossil llc .

pseg agreed to reduce its so2 emissions by 90% and its nox emissions by 83% from 2000levels by2012 at an estimated cost of $337 million .

in addition , pseg agreed to reduce co2 emissions by 15% from 1990levels .

litigation on these cases has slowed as participants assess the impact of the bush administration's june 2002 recommendations to revise the new source review process .

of particular interest is an epa recommendation thata newrulemaking be commenced on the definition of "routine maintenance," a key point of contention in the abovelawsuits .

asof october 2002 , no formal rulemaking has been proposed by epa as the drafting process has not beencompleted .

 ( 5 ) .

the continuing difficulties in the northeast both in meeting the ozone naaqs and in reducing acid precipitation havefocused attention on emissions from fossil fuel - fired utilities , particularly of nox - and on the potential costs ofreducingthose emissions .

concerned about the piecemeal nature of these initiatives , some in congress have been workingoncomprehensive , multi - pollutant alternative strategies to reduce emissions .

in june 2002 , the senate environmentandpublic works committee reported out s. 556 - a comprehensive , multi - pollutant bill that would incorporatemarket - oriented mechanisms to control nox , so2 , and co2 , and tonnage limitations on hg .

 ( 6 ) no floor action has beenscheduled .

