when a new congress convenes in january , one of its first orders of business is to receive the annual budget submission of the president .

following receipt of the president's budget , congress begins the consideration of the budget resolution and other budgetary legislation for the upcoming fiscal year , which starts on october 1 .

the transition from one presidential administration to another raises special issues regarding the annual budget submission .

which president — the outgoing president or the incoming one — is required to submit the budget , and how will the transition affect the timing and form of the submission ? .

the purpose of this report is to provide background information that addresses these questions .

the budget and accounting act of 1921 , as amended , requires the president to submit a budget annually to congress toward the beginning of each regular session ( 31 u.s.c .

§1105a ) .

this requirement first applied to president warren harding for fy1923 .

the deadline for submission of the budget , first set in 1921 as "on the first day of each regular session," has changed several times over the years: in 1950 , to "during the first 15 days of each regular session" ; in 1985 , to "on or before the first monday after january 3 of each year ( or on or before february 5 in 1986 ) " ; and in 1990 , to "on or after the first monday in january but not later than the first monday in february of each year. .

the 20 th amendment to the constitution , ratified in 1933 , requires each new congress to convene on january 3 ( unless the date is changed by the enactment of a law ) and provides a january 20 beginning date for a president's four - year term of office .

therefore , under the legal framework for the beginning of a new congress , the beginning of a new president's term , and the deadline for the submission of the budget , all outgoing presidents prior to the 1990 change were obligated to submit a budget .

the 1990 change in the deadline made it possible for an outgoing president to leave the annual budget submission to his successor , an option which the three outgoing presidents since then ( george h.w .

bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush ) took .

because president george h.w .

bush chose not to submit a budget for fy1994 ( and was not obligated to do so ) , president bill clinton submitted the original budget for fy1994 rather than budget revisions .

similarly , the budget for fy2002 was submitted by the incoming president george w. bush , rather than by outgoing president bill clinton .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) provided considerable advance notice of the plan for fy2002 .

president george w. bush indicated early on that he would not submit a budget for fy2010 .

in announcing the decision , then - omb director jim nussle stated: the fy2010 budget will be submitted by the next president .

in order to lay the groundwork for the next administration , we intend to prepare a budget database that includes a complete current services baseline and to gather information to develop current services program estimates for fy2010 from which the incoming administration can develop its budget proposals .

president barack obama submitted an overview of his budget , "a new era of responsibility: renewing america's promise" on february 26 , 2009 , two days after delivering an address on his economic and budget plan to a joint session of congress .

he submitted his appendix , which contained detailed budget information on may 7 , 2009 , and additional supplemental volumes , including the analytical perspectives and the terminations , reductions , and savings volume , on may 11 , 2009 .

incoming presidents , except for warren harding , bill clinton , george w. bush , and barack obama , assumed their position with a budget of their predecessor in place .

under the 1921 act , presidents may submit budget revisions to congress at any time .

six incoming presidents chose to modify their predecessor's budget by submitting revisions shortly after taking office: dwight eisenhower , john kennedy , richard nixon , gerald ford , jimmy carter , and ronald reagan .

six incoming presidents chose not to submit revisions: calvin coolidge , herbert hoover , franklin roosevelt , harry truman , lyndon johnson , and george h. w. bush .

during the period beginning with the full implementation of the congressional budget process ( in fy1977 ) , six transitions of presidential administration have occurred .

as table 1 shows , the three outgoing presidents required to submit a budget during this period ( gerald ford , jimmy carter , and ronald reagan ) did so on or before the statutory deadline .

the three presidents who were not required to submit an outgoing budget ( george h.w .

bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush ) each chose to leave the budget submission to his successor .

once the original budget for a fiscal year has been submitted , a president or his successor may submit revisions at any time .

two incoming presidents during this period ( jimmy carter and ronald reagan ) submitted budget revisions and one ( george h.w .

bush ) did not .

the fy1978 revisions by president jimmy carter ( a 101-page document ) were submitted on february 22 and the fy1982 revisions by president ronald reagan ( an initial 159-page document and a subsequent 435-page document ) were submitted on march 10 and april 7 , respectively .

in past years , congress authorized the submission of a budget for a fiscal year after the statutory deadline by enacting a deadline extension in law .

for example , the deadlines for submission of the budgets for fy1981 , fy1984 , and fy1986 were extended from mid - january to late - january or early - february by p.l .

96 - 186 , p.l .

97 - 469 , and p.l .

99 - 1 , respectively .

beginning in the late 1980s , however , several original budgets have been submitted late without authorization .

for fy1991 , the budget was submitted a week after a deadline that already had been extended by law ( p.l .

101 - 228 ) .

for fy1989 , the budget was submitted 45 days after the deadline without the consideration of any measure granting a deadline extension .

the three most recent transition - year budgets ( fy1994 , fy2002 , and fy2010 ) were submitted 66 , 63 , and 98 days beyond the deadline , respectively , without the consideration of a measure granting a deadline extension .

presidents clinton and george w. bush submitted the original budgets for fy1994 and fy2002 ( on april 8 , 1993 , and april 9 , 2001 , respectively ) , and president obama submitted the fy2010 budget on may 7 , 2009 .

although presidents reagan , clinton , george w. bush , and barack obama did not submit detailed budget proposals until april or may of their first year in office , each of them advised congress regarding the general contours of their economic and budgetary policies in special messages submitted to congress in february .

though president george h. w. bush did not submit an official revision of president reagan's fy1990 budget , he submitted a message to congress that contained many of the same elements as budget revisions that had been submitted by previous incoming presidents .

in conjunction , each incoming president since ronald reagan has presented his special message on the budget to a joint session of congress .

though the three presidents who were not required to submit an outgoing budget ( g.h.w .

bush , clinton , and g.w .

bush ) each chose to leave the budget submission to his successor , presidents clinton and george h.w .

bush helped facilitate the development of their successor's budget by providing a "transition budget" volume to congress .

on january 6 , 1993 , just prior to the inauguration of president clinton , president george h. w. bush submitted to congress a 573-page , single - volume budgetary document , budget baselines , historical data , and alternatives for the future .

instead of constituting a budget in the usual sense , this document provided historical data , baseline budget projections under the status quo , and illustrations of budget projections using alternative economic assumptions and different broad policy outlines .

similarly , on january 16 , 2001 , president clinton prepared a "transition budget" for incoming president george w. bush , fy2002 economic outlook , highlights from fy1994 to fy2001 , fy2002 baseline projections .

the volume was comparable in scope to the one issued for fy1994 by president george h. w. bush just before he left office , providing revised budget projections and an economic and programmatic update .

