rs20786 - - hong kong - u.s. economic relations updated january 27 , 200 .

with a population of 6.8 million , hong kong is one of the world's most vibrant economies and a major center forinternational banking and foreign trade .

it is utilized by many foreign companies as a gateway to markets inmainlandchina .

with a per capita gdp of $27,700 on a purchasing power parity basis in 2003 , hong kong maintains thesecond highest standard of living in asia ( after japan ) ; it is higher than that of many west european nations,includinggermany and the united kingdom .

hong kong is a member of a variety of multilateral economic organizations,suchas the world trade organization ( wto ) and the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum .

hong kong's economy is heavily dependent on trade .

 ( 3 ) in 2004 , hong kong's merchandise exports and imports were$259 billion and $271 billion , respectively .

a large share of hong kong's trade consists of entrepot and processingtrade , much of it involving china .

 ( 4 ) about 30% ofchina's trade passes through hong kong .

taiwan , which does notmaintain direct commercial links with china , ships most of its exports to , and imports from , china via hong kong .

alarge share of china's exports also pass through hong kong before being re - exported to other destinations .

someofthis trade consists of products made by hong kong firms in the mainland , which are sent to hong kong for furtherprocessing before being re - exported elsewhere .

hong kong has transferred a large share of its manufacturing basetothe mainland .

in the pearl river delta region ( guangdong province , china ) , 50,000 hong kong firms employabout 6million chinese workers , 20 times the size of hong kong's manufacturing workforce .

as a result , the importanceofmanufacturing to hong kong's economy has diminished in recent years , while that of services ( especially thoserelating to trade , such as banking and financial services ) has increased sharply .

in 2004 , services exports andimportswere estimated to total $65 billion and $36 billion , respectively .

hong kong has enjoyed relatively healthy growth over the past several years .

however , in 1997 hong kong's economy was hit by the asian financial crisis .

beginning in july 1997 , speculative pressures on the hong kongdollar ( which has been pegged to the u.s. dollar since 1983 ) caused the hong kong monetary authority ( hkma ) to spend$1 billion to prop up the currency .

these pressures continued , leading the hkma in october 1997 to raise interestrates ( to stop capital flight ) , which subsequently led to a nearly one - quarter drop in the hong kong stock market ( thehang seng index ) over a four - day period .

in late august 1998 , the hong kong government intervened in the stockmarket's decline by spending $15 billion to purchase shares from 33 blue - chip companies that make up the hangsengindex , which helped raise the value of the shares by 24% .

several analysts criticized the government's intervention,arguing that it violated hong kong's free market principles by increasing the government's role over the economy .

the hong kong government maintained that its intervention was a one - time event , intended to halt speculation andstabilize the stock market .

 ( 5 ) the effects of the asian economic crisis on hong kong were significant .

the economy fell into a major recession in1998: real gdp fell by 5.0% , the unemployment rate rose from 2.2% to 4.7% , and exports and imports declinedsharply .

the hong kong economy recovered somewhat in 1999 and 2000 , but was negatively affected by theterroristattacks against the united states in 2001 and by the outbreak and spread of a new and deadly virus called severeacuterespiratory syndrome ( sars ) in 2003 .

hong kong was one of the areas hardest hit areas by sars , whichdrasticallyreduced tourism and domestic demand .

by the end of june 2003 , the unemployment rate rose to a record high 8.7% .

hong kong's economy picked up sharply in 2004 , due to rising exports and strong domestic demand .

real gdp grewby an estimated 7.7% ; however , unemployment remained stubbornly high ( see table 1 ) table 1 .

selected economic data for hong kong , 1997-2004* *data for 2004 are estimates .

date on unemployment is average of the last three months ending in november 2004 .

sources: hong kong trade development council , hong kong census and statisticsdepartment , the economistintelligence unit , and global insight .

the united states is one of hong kong's most important economic partners .

in 2003 , the united states was hongkong's largest market for domestic exports ( i.e. , products made in hong kong ) and its fourth - largest supplier ofimports .

there are over 1,000 u.s. businesses represented in hong kong , including more than 400 regionaloperations ; more than 50,000 u.s. citizens reside in hong kong .

cumulative u.s. foreign direct investment ( fdi ) inhong kong at the end of 2003 was $44.3 billion .

 ( 6 ) many u.s. firms and investors seeking to do business in chinahave used hong kong as a base for their operations , frequently relying on hong kong partners to obtain the"guanxi" ( connections ) that are often needed to gain access to china's markets .

in 2004 , it is estimated that hong kong was the thirteenth - largest purchaser of u.s. exports ( $16.0 billion ) and thetwenty - seventh - largest supplier of u.s. imports ( $9.3 billion ) .

the top three u.s. exports to hong kong in 2005wereelectrical and electronic machinery and parts ( mainly electronic integrated circuits , micro - assemblies , andsemiconductors ) , non - electrical machinery ( such as computers and computer parts ) , and miscellaneous manufactureditems ( mainly diamonds and jewelry ) .

the top three u.s. imports from hong kong were apparel and clothing,miscellaneous manufactured commodities , and telecommunications and sound equipment ( see table2 ) .

table 2 .

major u.s. - hong kong trade commodities , 2000-2004 ( $ in billions ) sitc classification , two - digit level .

source : u.s. commerce department .

date for 2004 estimated based on actual data forjan. - nov. 2004 .

the united states continues to treat hong kong as a separate economic territory for such purposes as trade dataandexport controls .

u.s. officials continue to work with hong kong officials to ensure that hong kong is not used bychina to illegally circumvent u.s. controls on exports of dual - use and other high technology products and to combatviolations of u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) in hong kong .

 ( 7 ) export controls .

the united states seeks to control exports of dual - use technologies for a variety of national security and foreign policy purposes through a complex regulatorysystem of export license requirements .

despite the reversion of hong kong to chinese sovereignty , the unitedstatescontinues to treat hong kong separately from the mainland for export control purposes ( i.e. , controls of u.s. exportsof dual - use items to hong kong are far less restrictive than those to china ) .

some members of congress haveraisedconcern that china may be using hong kong to acquire dual - use items that cannot be obtained directly from theunited states , and have called for tighter controls on u.s. exports to hong kong .

the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-383 ) requires the u.s. state department to report periodically to congress on conditions in hong kong and its relations with the united states , including cooperationinthe area of export controls .

in its most recent report ( april 2004 ) , the state department stated that "hong kong maintains an effective , highly autonomous , and transparent export control regime that the u.s. government hasencouraged others to emulate. .

however , the report stated that the growing economic integration between chinaandhong kong has presented new challenges to ensure effective compliance with export control regimes , and notedthatover the past two years , inspections have uncovered an increase in instances of illegal re - exports of u.s. dual - usetechnology to china .

hong kong and u.s. officials have agreed to boost cooperation on the sharing of licensingandenforcement information and to education the hong kong public of export control laws .

 ( 8 ) ipr protection .

over the past few years , the united states has pressed hong kong to improve its ipr protection regime .

from april 1997 to february 1999 , hong kong wasdesignated by u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) under special 301 , ( a provision of u.s. trade lawdealing withcountries that violate u.s. ipr ) as a watch list country due to the widespread distribution and retail salein hong kongof pirated compact discs .

 ( 9 ) hong kong was removedfrom the special 301 watch list after the ustr determined thathong kong had made significant improvements to its legal regime and enforcement efforts .

the 2001 and 2002special 301 reports listed hong kong as one of several trading partners in which progress in protection of ipr hadbeen made .

the ustr's 2003 ipr report praised the hong kong government for requiring government agenciestouse only legitimate software and for its commitment to halt optical media piracy .

the 2003 state department reportstated that hong kong had "shut down virtually all large - scale illicit manufacturing lines," but noted deficienciesintwo areas: commercial end - use piracy and patent projection for pharmaceuticals .

 ( 10 ) .

several international economic forecasting organizations contend that the long - term prospects for hong kong's economic future remain relatively positive , provided that it continues to employ free trade , market - oriented policies,and maintains its autonomy from mainland china .

 ( 11 ) the economist intelligence unit projects that hong kong'seconomy will grow by 4.7% in 2005 and 3.6% in 2005 , while global insight projects real gdp growthat 4.9% and4.4% , respectively .

 ( 12 ) china's accession to the wto ( which occurred in december 2001 ) poses both opportunities and challenges to hongkong's economy .

on the one hand , the removal of trade and investment barriers by china will likely significantlyboost hong kong trade with , and investment in , the mainland .

hong kong is already by far the largest investor inchina ( and china is the largest investor in hong kong ) , and hence is likely to be in the best position to takeadvantageof a more open chinese market .

in addition , china's wto accession is expected to sharply increase its trade flows,and much of that increased trade will likely take place via hong kong .

 ( 13 ) on the other hand , a more open chinesemarket could diminish hong kong's role as a middleman for foreign firms wanting to do business with themainland,especially if foreign investors believe that the rule of law , rather than "connections," will be the primary factorgoverning business relations in china .

hong kong's economy could also be negatively affected if china and taiwandecide to establish direct trade links , which would likely reduce the level of trade that takes place via hong kong .

 ( 14 ) .

