rs20913 - - farm "counter - cyclical assistance" updated may 31 , 200 .

farming often is characterized as a "cyclical" business with exaggerated price swings that are destabilizing .

farmersrespond to high prices by boosting output .

however , when prices drop , farmers are not quick to cut backproduction .

theyare more likely to operate at a loss and draw down resources .

contributing to the unstable nature of the farmeconomy arethe weather , export demand , currency exchange rate fluctuations , and the farm support and export subsidy programsofforeign competitors .

typically , farmers do not view the eventual self - correcting character of commodity prices and production with the sameequanimity as economists .

in fact , u.s. producers of the major crops have asked for and received federalintervention - - including various forms of counter - cyclical assistance - - to support their commodity prices and incomes for nearlythe past70 years .

between 1973 and 1995 , a prominent form of counter - cyclical aid was deficiency payments linked to target prices .

congress specified , for each major crop , an annual per - unit target price ( eg , $4 per bushel for wheat ) .

if , as oftenoccurred , the market price was below the target price , eligible producers received a deficiency payment to make upthedifference .

this aid was ended by the federal agriculture improvement and reform ( fair ) act of 1996 ( p.l.104-127 ) .

under title i of the 1996 act , fixed production flexibility contract ( pfc ) payments replaced target price deficiencypayments .

these payments were intended to provide , over 7 years , a total of about $36 billion to eligible producersorlandowners .

the pfc payments were not linked to either current production or prices .

by design , lawmakersintended thatthese fixed payments , along with the ability to make unconstrained planting decisions , would cause the marketplaceratherthan subsidies to guide farmers' production choices .

however , the 1996 law did continue another form of counter - cyclical support: marketing assistance loans .

producers could ( and , under the new 2002 law , continue to ) pledge their stored grain , cotton , or oilseeds as collateral for a u.s.departmentof agriculture ( usda ) nonrecourse commodity loan after harvest .

these loans are based on a per - unit ( bushel,pound ) rate .

in earlier years , these nonrecourse loans were set higher than market prices in order to support farm incomes , and farmersforfeited the commodities pledged as collateral at the end of the loan term ( about 9 months ) .

under the more recentdesign,farmers can repay the nonrecourse "marketing assistance loans" at less than the original loan rate when market pricesarelower than that loan rate .

the difference between the usda loan rate and the lower repayment rate ( times thenumber ofbushels under loan ) constitutes the federal subsidy .

in addition , those producers who choose not take out usdacommodity loans can instead receive the equivalent subsidy as a direct payment , called a "loan deficiency payment" ( ldp ) .

the federal subsidy ( either a loan gain or ldp ) increases as market prices drop below the loan rate , and the subsidydiminishes as prices rise - - thus , the "counter - cyclical" nature of the marketing loan program .

when the 1996 farm bill was passed , commodity prices were relatively high , and policymakers widely anticipated that thepfc payments , when combined with whatever was earned from the market , would provide sufficient income toproducers .

marketing loans were set at relatively low rates so that they only would be needed as a safety net if prices declinedrelatively steeply .

however , by the late 1990s , major commodity prices declined even more than expected , andgenerallydid not recover to what farmers regarded as acceptable levels .

as a result , they relied heavily on marketing loanbenefits,which went from zero in fy1996 , to a high of over $8 billion in fy2000 ( the cost has declined somewhat sincethen ) .

congress determined that the "safety net" provided by the 1996 fair act ( i.e. , marketing assistance loans and fixed pfcpayments ) was inadequate , and supplemented the benefits with additional , emergency "market loss payments. .

thesepayments , mainly to pfc enrollees , added about $3 billion in fy1999 , $11 billion in fy2000 , and $5.5 billion infy2001to program costs .

these supplemental payments also can be characterized as counter - cyclical - - even though theyare adhoc and not "programmed" into standing law - - because they were made ( according to the sponsors ) inresponse to lowprices and incomes .

nearly all of the numerous farm and commodity organizations that testified before the house and senate agriculturecommittees in 2001 requested that additional counter - cyclical support be developed as a supplement to the currentmarketing assistance loans and fixed annual payments .

in response , the separate farm bills passed in october 2001by thehouse and february 2002 by the senate , incorporated new counter - cyclical measures into standing law .

thus,congresspresumably would no longer have to debate and enact periodic emergency ad hoc assistance .

the final farm bill , the farm security and rural investment act ( fsria ) of 2002 ( h.r .

2646 , p.l .

107-171 ) ,provides new long - term counter - cyclical support for grains and cotton , by restoring target prices and deficiencypayments,similar in some respects to the program terminated by the 1996 act .

what are now called annual pfc paymentsarereplaced with fixed , "direct payments" to farmers .

both types of payments will be available to producers withannualagreements with usda .

in addition , the measure maintains marketing assistance loans and loan deficiencypayments asthey now function , with changes in most loan rates .

the new law , which covers the 2002-2007 crop years , brings soybeans and the minor oilseeds ( eg , sunflowers , etc. ) .

fullyunder the support program rules that apply to grains and cotton .

in a major departure from the past , fsriaredesignspeanut support to operate like that for grains , oilseeds , and cotton - - instead of the traditional system of peanutmarketingquotas and nonrecourse price support loans .

under the new law , fixed payments and target price deficiency payments will be paid on 85% of each farm's baseproduction ( base acres times base yield of each commodity ) .

a farmer may choose , as base production , either theacreageused for pfc payments , or average acres planted to eligible crops from 1998 through 2001 .

yields effectively arethe1981-85 averages , except that , for counter - cyclical payments , yields also can be updated under astatutorily - prescribedformula .

a key difference between the new target price payments and those made until 1995 , is that the old payments were tied toannual planting rules ( i.e. , an acreage reduction program. ) .

the new system is not contingent upon such rules:payments arebased upon historical , not current , production , and farmers can plant virtually any crops except most fruits andvegetables .

under the new counter - cyclical program , the deficiency payment rate will be calculated as the difference between the targetprice , and the lower average season market price ( but not to exceed the difference between the target price and thesum ofthe loan rate and fixed payment ) .

 ( see table 1 for rates ) .

an individual may receive no more than $130,000 peryear incounter - cyclical assistance .

milk support would continue under fsria through government purchases of nonfat dry milk , butter , and cheese .

however , it has an added feature of counter - cyclical payments .

dairy farmers nationwide will be eligible for"nationaldairy market loss payments" whenever the minimum monthly market price for farm milk used for fluid consumptioninboston falls below $16.94 per hundredweight ( cwt. ) .

in order to receive a payment , a dairy farmer must enter intoacontract with the secretary of agriculture .

the value of the payment equals 45% of the difference between the$16.94 percwt .

target price in any month that the boston market price falls below $16.94 .

a producer can receive a paymenton allmilk production during that month , but no payments will be made on any annual production in excess of 2.4 millionpoundsper dairy operation .

all contracts expire on september 30 , 2005 .

 ( see dairy farmer counter - cyclical assistance in thecrs electronic briefing book on agriculturepolicy and the farm bill . ) .

table 1 .

loan rates , fixed payment rates , and target prices * reflects rates that change in some years .

na=not applicable .

whereas the final farm bill ties the availability of counter - cyclical assistance to target prices for specified commodities,other designs also were discussed .

for example: one plan would have triggered payments in a state whenever state ( as opposed to national ) gross cash receipts for any of eight program or oilseed crops are forecast for the year to be less than 94% of that state's annualaveragecash receipts for the crop during 1996-1999 .

cash receipts would be defined as the national average price timesstate - levelproduction .

those who produced the crop during 1998-2000 would be eligible for a share of total payments ( americanfarm bureau federation ) .

another would have established a "national target income" for each major crop: that is , the national average annual market value of the crop during 1996-2000 , plus the annual average of any marketing loan benefitsandmarket loss assistance payments made during those years .

a further adjustment would be made to account for yieldincreases since then .

those who produced that crop during 1996-2000 would be eligible for a share of totalpaymentswhenever returns ( defined as the crop's u.s. production times the average price for the first 3 months of themarketingyear ) are below the national target income for the crop ( national corn growers association ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated the commodity support provisions ( title i ) of fsria at $98.9billion over 6 years ( budget authority , march 2002 estimate , fy2002-2007 ) .

this is $37.6 billion more than thebaselinepolicy of simply extending current programs into the future .

the new counter - cyclical payments for grains , cotton,andoilseeds account for $23.6 billion of the new costs ( i.e. , above baseline ) .

the peanut and dairy counter - cyclicalpaymentsare projected to cost , respectively , another $904 million and $963 million .

however , such cost estimates are speculative due to the extreme difficulty of predicting future market conditions , includingprices .

if prices are lower than cbo's assumptions , then costs will be higher , and vice versa .

some other analystsalreadyhave differing projections .

for example , the food and agricultural policy research institute ( fapri ) at the university of missouri estimates that thetotal cost of the dairy program alone could exceed $3.6 billion .

that's mainly because fapri projects significantlylowermarket prices for milk than cbo over the 46-month life of the program .

cbo estimates that the average monthlypaymentrate over the 46-month life of the program will be about $0.45 per cwt .

 ; fapri estimates an average monthlypayment rateof $0.89 per cwt .

 ( see also what is the cost of the 2002 farm bill ? .

in the crs electronic briefing book on agriculture policy and the farmbill . ) .

the 1994 uruguay round agreement on agriculture ( uraa ) obligates countries to discipline their agricultural subsidyprograms and reduce import barriers in order to promote more open trade .

under the uraa , the united states iscommitted to providing subsidies of no more than $19.1 billion per year through domestic farm policies with themostpotential to distort production and trade .

the uraa contains detailed rules for how countries should determine which of their programs must be counted towardtheir assigned subsidy limits ( eg , $19.1 billion for the united states ) .

generally , however , programs that are tiedtocurrent prices or current production must be counted ( these are called "amber box" policies ) .

thus , marketing loangains,which rise when crop prices decline and vice versa , are "amber" and must be counted ( but only if their value , alongwithother subsidies , exceeds 5% of the value of annual production of that crop ) .

on the other hand , subsidies that are not linked to prices or production , and / or meet other specified criteria , might beexempted as "green box" policies .

the united states has classified its pfc payments as "green" because they aremadewithout regard to prices or current production .

it is anticipated the fixed , decoupled payments in the new law alsowill fallwithin the green box .

the new counter - cyclical assistance will be decoupled from current output because the producer would not have to produceany particular crop now to receive the payments .

however , because ( like marketing loan gains ) the target pricedeficiencypayments would be triggered by current market prices , they are expected to be placed in the amber box .

so , they conclude , if counter - cyclical payments , when added to other "amber" subsidies such as marketing loanbenefits,caused u.s. spending to exceed $19.1 billion , the united states could be in violation of its world tradecommitments .

whether that would happen is unclear , in part because of the difficulty of predicting future market prices , but alsobecauseof the technicalities involved in classifying and valuing subsidies under the wto system .

"circuit breaker" language in fsria is intended to require usda to keep trade - distorting farm subsidies at or below the$19.1 billion limit .

questions arise about the administrative , economic , and political implications of changing ( i.e.,reducing ) benefits , particularly after they are announced and / or awarded .

 ( see crs report rl30612 ( pdf ) , farmsupportprograms and world trade commitments . ) .

some groups had argued that their own counter - cyclical policies could be designed in a way that they would not have to becounted toward the $19.1 billion limit .

for example , if payments to farmers were triggered by low income ( asmeasured bygross receipts for one or more commodities ) rather than by low prices , they would be exempt , it has been argued .

othersdispute this assertion , noting that it is usually low prices that cause low income .

the new counter - cyclical aid in the 2002 law focuses on the "major" commodities - - grains , cotton , oilseeds , peanuts , andmilk .

these generally are the most widely produced , but that still leaves much of u.s. agriculture ineligible for suchpayments , raising questions of equity among commodities , and of the potential for distorting production towarditems thatmight receive more support ( contributing to surplus production ) .

but extending such aid to more commodities , suchasfruits , vegetables , or livestock , also would have increased federal costs , or else reduced assistance levels for themajorcommodities .

also , not all commodity groups sought such aid .

for example , the national cattlemen's beefassociationwas among those that opposed most forms of direct assistance , counter - cyclical or otherwise .

and , the unitedfresh fruitand vegetable association argued against any subsidies that would insulate fruit or vegetable producers from marketsignals or would sustain or encourage production .

another issue was whether a new counter - cyclical program should perpetuate past patterns that tie aid to output rather thaneconomic need .

farm programs , including direct payments , marketing loans and the ad hoc "marketloss payments," havebeen based on either past or current production by individual farmers , meaning that larger payments have trendedtowardlarger operations - - which do not or should not need them , critics argue .

they add that if congress intends to helpproducers in economic distress , then such recipients should have to document their need .

others counter that farmprograms are not "welfare" but rather part of a larger policy to ensure that u.s. agriculture remains competitive intheglobal economy ( an assertion that critics challenge ) .

