concerns about the safety of presidents have existed throughout the history of the republic , beginning with george washington in 1794 , when he led troops against the whiskey rebellion in pennsylvania .

the intervening years have witnessed a variety of incidents of actual and potential harm to presidents ( as well as immediate family members and other high - ranking officials ) .

these situations extend to illegal entries onto the white house grounds and the white house itself ; violence and conflict near the president's residence or where he was visiting ; unauthorized aircraft flying near the white house and , in one instance , a plane crashing into the building ; schemes to use airplanes to attack the white house ; other threats of attack , including bombings and armed assaults ; feared kidnapping and hostage - taking ; assassination plots ; as well as immediate , direct assaults against presidents .

in addition to incumbents , presidents - elect and candidates for the office have been subject to assaults or threats .

this report identifies assassinations of and other direct assaults against presidents , presidents - elect , and candidates for the office of president .

there have been 15 such attacks ( against 14 individuals ) , with five resulting in death .

the first incident occurred in 1835 , involving president andrew jackson , when an attacker's pistol misfired .

the most recent occurred in 2005 , when a would - be assassin in tbilisi , republic of georgia , tossed a grenade ( which did not explode ) at the platform where president george w. bush and the georgian president were speaking .

the tally of victims reveals the following: of the 43 individuals serving as president , 10 ( or about 23% ) have been subject to actual or attempted assassinations .

four of these 10 incumbents — abraham lincoln , james a. garfield , william mckinley , and john f. kennedy — were slain .

four of the seven most recent presidents have been targets of assaults: gerald r. ford ( twice in 1975 ) , ronald w. reagan ( in a near - fatal shooting in 1981 ) , william j. clinton ( when the white house was fired upon in 1994 ) , and george w. bush ( when an attacker tossed a grenade , which did not explode , towards him and the president of georgia at a public gathering in tbilisi in 2005 ) .

two others who served as president were attacked , either as a president - elect ( franklin d. roosevelt in 1933 ) or as a presidential candidate ( theodore roosevelt in 1912 , when he was seeking the presidency after being out of office for nearly four years ) .

two other presidential candidates — robert f. kennedy , who was killed in 1968 , and george c. wallace , who was seriously wounded in 1972 — were also victims , during the primaries .

in only one of these 15 incidents ( the lincoln assassination ) was a broad conspiracy proven , although such contentions have arisen on other occasions .

only one other incident involved more than one participant ( the 1950 assault on blair house , the temporary residence of president harry s truman ) ; but no evidence of other conspirators emerged from the subsequent investigation or prosecution .

of the 15 direct assaults , 11 relied upon pistols , two on automatic weapons , one on a rifle , and one on a grenade .

all but two of the attacks ( both against gerald ford ) were committed by men .

all but one of the 15 assaults occurred within the united states .

the following table identifies the direct assaults on presidents , presidents - elect , and candidates for the office of president .

it specifies the date when the assault occurred , the victim , his political party affiliation , the length of his administration at the time of the attack or whether he was then a candidate or president - elect , the location of the attack , its method and result , and the name of the assailant , along with the professed or alleged reason for the attack ( if known ) .

