congress relies on a variety of mechanisms , instruments , and procedures to protect classified national security and other sensitive information in its custody .

such information — most of which comes from the executive branch — can be hard to obtain .

but accessibility to it is seen as necessary for the legislature to carry out its constitutional responsibilities , especially overseeing the executive and legislating public policy .

the safeguards surrounding information deal with who is eligible for access , what information is made available and in what form , where and when it can be accessed , and how and in what circumstances or contexts it can be used afterwards .

the relevant requirements and mechanisms include house and senate security offices responsible for setting and implementing standards for safeguarding classified information ; committee rules determining access to committee - held classified information , including what is made available and to whom , as well as how and under what conditions ; committee and certain chamber rules governing how classified information can be used afterwards , in what contexts and forums , and under what conditions ; establishment of special congressional groups to receive highly sensitive classified information ; a secrecy oath required for all members and employees of the house and several of its committees ; security clearances and nondisclosure agreements for staff ; and formal procedures for investigating suspected security violations .

public laws , house and senate rules , and committee rules — as well as custom and practice , including informal agreements between legislators and executive officials — constitute the bases for these requirements and arrangements .

some of these have evolved over time , in response to changing conditions and needs of both the legislative and executive branches .

a variety of proposals — coming from congressional bodies , government commissions , and other groups — have called for changes in the procedures for handling and safeguarding classified information in the custody of congress .

these plans , some of which might be controversial or costly , focus on setting uniform standards for congressional offices and employees and heightening access eligibility requirements .

this would mark a significant and unprecedented departure from the past .

members of congress ( as with the president and vice president , justices of the supreme court , or other federal court judges ) have never been required to hold security clearances .

most of the proposals along this line appeared in the late 1980s , following charges and countercharges between the executive and legislative branches over unauthorized disclosure of classified information .

a more recent bill , introduced in 2006 , would have required a security clearance for members serving on the house permanent select committee on intelligence and on the subcommittee on defense of the house appropriations committee .

the resolution , however , did not specify which entity ( in the legislative or executive branch ) would conduct the background investigation or which officer ( in congress or in the executive ) would adjudicate the clearances of members .

the broad mandate for such clearances could be applied to four different groups: ( 1 ) all senators and representatives , thus , in effect , becoming a condition for serving in congress ; ( 2 ) only members seeking access to classified information , including those on the panels receiving it ; ( 3 ) only members on committees which receive classified information ; or ( 4 ) only those seeking access to classified information held by panels where they are not members .

under a security clearance requirement , background investigations might be conducted by an executive branch agency , such as the office of personnel management or federal bureau of investigation ; by a legislative branch entity , such as the house or senate office of security , or the government accountability office ; or possibly by a private investigative firm under contract .

possible adjudicators — that is , the officials who would judge , based on the background investigation , whether applicants would be "trustworthy" and , therefore , eligible for access to classified information — could extend to the majority or minority leaders , a special panel in each chamber , a chamber officer , or even an executive branch officer , if congress so directed .

the main goals behind this proposed change are to tighten and make uniform standards governing eligibility for access for members .

proponents maintain that it would help safeguard classified information by ensuring access only by members deemed "trustworthy" and , thereby , limit the possibility of leaks and inadvertent disclosures .

in addition , the clearance process itself might make recipients more conscious of and conscientious about the need to safeguard this information as well as the significance attached to it .

as a corollary , supporters might argue that mandating a clearance to serve on a panel possessing classified information could increase its members' appreciation of the information's importance and its protection's priority .

this , in turn , might help the committee members gain the access to information that the executive is otherwise reluctant to share and improve comity between the branches .

opponents , by contrast , contend that security clearance requirements would compromise the independence of the legislature if an executive branch agency conducted the background investigation , had access to the information it generated , or adjudicated the clearance .

even if the process were fully under legislative control , concerns might arise over a number of matters: its fairness , impartiality , objectivity , and correctness ( if determined by an inexperienced person ) ; the effects of a negative judgment on a member , both inside and outside congress ; and the availability of information gathered in the investigation — which may not be accurate or substantiated — to other members or to another body , such as the chamber's ethics committee or justice department , if it is seen as incriminating in matters of ethics or criminality .

opponents might also contend that adding this new criterion could have an adverse impact on individual members , the full legislature , and the legislative process in other ways .

it might impose an unnecessary , unprecedented , and unique ( among elected federal officials and members of the federal judiciary ) demand on legislators ; create two classes of legislators , those with or without a clearance ; affect current requirements for non - member access to holdings of committees whose own members might need clearances ; possibly jeopardize participation by members without clearances in floor or committee proceedings ( even secret sessions ) ; and inordinately slow down the legislative process , while background investigations , adjudications , and appeals connected with security clearances of members are conducted .

this proposal would require a secrecy oath for senators and staffers , similar to the current requirement for their house counterparts .

an earlier attempt to mandate such an oath for all members and employees of both chambers of congress seeking access to classified information arose in 1993 , but it was unsuccessful .

if approved , it would have prohibited intelligence entities from providing classified information to members of congress and their staff , as well as officers and employees of the executive branch , unless the recipients had signed a nondisclosure agreement .

each would have to pledge that he or she "will not willfully directly or indirectly disclose to any unauthorized person any classified information" — and the oath had been published in the congressional record .

this demand might make it easier to detect and investigate possible misconduct instigated for financial reasons .

and many staff with high - level clearances may already file financial disclosure statements , because of their employment rank or salary level ; consequently , few new costs would be added .

nonetheless , objections might arise because the proposal would impose yet another burden on staff and result in additional record - keeping and costs .

this requirement's effectiveness in preventing leaks or espionage might also be questioned by opponents .

under such proposals , drug tests or polygraph examinations could be imposed in several different circumstances: as a condition of employment for all personnel in offices holding classified information , only on staff seeking access to such information , or for both employment and access .

objections have been expressed to such tests , especially as a pre - condition of employment , however , because of their costs and questioned reliability and validity .

