rs20787 - - army transformation and modernization: overview and issues for congress updated march 11 , 200 .

modernization is not a new issue or objective for u.s. military forces , but it has taken on new urgency because of: the post - cold war downsizing andprocurement reductions , the new global environment and unexpected requirements , and the promise of a "revolutionin military affairs" ( rma ) suggested byrapid developments in computers , communications , and guidance systems .

the last notable surge in modernizationculminated during the "reagan build - up" ofthe 1980's .

weapons and doctrines developed and fielded in that era made fundamental contributions to unitedstates successes in the cold war , the gulf war,and kosovo .

for the army , such weapons included the m1 abrams tank , m2 bradley armored fighting vehicle,apache attack helicopter , blackhawk utilityhelicopter , and patriot air defense system .

during post - cold war downsizing , the army greatly decreased purchase of new equipment and largely deferred development of a next generation of weapons,with notable exceptions being r&d for a howitzer , the crusader , and a reconnaissance helicopter , thecomanche .

 ( 1 ) much older equipment was retired .

modernization was approached through upgrading and inserting new technologies into previously acquired"legacy," systems .

information technology wasseen as the most immediate , promising aspect of rma .

it exploited desert storm successes such as pinpointtargeting and navigation , while addressingproblems such as friendly fire casualties .

a major initiative was launched in the 1990's to create army force xxi,based on the "digitization" of thebattlefield , now dubbed "network - centric warfare. .

modern computers and communications systems would connectall weapons systems and give u.s. soldiersand commanders advantages in situational awareness and speed of decisions .

 ( 2 ) one heavy , mechanized division at fort hood , tx was so equipped in 2001and was battle tested in iraq in 2003 .

other units were at least partially equipped and trained with this capabilitybefore commitment in iraq .

even before desert storm , the "battlefield" was changing as the army was called upon to respond to numerous , lengthy operations short of war rather thanoccasionally to defeat a large army .

near - term readiness became a problem as fewer troops were asked to covermore missions , and operation and maintenance ( o&m ) funds were diverted from fixing aging equipment and facilities to pay for unbudgeted deployments suchas bosnia ( funds eventually replaced in part byemergency supplemental appropriations ) .

the problem of rapidly projecting heavy forces had been highlightedbeginning with the long buildup required for desert shield / desert storm in 1990-91 .

in 1999 , it was suggested that an army task force inserted intoalbania for potential action in kosovo was too heavyfor rapid air insertion and the unimproved roads and bridges found there .

the army determined that a newcapability was needed in addition to mobile , lightforces and heavy , lethal forces - a medium , lethal force .

in october 1999 , the army announced its priority program to transform into a force that could better meet future requirements to be both rapidly deployable andlethal .

the first step was near - term fielding of a new unit , first called the interim brigade combat team but nowcalled the stryker brigade combat team ( sbct ) , based on a wheeled armored vehicle much lighter than the standard m2 bradley .

for the long - term , thearmy is developing a future combat system ( fcs ) based on new technologies that would equip very mobile formations with lethality and survivability equalor greater than that of present heavy units .

until the fcs is fielded , the army believes it must also continue to maintain and upgrade legacy weapons systems ( eg , m1 , m2 , etc. ) .

and equipment in unitsthat can meet any potential foe across the spectrum of conflict .

these legacy , interim , and objective forces wouldeventually meld into the transformedobjective force of the future .

in summer of 2003 , the new army chief of staff emphasized that the army was atwar and transforming .

the current forcewould incorporate usable technology and other ideas being developed for the future force without waiting , movingtowards the future force while fighting theglobal war on terrorism .

he also began a short term reorganization of the active army from 33 to 48 combatbrigade modules using existing resources and atemporary increase of 30,000 in soldier end strength .

 ( 4 ) stryker force .

the army is fielding a new capability based on the sbct .

this unit is designed formaximum strategic and operational mobility in that its equipment can be airlifted inter - theater in all u.s. cargoaircraft , including the comparatively smallc - 130 hercules .

all vehicles weigh less than 20 tons .

the goal is that a sbct could be completely moved to acombat zone within 96 hours .

it is an infantrybrigade of about 3,500 soldiers with the armored mobility needed to fight on a mid - intensity battlefield .

particularstrengths are an included reconnaissance andintelligence battalion and "network - centric" command , control , and communications ( c3 ) systems .

the effort beganearly in 2000 at fort lewis , wa , wheretwo existing brigades were converted , using temporary , borrowed equipment .

in november , 2000 the army selected the light armored vehicle iii ( lav iii ) , built by general motors defense and general dynamics land systems , as its"interim armored vehicle" under a six year contract worth $4 billion .

 ( 5 ) some 2,131 lav iii's , now called strykers , will be procured .

they willinclude twovehicle variants , an infantry carrier with eight additional configurations and a mobile gun system with a 105 mmcannon .

the vehicle can negotiate flatsurfaces at 62 mph , convert to 8-wheel drive off - road , and self - recover with its winch if needed .

as of early 2004,the first stryker brigade was conductingstability operations in a sector of iraq .

plans also include procurement of the joint lightweight 155 mm howitzerfor the brigade's included field artillery - - an army - marine program , with an estimated cost of about $1.1 billion , aiming for army initial operating capability ( ioc ) at the end of 2004 .

future force .

for the long - term , the defense advanced research projects agency and the army beganwork on some 25 critical technologies for incorporation into r&d of new systems to be selected as early as2006 , with fielding to begin by 2008 and ioc by2010 .

 ( 6 ) a key component is expected to be a futurecombat system ( fcs ) that could , as one capability , assume the role currently held by the abrams tank .

itis intended to be as transportable and mobile as the stryker , with lethality and crew survivability equivalent to orgreater than that of today's tanks .

the fcsmay , however , bear little or no resemblance to today's tanks and could feature advanced technologies such asrobotics and electric guns and facilitate newoperational doctrines .

the fcs currently encompasses some 18 subsystems and the network to tie them together .

boeing company and science applicationsinternational corp. were selected as the lead system integrator .

as of september 2002 , the army had budgeted $20billion to develop fcs .

futureforce units will also incorporate ongoing developments in information technology .

they should respond to allrequirements from stability operations tohigh - intensity conflict .

current force .

until the future force exists , the army must be prepared to fight with legacy equipment,whether on low or high - intensity battlegrounds .

according to army planners , programs to replace and / or upgradeolder equipment must continue if forces otherthan or additional to 6 new stryker brigades are to be ready for combat .

the ongoing program to replace old truckswill continue .

older models of the abramstank and the bradley fighting vehicles will continue to be rebuilt and upgraded .

the current force will have manym1a2 sep ( for systems enhancementpackage ) and m1a1d tanks and m2a3 and m2a2ods with applique bradley's .

inserting these vehicles into theforce will aid the whole army in convertingto a digitized force .

although modernization of the current force is important , the army sacrificed manypreviously desired programs to free funds fortransformation priorities .

examples are a dedicated command and control vehicle , the grizzly breacher engineervehicle , and the wolverine assault bridgevehicle .

the 107th and 108th congresses gave strong support to army modernization and transformation initiatives .

at the same time , congress showed caution bypressing a requirement to compare the wheeled lav iii with similar tracked vehicles already in inventory .

thearmy believes its evaluation demonstrated thatbuying stryker was more desirable than converting the m113a3 apc .

 ( 7 ) whether the 108th congress will continue to support armytransformation as a highpriority will depend on its evaluation of issues such as those discussed below .

desirability .

all services have felt pressures to "transform," or at least adapt to current circumstances andexperiences with the post - cold war world .

these include opportunities and challenges from a rush of technologicaladvances , unexpected numbers and typesof missions ( particularly peacekeeping and urban warfare requirements ) , new threats from potential enemies withnuclear , chemical , or biological weapons , and,for the army , criticism that it was not "nimble" enough during 1999 allied operations in kosovo .

the broadest long - term question is whether current transformation plans will yield the military forcecapabilities the united states requires 20 years from now .

should they include a power projection army capable of fighting equally well across the full spectrum of groundcombat ; or , should other services or entitiesassume some parts of that mission ? .

will army plans over - stress dod airlift assets , or would more reliance on fastsealift yield greater flexibility andeconomies ? .

internally , has the army sought the right approach to transformation with its emphasis onmedium - weight formations ? .

does the army's planstrike the right balance in allocating resources between modernizing the current legacy force and developing andfielding the future force ? .

for the short term , it is projected that some amount of modernization for current forces is needed to prevent further aging and degradation .

the average age ofthe m1 tank fleet is now 11.9 years and an estimated 11.7 years for support vehicles .

 ( 8 ) many of these vehicles may not be able to remain in service beyond2030 without some form of service life extension .

deciding the proper allocation of resources is made morecomplex by the large numbers and diverse typesof vehicles and weapons systems in the army , which makes it difficult to gather and present desirable data , that isboth comprehensive and aggregated , onequipment age , condition , and potential combat effectiveness .

the navy , in managing a fleet of about 315 ships,may have an easier job describing the level ofinvestment needed to maintain a fleet of a given size over time .

 ( 9 ) congress may consider recommending that the army attempt to develop some aggregateportrayal of its fleet capitalization status and implications of various funding strategies .

feasibility .

the army plan for transformation is considered aggressive .

but , by using largely off - the - shelfmateriel , the "interim stryker force is fairly low risk for meeting technology objectives .

after an initial slip of 16months , a contractor's protest , and initialhesitation by the incoming bush administration , deliveries of strykers are now supporting the fielding of 6 sbcts,to be completed by may 2010 .

 ( 10 ) plans for the future force involve higher risk in both technology and time .

it is possible that integration of all the specific fcs technologies into a leap - aheadsystem will experience some problems .

the goal of fielding the first unit of this system of 18 systems by 2010 isvery ambitious .

 ( 11 ) previoussystem - development efforts of this kind have often encountered technical problems , schedule problems , or both .

the need for the comanche helicopter , forexample , was identified in 1979 and it had not yet entered production when cancelled in 2004 .

the original targetdate proposed for fcs , 2023 , may be morerealistic but it also raised concerns regarding duration of development .

congress will likely influence the priorityand speed with which the fcs becomesreality .

affordability .

some question the army's ability to finance its transformation plan , particularly given aninability in recent years to finance many procurement programs at desired rates .

can the army adequately financeall three elements of its plan at once , whilealso providing adequate funds for necessary non - transformation priorities such as readiness and pay and benefits ? .

the life - cycle cost for equipping 6 brigadeswith lav iii's has been estimated by program officials at $9 billion through fy2032 .

 ( 12 ) this will only be part of the total cost to transform and modernize thearmy ; some have estimated that the army requires a sustained increment of $10 billion annually beyond its averagepost - cold war expenditures for r&d andprocurement .

the army is not alone in claiming a need for more investment funds .

other services cite even highernumbers .

 ( 13 ) an issue that will confront congress is whether to fund army transformation and modernization efforts at levels proposed by the bush administration , orhigher or lower .

if congress ascribes a higher priority to army transformation , will necessary funds be providedby adding to overall dod appropriations,subtracting from dod programs in other services , or reducing deployments ? .

during the fy2003 budget cycle , dod expressed its intent to cut acquisition programs that do not meet its definition of "transformational" in favor of those thatdo .

its prime example was the army's crusader howitzer program .

dod cut crusader and allocated the savingsto several other advanced fire support systemsin development .

congress reluctantly endorsed the action with the proviso that crusader expertise be rolled intothe fcs program .

as part of its appropriationsresponsibilities , the 108th congress may choose to enforce dod's implied promise to supportadequately fire support throughout the fcs developmentprogram .

 ( 14 ) wheels or tracks and how many stryker brigades ? .

an early issue to confront the army was whether theinterim force should use tracked or wheeled armored vehicles , or some combination .

 ( 15 ) traditionally , the u.s. army has favored tracks for its combatvehicles ; with their low ground pressure and greater traction , they generally perform better off roads on difficultterrain .

wheels generally perform better onroads in terms of speed , agility , and quietness .

after reviewing proposals , the army selected the wheeled lav iiifrom general motors , and named it stryker .

critics of the decision , including some current and former members of congress , continue to argue for a reversalor curtailment of the stryker decision .

 ( 16 ) thearmy defends its case strongly and dod has not intervened .

the question of whether the fcs will be based onwheels , tracks , or a combination remains open .

dod has , however , raised questions about the ultimate number and stationing of sbct's .

in the past , it requested the army consider stationing one of the sixunits in europe and thhe first one is now on station in europe .

more recently it suggested that units five and sixnot be funded unless they could be "spiraldeveloped" into much more transformational formations .

it appears , however , that funding for all 6 sbct's willnow be requested .

the combination of theseevents and considerations could , however , open prior decisions to station sbct's in hawaii and alaska to debateand thus create political complications .

 ( 17 ) the 108th congress may play an important role in resolving the ultimate disposition of the proposedsbct force .

