the twentieth amendment to the constitution directs that a new congress convene at noon on january 3 in each odd - numbered year , unless the preceding congress has by law designated a different day for the new congress's convening .

on november 20 , 2014 , the 113 th congress completed action on h.j.res .

129 , setting the convening date for the 114 th congress as january 6 , 2015 .

the joint resolution was signed into law by president obama on december 4 ( p.l .

113-201 ) .

congressional leaders planned that the 115 th congress would convene january 3 , 2017 , and that the 116 th congress would convene january 3 , 2019 , obviating the need for a law to set the date .

in recent years , it has been the exception rather than the rule for a new congress to begin on january 3 .

nine of the past 12 congresses began on a date other than january 3 — 104 th congress ( january 4 , 1995 ) , 105 th congress ( january 7 , 1997 ) , 106 th congress ( january 6 , 1999 ) , 108 th congress ( january 7 , 2003 ) , 109 th congress ( january 4 , 2005 ) , 110 th congress ( january 4 , 2007 ) , 111 th congress ( january 6 , 2009 ) , 112 th congress ( january 5 , 2011 ) , and 114 th congress ( january 6 , 2015 ) .

the 107 th , 113 th , and 115 th congresses were the only 3 of these 12 to begin on january 3 , convening january 3 , 2001 ; january 3 , 2013 ; and january 3 , 2017 , respectively .

the vice president , named by the constitution as president of the senate , presides when the senate first convenes ; the senate chaplain offers a prayer and the vice president leads the senate in the pledge of allegiance .

the vice president then announces the receipt of the certificates and credentials of election of senators who were newly elected or reelected in the most recent general election , and of certificates of appointment for senators newly appointed to fill a vacancy .

the reading of these documents is waived by unanimous consent , and they are printed in full in the congressional record .

the first order of business in a new senate is the swearing - in of senators elected or reelected in the most recent general election and of newly appointed senators .

on occasion in recent years , the majority leader or the majority and minority leaders might first be recognized for brief remarks .

if there is a contested or undecided senate election , the leadership might provide a status report and plan for its resolution , before or after senators are sworn in .

after the vice president lays the certificates of election and appointment before the senate and states that their reading will be waived if there is no objection , he calls those senators to the front of the chamber , generally in alphabetical order in groups of four , to take the oath and to also "subscribe to the oath" in the official oath book .

each senator may be accompanied by the other senator from his or her state , the senator he or she is replacing , or a former senator .

the oath , which is the same for representatives and executive and judicial appointees , is as follows: i do solemnly swear ( or affirm ) that i will support and defend the constitution of the united states against all enemies , foreign and domestic ; that i will bear true faith and allegiance to the same ; that i take this obligation freely , without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion ; and that i will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which i am about to enter .

so help me god .

an oath is mandated by article vi of the constitution ; its text is set by statute ( 5 u.s.c .

3331 ) .

when senators take the oath , they raise their right hand to swear or affirm , repeating after the vice president .

many senators hold a family bible or another item , and some hold nothing .

there is no requirement that a bible or anything else be used when the oath is taken .

when the vice president ( or another individual of a senator's choosing ) and individual senators subsequently reenact the swearing - ins in the old senate chamber with the senator's family , each senator might hold a bible , another item , or nothing in his or her left hand .

although photography is not permitted on the senate floor , photographers are present for the ceremonial swearing - in .

individuals might also record a ceremonial swearing - in .

after the senators have been sworn in in the senate chamber , the vice president recognizes the majority leader , who notes the absence of a quorum .

the vice president directs the senate clerk to call the roll , and all senators are normally present to respond , fulfilling the constitutional requirement that a quorum be present to conduct business .

the majority leader offers simple resolutions that the president ( s.res .

1 , 115 th congress ) and the house ( s.res .

2 , 115 th congress ) be formally notified that a quorum of the senate is assembled and ready to proceed to business .

subsequently , pursuant to the resolution providing for notification of the president , the house and senate leadership telephone the president with the news that a quorum of each house of congress has assembled and is prepared to begin its work .

as provided by the constitution , the president pro tempore is chosen by the senate to preside during the absence of the vice president .

referred to as the president pro tem , this majority - party senator usually has his party's longest continuous senate service .

when there is a change in party control of the senate , or when a vacancy in the office of president pro tempore occurs , a new president pro tempore is elected by simple resolution and then escorted to the front of the chamber to be sworn in by the vice president .

afterwards , the senate adopts simple resolutions to notify the house and the president of the election of the president pro tempore .

since the senate is a continuing body , its officers — the secretary of the senate , sergeant at arms and doorkeeper , chaplain , and majority and minority party secretaries — do not need to be reelected on the opening day of a new congress .

however , when there is a change in party control or a vacancy at the beginning of a congress , any new officers are approved by the full senate .

the senate filled a vacancy at the beginning of the 112 th congress in electing a new secretary for the ( democratic ) majority .

 ( party secretaries are approved by their party conferences and then elected by the senate. ) .

in addition , since the senate's legal counsel and deputy legal counsel are typically appointed by the president pro tempore for the duration of only two congresses , they are appointed or reappointed every four years and simple resolutions adopted effecting the appointments .

when party control of the senate switched with its convening in 2015 , the senate elected a new secretary and sergeant at arms , elected the majority and minority secretaries ( since their roles had changed ) , and , as already indicated , effected the appointments of the legal counsel and deputy legal counsel for the 114 th and 115 th congresses .

the senate also adopted simple resolutions to notify the president and the house of the election of the secretary and sergeant at arms .

the senate establishes its daily hour of meeting by a simple resolution , which must be renewed each congress .

this resolution is usually offered by the majority leader .

negotiations between parties over committee sizes and ratios and separate committee assignment processes begin prior to the convening of a new congress , and mostly within the party groups — the democratic and republican conferences .

the only action visible on the chamber floor is the subsequent adoption of simple resolutions assigning senators from each party to committees agreed upon by the respective party conference .

the adoption of both parties' resolutions is routine .

committee assignment resolutions are not normally considered on the opening day of a new congress , but later in january .

on the opening day of the 107 th congress , an assignment resolution ( s.res. ) .

was taken up to designate committee chairs , pending an agreement on the organization of the senate under the special circumstance of 50 democratic and 50 republican senators .

committee funding resolutions ( s.res. ) .

are also considered later in february or early march .

in years in which a new president will be inaugurated , senate committees begin hearings on designated cabinet secretaries , pending the formal submission of nominations once the president - elect has been inaugurated .

