rs20425 - - satellite television: historical information on shvia and local updated december 15 , 200 .

the 1999 satellite home viewer improvement act ( 1 ) ( shvia ) expands on and extends some provisions of the 1988satellite home viewer act ( shva ) , as amended , regarding consumer reception of television signals via satellitedishes .

two major companies , echostar and directv ( a subsidiary of news corp. ) , offer satellite televisionservicestoday through their direct broadcast satellite ( dbs ) systems .

echostar's service is called dish tv .

directv'sprogramming is also distributed through the national rural telecommunications cooperative ( nrtc ) and bypegasuscommunications .

another company , rainbow dbs ( a subsidiary of cablevision ) offers a comparatively smallnumber of satellite channels though a service called voom .

historical information on shva and the issuescongressfaced in revising it are available in crs report 98-942 .

the 1999 law , shvia , provides consumers greater access to broadcast network television programming via theirsatellite dishes .

the original law permitted rebroadcast of distant network signals to consumers wholived outside the"grade b contour" of broadcast network affiliate stations .

the 1999 law continues to permit that activity , but also allows satellite companies to rebroadcast local network signals back into the same localmarket area .

they are notrequired to do so , however .

local versus distant network signals .

the distinction between local and distant network signals is important to understanding shvia .

a local signal is received within a networktelevision affiliate's local area .

a distant signal is from elsewhere in the country .

if a consumer lives in denver andisreceiving a signal from a denver network affiliate , that is a local signal .

if a consumer lives in west virginia andisreceiving a signal from that denver network affiliate via satellite , it is a distant network signal .

who may receive distant network signals .

the original shva established the "grade b" ( 2 ) contour as thedetermining factor as to whether a particular household was eligible toreceive distant network signals via satellite .

consumers living inside the grade b contour were not allowed toreceivesuch signals while those outside the contour ( in so - called "white areas" ) were allowed to receive them .

somesatellitecompanies transmitted distant network signals to consumers inside grade b contours , however , leading to courtchallenges by the networks to try to force the satellite companies to obey the law .

based on decisions by a miamijudge in 1998 , over 2 million consumers reportedly had , or were scheduled to have , distant network signalsterminatedby their satellite companies .

echostar appealed the decision to the supreme court in 2002 , which declined to hearthecase .

in the 1999 law , congress "grandfathered" consumers who had been receiving distant network signals illegally as longas they could not receive a signal of "grade a" 2 intensity .

for new subscribers , however , the originalrules apply .

toreceive distant network signals , new subscribers must not be able to receive a signal of grade b intensity asdetermined using the individual location longely - rice ( illr ) method for predicting signal strength establishedbythe federal communications commission ( fcc ) in february 1999 .

shvia directed the fcc to review whetherthegrade b standard should still be used for the purposes of shvia .

the fcc concluded it should ( fcc - 016 , etdocket no .

00-90 ) .

consumers who believe they are not receiving a grade a or grade b signal despite predictive models showing thatthey are may seek a waiver to receive distant network signals via satellite .

consumers must apply to their satellitecompany for the waiver .

the satellite company forwards the request to the local network affiliate .

there is no timelimit for the satellite company to take that action .

once the request is received , the local affiliate has 30 days todecidewhether or not to grant the waiver .

if the waiver is granted , or if no action is taken by the affiliate , the consumermaythen receive distant network signals from the satellite company .

if a waiver is denied , consumers may then requestasignal intensity test from their satellite company .

the satellite company and the local affiliate are required jointlytochoose someone to conduct the test .

the consumer does not bear the cost of the test .

instead , the "loser" pays ( eitherthe satellite company or the affiliate ) , or the satellite company and the affiliate may choose some other method ofpaying the costs as long as the consumer does not pay .

exceptions were made for recreational vehicles ( as definedbydepartment of housing and urban development regulations ) , commercial trucks ( as defined by department oftransportation regulations ) , and for consumers using large "c - band" satellite dishes .

the rv or commercial truckcannot be a fixed dwelling .

in summary , the following consumers may receive distant network signals until december 31 , 2004 , the period forwhich the compulsory license ( see below ) was extended: if they do not receive a signal of grade b intensity from the local affiliate of a particular network ; if their satellite dish is installed on an rv or commercial truck , or if they had been receiving distant network signals illegally and those signals were terminated orscheduled to be terminated under the 1998 miami court rulings , and they do not receive a signal ofgrade a intensityfrom the local affiliate of the network .

consumers using "c - band" dishes are not subject to the five year limitation .

they may receive distant network signalsthey were receiving before october 31 , 1999 indefinitely .

who may receive local signals .

shvia permits dbs companiesto provide "local - into - local" service , where a local broadcast tv signal is transmitted up to the satellite and backdown to consumers in that same "designated market area" ( dma ) .

the law does not require the dbscompanies toprovide this service .

there is considerable confusion on this point , stemming , in part , from the fact the lawalsocreated a " must carry " provision .

under must carry , each dbs company must provide all local broadcast stations ina particular market if it provides any local station in that market .

this does not mean that dbscompanies must carrylocal broadcast programming throughout the country .

instead , if a dbs provider chooses to provide local broadcastprogramming in a market , it must carry all local tv stations in that market that wish to be carried ( with exceptionsforduplicative programing and educational stations ) .

the dbs companies still may choose not to providelocal - into - local service in any particular market .

cable companies already were subject to must carry rules ( depending on the size of the cable system ) .

the must carryprovisions for dbs went into effect on january 1 , 2002 .

 ( 3 ) the dbs companies oppose the must carry requirement ( see below ) and unsuccessfully attempted to overturn it in court .

according to their respective websites , as of october 2004 , echostar offered local - into - local in 152 markets anddirectv in 106 markets .

both plan to add more markets as additional capacity becomes available .

there are 210designated market areas ( dmas ) in the united states as identified by nielsen media research , meaning that manysmaller communities do not receive local signals via satellite .

dmas differ in size , so the number of dmas servedisnot necessarily indicative of the percentage of the population able to receive local - into - local .

when echostar passedthe 100 dma mark , it reported that 83% of the population could receive its local - into - local service .

directvassertsthat it will provide local - into - local in at least 130 dmas by the end of 2004 , which it says represents 92% of tvhouseholds .

congress passed the local act ( see below ) in 2000 to help ensure that small and rural areas thatcannotobtain local - into - local service from echostar or directv can receive local television via other satellite or terrestrialtechnologies .

compulsory copyright license .

another issue regarding satellite retransmission of television programming concerns compensation to those who own the copyright on theprogramming .

under both the 1988 and 1999 laws , satellite carriers were given a compulsory copyright license forrestransmitting distant network and superstation signals .

that means that the copyright owners must make thatprogramming available to the satellite companies at government - set prices .

 ( 4 ) without such a license , the satellitecompanies would have to negotiate with each copyright owner individually .

the 1999 law extended the compulsorylicense for distant network signals for five years , until december 31 , 2004 .

the 108th congress isconsidering whetherto extend it further , and whether to change how the prices are set ( see crs report rs21768 ) .

for retransmittinglocalsignals , however , congress gave the satellite companies a royalty - free permanent compulsory copyright license .

cable has a permanent compulsory copyright license .

 ( copyright compensation is separate from businessarrangements negotiated to obtain retransmission consent , which is explained in footnote 3 below. ) .

table 1: summary of shvia provisions permits satellite companies to offer local - into - localtelevision service ; makes must - carry requirements effective for satellites on january 1 , 2002 ; makes syndicated exclusivity , sports blackout , and network nonduplication applicable to satelliteretransmission of nationally distributed superstations , but for network stations , only sports blackout applies and onlyiftechnically feasible and not economically prohibitive ; allows subscribers who do not receive a grade a intensity signal and whose distant networksignals were terminated or were going to be terminated because of 1998 miami court rulings to have those signalsrestored or continued until december 31 , 2004 ( "grandfathering" many of the subscribers affected by the 1998 courtdecision ) ; retains the grade b signal intensity standard as the criterion for who may receive distant networksignals ; allows subscribers unable to receive a grade b signal , as well as recreational vehicles andcommercial trucks that are not fixed dwellings , to receive no more than two distant network signals of eachtelevisionnetwork on a single day ; establishes a process for consumers to seek waivers from local affiliates to receive distantnetwork signals if signal strength is in doubt , at no cost to the consumer ; allows c - band satellite customers to continue receiving distant network signals they werereceiving as of october 31 , 1999 indefinitely ; extends the existing satellite copyright compulsory license for distant network and superstationsignals until december 31 , 2004 and creates a new compulsory license for local network signals with no sunsetdate ; reduces the rate set in 1997 for copyright royalty payments satellite companies must pay by 45%for distant network signals and 30% for superstation signals ( no copyright fees may be charged for localsignals ) ; eliminates the 90-day waiting period for cable subscribers ; and allows satellite companies to offer a national public broadcasting service ( pbs ) feed throughjanuary 1 , 2002 ; after that , local pbs stations would have to be carried in markets where local - into - local serviceisprovided .

in 1999 , the conference version of h.r .

1554 would have created a loan guarantee program to help ensure that subscribers in small and rural markets benefit from the local - into - local provisions even though echostarand directv do not plan to offer such service in all areas .

the provision was deleted before final passage becauseofobjections by senator gramm that the proposal had not been sufficiently debated .

congress subsequently passedthe"launching our communities access to local television act" ( local ) as title x of the fy2001commerce - justice - state appropriations act as enacted by the fy2001 district of columbia appropriations act ( p.l.106-553 ) .

loan guarantees .

local created a four - person board , consisting of the secretaries of treasury , agriculture , and commerce , and the chairman of the federal reserve , or theirdesignees , to select recipients of loan guarantees for up to $1.25 billion in loans ( generally , 80% of the loan maybeguaranteed ) .

the loans may be used to build systems to ensure that consumers throughout the country can receivelocal television signals .

the board is to take into account whether a project serves "nonserved" or "underserved"areas and whether it would provide high - speed internet access .

the act is technology neutral in that it does notspecifywhether local tv stations would be provided by satellite , cable , or other transmission media , but places some limitson which cable companies are eligible .

the board's website is http: / / www.usda.gov / rus / localtvboard / .

the boardissued regulations for the local television loan guarantee program in the december 23 , 2003 federalregister ( pp .

74411-74433 ) .

an application period ended april 21 , 2004 .

one application was received .

on may 24 , theboard voted 3-1 to return that application because it was incomplete , and then voted unanimously to open another60-day application period .

however , the board rescinded the latter decision on july 6 .

the loan guarantee program is administered by the rural utilities service in the department of agriculture , whichreceived $280 million in the fy2002 agriculture appropriations act ( p.l .

107-76 ) for the program .

section 6404ofthe farm security and rural investment act ( p.l.107-171 , h.r .

2646 ) allocated $80 million for theprogram from the commodity credit corporation through december 31 , 2006 .

gao is required to review theprogram annually , and criticized the slow progress of the program in its first such report ( gao - 04-134 , october2003 ) .

its second report ( gao - 05-18r , october 2004 ) stressed the need for the board to accurately accumulateandreport administrative costs to meet federal cost accounting requirements and determine what portion must berecovered through fees .

the "northpoint provision" .

local required the fcc to select an independent entity to conduct tests to determine whether terrestrial systems operating in the same frequency bandas dbs satellites ( 12.2-12.7 gigahertz ) would cause unacceptable interference to dbs systems .

this is often called"the northpoint provision" because a company called northpoint technology , through its broadwave subsidiary,wants to operate a terrestrial wireless system offering tv programming similar to that provided by dbs , and dataservices .

it is seeking a license from the fcc for that terrestrial service , designated mvdds ( multichannel videodistribution and data service ) .

until now , the 12.2-12.7 ghz band has been assigned only to satellites .

the fccchose the mitre corporation to conduct the interference tests in 2001 , and it concluded that the two systems couldnot co - exist unless the mvdds systems use a number of mitigating techniques .

dbs operators hailed the mitrereport because it concluded that mvdds would cause interference to their operations .

northpoint hailed the reportbecause it said there were mitigating steps that could be taken .

the fcc decided that mvdds and dbs could co - exist , but dismissed without prejudice applications by northpointand two other companies to provide mvdds ( fcc 02-116 , et docket 98-206 ) , deciding to auction the frequenciesinstead .

northpoint objected to that decision , and chose not to participate in the auction .

other companies did,however , and the auction was completed on january 27 , 2004 , raising $118.7 million http: / / hraunfoss.fcc.gov / edocs_public / attachmatch / doc - 243253a1.pdf .

s. 564 , and h.r .

1320 as reported from the senate commerce committee ( s.rept .

108-168 ) , would have eliminated the auction requirement for fixed terrestrial services ( such as mvdds ) other thanmobile phones in the 12.2-12.7 ghz band .

similar language was in the senate - passed version of the fy2004commerce , justice , state appropriations bill ( sec .

626 of s. 1585 ) , but not in the final version of the bill ( part of the fy2004 consolidated appropriations act , h.r .

2673 , p.l .

108-199 ) .

