though only about three times the size of washington , dc , and with a population of 4.7 million , the city - state of singapore punches far above its weight in both economic and diplomatic influence .

its stable government , strong economic performance , educated citizenry , and strategic position along key shipping lanes make it a major player in regional affairs .

for the united states , singapore is a crucial partner in trade and security cooperation as the obama administration executes its rebalance to asia strategy .

singapore's value has only grown as the administration has given special emphasis to the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) as a platform for multilateral engagement .

singapore's heavy dependence on international trade makes regional stability and the free flow of goods and services essential to its existence .

as a result , the nation is a firm supporter of both u.s. trade policy and the u.s. security role in asia , but also maintains close relations with china .

the people's action party ( pap ) has won every general election since the end of the colonial era in 1959 , aided by a fragmented opposition , singapore's economic success , and electoral procedures that strongly favor the ruling party .

some point to shifts in the political and social environment that may herald more political pluralism , including generational changes and an increasingly international outlook among singaporeans .

in may 2011 , opposition parties claimed their most successful results in history , taking six of parliament's 87 elected seats , and garnering about 40% of the popular vote .

though this still left the pap with an overwhelming majority in parliament , the ruling party described the election as a watershed moment for singapore and vowed to reform the party to respond to the public's concerns .

singapore's parliamentary - style government is headed by the prime minister and cabinet , who represent the majority party in parliament .

the president serves as a ceremonial head of state , a position currently held by tony tan keng yam .

lee hsien loong has served as prime minister since 2004 .

lee is the son of former prime minister lee kuan yew , who stepped down in 1990 after 31 years at the helm .

the senior lee , 89 and widely acknowledged as the architect of singapore's success as a nation , resigned his post as "minister mentor" following the 2011 elections , citing a need to pass leadership to the next generation .

in 2010 , changes to the constitution guaranteed that more non - pap members would be represented in the parliament .

the electoral reforms were seen as an acknowledgement by the pap that it must adjust to a more open and diverse singapore .

singapore's leaders have acknowledged a "contract" with the singaporean people , under which individual rights are curtailed in the interest of maintaining a stable , prosperous society .

supporters praise the pragmatism of singapore , noting its sustained economic growth and high standards of living .

others criticize the approach as stunting creativity and entrepreneurship , and insist that singapore's leaders must respond to an increasingly sophisticated public's demand for greater liberties for economic survival .

greater , and generally freer , use of the internet may be threatening to some of the leadership ; in the past the government attempted to tighten control over bloggers , who may not exercise the same restraint as the mainstream media in limiting criticism of the ruling party or touching on sensitive issues such as race , in singapore's multi - ethnic environment .

although it has been elected by a comfortable majority in every election since singapore's founding , the pap "places formidable obstacles in the path of political opponents," according to the u.s. state department's 2012 country report on human rights practices .

the report states that "the pap maintained its political dominance in part by circumscribing political discourse and action. .

according to amnesty international , defamation suits by pap leaders to discourage opposition are widespread .

the political careers of opposition politicians are marked by characteristic obstacles from the ruling party , including being forced to declare bankruptcy for failing to pay libel damages to prominent pap members .

singapore has been a strong champion of asean , which helps southeast asia's mostly small countries to influence regional diplomacy , particularly vis - à - vis china .

renewed u.s. engagement under the obama administration has pleased singapore and may have allowed it more diplomatic space to stand up to beijing on key issues .

singapore has praised the administration's "rebalancing" effort toward asia , yet has been careful to warn that anti - china rhetoric or efforts to "contain" china's rise will be counterproductive .

during an april 2013 visit to washington , prime minister lee advised the united states to strengthen its economic ties to the region and develop more trust with beijing .

maintaining strong relations with both china and the united states is a keystone of singapore's foreign policy .

singapore often portrays itself as a useful balancer and intermediary between major powers in the region .

in the south china sea dispute , for example , in 2011 singapore — a non - claimant — called on china to clarify its island claims , characterizing its stance on the issue as neutral , yet concerned because of the threat to maritime stability .

at the same time , singapore was hosting a port visit by a chinese surveillance vessel , part of an ongoing exchange on technical cooperation on maritime safety with beijing .

china's economic power makes it a crucial component of trade policy for all countries in the region , but singapore's ties with beijing are multifaceted and extend to cultural , political , and educational exchanges as well .

there are frequent high - level visits between singapore and china .

singapore adheres to a one - china policy , but has an extensive relationship with taiwan and has managed it carefully to avoid jeopardizing its strong relations with beijing .

taiwan and singapore have held large - scale military exercises annually for over 30 years and , in 2010 , announced the launch of talks related to a free - trade pact under the framework of the world trade organization .

although it has been elected by a comfortable majority in every election since singapore's founding , the pap "places formidable obstacles in the path of political opponents," according to the u.s. state department's 2012 country report on human rights practices .

the report states that "the pap maintained its political dominance in part by intimidating organized political opposition and circumscribing political discourse and action. .

according to amnesty international , defamation suits by pap leaders to discourage opposition are widespread .

the pap ideology stresses the government's role in enforcing social discipline and harmony in society , even at the expense of individual liberties .

the political careers of opposition politicians are marked by characteristic obstacles from the ruling party , including being forced to declare bankruptcy for failing to pay libel damages to prominent pap members .

international watchdog agencies criticize singapore's control of the press as well .

in 2013 , reporters without borders ranked singapore 149 th out of 179 countries in terms of press freedom , its worst performance ever on the index .

new media controls have been stepped up as well: in 2013 the government issued new regulations for online news sites that report on singapore , prompting international internet companies with a presence in the city - state to criticize the move as backward - looking .

