the federal government has a long history of involvement in water resource development and management to facilitate water - borne transportation , expand irrigated agriculture , reduce flood losses , and , more recently , restore aquatic ecosystems .

increasing pressures on the quality and quantity of available water supplies — due to growing population , environmental regulation , in - stream species and ecosystem needs , water source contamination , agricultural water demand , climate variability , and changing public interests — have resulted in heightened water use conflicts throughout the country , particularly in the west .

federal water resource construction waned during the last decades of the 20 th century in response to fiscal constraints , interest in more local control of water and land resources , and requirements to assess environmental impacts of federal actions and to protect fish and wildlife .

this marked the end of expansionist federal policies of the early 20 th century that had led to widespread federal investment in dams , navigation locks , irrigation diversions , and levees and basin - wide planning and development efforts .

the 110 th congress is faced with numerous water resource issues regarding the federal role in the planning , construction , maintenance , inspection , and financing of water resource projects and federal investment in water resources research and data collection .

congress makes these decisions within the context of multiple and often conflicting laws and objectives , competing legal decisions , and entrenched institutional mechanisms , including century - old water rights and long - standing contractual obligations .

although most water resource legislation typically addresses site - specific needs , certain themes and issues appear in many local and regional water resources conflicts .

for example , demand for new project services ( eg , improved navigation , new water supply , improved or new flood control facilities ) , protection of threatened and endangered species , and water quality concerns are common to many conflicts .

even so , most water resource legislation deals with specific sites .

the 110 th congress is considering site - specific restoration legislation for coastal louisiana , the upper mississippi river - illinois waterway system , the great lakes , the san joaquin river , and the platte river .

however , the more typical site - specific measures , on a smaller scale , are the hundreds of individual water resources projects authorized through water resources development acts ( wrdas ) and stand - alone bills addressing new water supply technologies and augmentation of existing water supplies , rural water supply development , and indian water rights settlements .

oversight of existing laws and projects ( eg , central valley project , flood protection in new orleans and sacramento ) and project operations is also expected , especially where court decisions , agency actions , or other circumstances ( such as drought ) may affect project operations ( eg , federal projects on the colorado , columbia , klamath , missouri , rio grande , and san joaquin rivers and pumps in the california bay - delta ) .

in the west , naturally scarce water supplies and increasing urban populations have spawned new debates over water allocation — particularly over water for threatened or endangered species — and have increased federal - state tensions , since the federal government has generally deferred to state primacy in intrastate water allocation .

observed changes in the timing of snowmelt and runoff and the potential for further climate variability due to climate change has increased concerns about the reliability of developed water supplies and the flexibility of existing management mechanisms .

western water legislation during the 110 th congress centers on project management and program issues , such as san joaquin river settlement legislation , the bureau of reclamation's title 16 water reclamation and recycling program , and sustainability of the west's water supplies .

oversight of the bureau's central valley project ( cvpia , trinity river , and calfed and other san francisco bay - san joaquin / sacramento rivers delta [bay - delta] management issues ) , klamath project , and colorado river operations also may continue .

nationally , congressional attention during the 110 th congress may focus on the federal role in levee construction , maintenance , and evaluation , and water resources management generally .

hurricane katrina oversight issues — such as how to better coordinate federal activities and how to respond or rebuild in the wake of catastrophic damages — may be of particular focus , as might the examination of other areas of the country that may also be vulnerable .

also of concern nationwide is the status of threatened and endangered species and the health of the nation's rivers and riparian areas .

federal obligations to protect threatened and endangered species and other environmental quality requirements have resulted in increased attention to river and watershed restoration efforts .

the federal government is involved in several significant restoration initiatives ranging from the florida everglades to the california bay - delta ( calfed ) .

at the same time , the demand for traditional or new water supply projects , navigational improvements , flood control projects , and beach and shoreline protection continues .

in fact , both the everglades and bay - delta restoration efforts include significant water supply components .

controversy over how much water should be divided among recovering ( threatened and endangered ) species , protecting water quality , and supplying farms , cities , and other uses has been ongoing .

further , widespread drought throughout different parts of the country over the past several years has spurred new requests for developing and ensuring dwindling water supplies , and new security threats to water infrastructure have placed added pressures on budgetary resources .

the 109 th congress left pending several national water policy proposals , ranging from new water study commissions and assessments to global sanitation and drinking water aid , some of which have been reintroduced in the 110 th congress .

the 110 th congress also has addressed water resource issues during consideration of individual project authorizations , as well as during debate on wrda legislation ( h.r .

1495 ) and on fy2008 appropriations for the bureau and the corps .

specific issues that are being or may be discussed during the 110 th congress are treated below .

other general issues also being discussed include federal reserved water rights in relation to federal lands , transfer of water across federal lands and through federal facilities , indian water rights settlements , licensing of nonfederal hydropower facilities ( i.e. , private dams regulated by the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) ) , and whether to establish a national water commission to address federal water policy and coordination .

most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the united states were built by , or with the assistance of , the bureau of reclamation in the department of the interior ( bureau ) or the u.s. army corps of engineers in the department of defense ( corps ) .

traditionally , bureau projects were designed principally to provide reliable supplies of water for irrigation and some municipal and industrial uses ; corps projects were designed principally for flood control , navigation , and power generation .

the bureau currently manages hundreds of storage reservoirs and diversion dams in 17 western states , providing water to approximately 9 million acres of farmland and 31 million people .

the corps' operations are much more widespread and diverse , and include several thousand flood control and navigation projects throughout the country , including 25,000 miles of waterways ( with 238 navigation locks ) , nearly 1,000 harbors , and 400 dam and reservoir projects ( with 75 hydroelectric plants ) .

water resources debates in the 110 th congress likely will be dominated by different opinions of the desirability and need for changing the water resource agencies' policies , practices , and accountability , and for authorizing multi - billion dollar investments in ecosystem restoration , navigation , and flood and storm damage reduction measures .

a broad water resource issue significant to the water resources agencies and the nation is the changing federal role in water resources planning , development , and management .

hurricane katrina raised questions about this role ; in particular , the disaster brought attention to the trade - offs in benefits , costs , and risks of the current division of responsibilities among local , state , and federal entities for flood mitigation , preparedness , response , and recovery .

the question of the federal role also is raised by the increasing competition over water supplies , not only in the west but also for urban centers in the east ( eg , atlanta ) , which has resulted in a growing number of communities seeking financial and other federal assistance , actions , and permits related to water supply development ( eg , desalination and water reuse projects , reservoir expansions and reoperations ) .

congress rarely chooses to pursue broad legislation on federal water resources policies for many reasons , including the challenge of enacting changes that affect such a wide breadth of constituencies .

another practical challenge is the fractured nature of congressional committee jurisdictions over water resources and water quality issues and activities .

consequently , congress traditionally has pursued incremental changes through wrda bills for the corps and project - specific legislation for the bureau , and this pattern seems likely to continue .

