the invasion of normandy on june 6 , 1944 , was the largest air , land , and sea invasion ever undertaken , including over 5,000 ships , 10,000 airplanes , and over 150,000 american , british , canadian , free french , and polish troops .

there are no exact figures for the total number of d - day participants nor exact casualty figures .

some historians estimate that more than 70,000 americans and more than 80,000 combined british , canadian , free french , and polish troops participated , including 23,000 men arriving by parachute and glider .

according to estimates from the national d - day memorial museum , the allied forces suffered 9,758 casualties , of which 6,603 were americans .

the jubilee of liberty medal was first awarded in june 1994 to american servicemen for their participation in the battle of normandy .

the medals were minted at the request of the regional council of normandy to be presented to veterans attending the 50 th anniversary of the d - day landing on june 6 , 1994 .

eligible veterans included all who served in normandy from june 6 to august 31 , 1944 , comprising land forces , off - shore supporting personnel , and airmen flying cover overhead .

the only stipulation was that the medal be presented during an official ceremony , and the veteran be present to accept .

on the front of the medal is inscribed , "overlord 6 juin 1944" on the upper part of the medal , with the flags of the allied nations and the names of the landing beaches completing the face of the medal .

on the reverse side is the torch of freedom surrounded by the device of william the conqueror 'diex aie' ( "god is with us" in norman french ) .

unfortunately , these medals are no longer being awarded by the french government .

all medals to commemorate the 50 th anniversary ceremony on june 6 , 1994 , have been distributed by the french government .

additional medals for those veterans who were unable to attend the anniversary ceremony were later distributed through the association debarquement et bataille de normandie 1944 in france , which is now defunct .

some members of congress have awarded the jubilee of liberty medals to u.s. veterans who were unable to attend the ceremony in france on june 6 , 1994 .

these medals were obtained either from the association debarquement et bataille de normandie 1944 or from a commercial source .

commercially - minted jubilee of liberty medals are being manufactured by sims enterprises , a private company in kansas , that is selling these medals at a cost of $17 for each individual medal ( includes shipping and handling ) or $13 each for orders of 10 or more medals ( plus an additional charge for shipping ) .

please note: this company is not affiliated with either the french or u.s. governments .

veterans are asked to send copies not the originals of their service record for verification ; copies will not be returned unless specifically requested along with the medals .

for additional information , please contact sims enterprises , 617 main street , newton , ks 67114 ; tel: [phone number scrubbed] .

the french government is no longer distributing the jubilee of liberty medals .

instead , the government of france is distributing a "thank - you - america certificate 1944-1945" for u.s. veterans .

according to a letter sent in december 2000 by former ambassador of france to the united states , his excellency franã§ois bujon de l'estang , to then secretary of veterans affairs hershel w. gober , the government of france is issuing a certificate to recognize the participation of american and allied soldiers who participated in the normandy landing and subsequent battles leading to the liberation of france .

veterans who served on french territory and in french territorial waters and airspace , from june 6 , 1944 , to may 8 , 1945 , are still eligible .

the certificate will not be issued posthumously .

in agreement with the u.s. secretary of veterans affairs , the french consulates general and state veterans affairs offices , veterans service organizations , and veterans associations will identify eligible veterans , review and certify the applications , prepare the certificates , and organize the ceremonies to present the certificates .

d - day participants living in delaware , the district of columbia , maryland , ohio , pennsylvania , virginia , and west virginia may obtain applications for certificates from the french embassy in washington , dc , or directly from the internet at http: / / www.ambafrance - us.org / news / statmnts / 2000 / ww2 / index.asp .

french consulate / "thank - you - america" 4101 reservoir road washington , dc 20007 tel: [phone number scrubbed] fax: [phone number scrubbed] d - day veterans living in other states may wish to contact the nearest french consulate listed below .

the american battle monuments commission's web page on the normandy cemetery at http: / / www.abmc.gov / cemeteries / cemeteries / no.php has information on the cemetery and links on how to locate those interred at american world war ii cemeteries overseas .

the national d - day museum in new orleans , louisiana , at http: / / www.ddaymuseum.org provides historical information on events from d - day as well as information on annual commemorative events .

the website of the national d - day memorial in bedford , virginia , at http: / / www.dday.org includes information on the memorial , local events , and tours .

the official website in english of the comitã© rã©gional de tourisme de normandie lists various d - day tours in the region as well as general tourist information at http: / / www.normandy - tourism.org / gb / 16tours / index.html .

the official site of the western france tourism board offers information on tours and travel in the region by clicking on "normandy" at http: / / www.westernfrancetouristboard.com .

