rs20771 - - quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) : background , process , and issues updated june 21 , 200 .

the quadrennial defense review for 2001 is a congressionally mandated review of national defense strategy .

the secretary of defense is required to analyze , among other things , forcestructure , modernization plans , military infrastructure , and the defense budget with a view towards establishing aroadmap for defense programs for the next 20 years .

thiscomprehensive assessment could profoundly effect the nation's ability to carry out its national security strategy inthe new millennium .

genesis of qdr 2001 .

the1990s produced a number of defense related studies meant to reshape american military strategy in lightof the downfall of the soviet union and the end of the cold war .

these studies included the "base force" structure,the bottom up review , the commission on roles and missions , thequadrennial defense review of 1997 , and the 1997 national defense panel .

in the early 1990s the chairman ofthe joint chiefs of staff , general colin powell , coined the term "baseforce. .

it was used to designate a proposed structure representing the minimum armed forces necessary for theunited states to meet the national security objectives defined by policymakers , notably the capability to conduct two major theater wars simultaneously .

 ( 1 ) in 1993 , the bottom up review ( bur ) acknowledged the significant changesin the global securityenvironment by articulating a strategy where the department of defense sought to prevent conflict by promotingdemocracy and peaceful resolution of conflict while connecting theu.s .

military to the militaries of other countries , especially those of the former soviet union .

 ( 2 ) the bur addressed the need for peacekeeping andpeace enforcement operations butused the two major theater war ( mtw ) scenario as the main force shaping construct .

 ( 3 ) iraq and north korea were seen as regional powers able to initiatesimultaneous conflictsrequiring a u.s. military response .

their capabilities in turn drove force planning , structure , and capabilities of theamerican military forces .

the bur was criticized on various grounds .

some thought the resultant construct was merely a budget driven review and failed to adequately address the challenges of the newinternational security environment .

as a result , in the 1994 national defense authorization act , congressmandated the commission on roles and missions ( corm ) .

the corm waslater criticized for failing to depart from the two - mtw scenario .

its most significant contributions includedsuggestions that dod undertake a major quadrennial strategy review and thatthe chairman of the joint chiefs of staff develop a clear vision for future joint operations .

 ( 4 ) reacting to one of the corm recommendations,congress directed the 1997 quadrennialdefense review as a method to conduct a "fundamental and comprehensive examination of america's defenseneeds. .

 ( 5 ) the first qdr .

qdr 97 described a strategy of "shape , respond , prepare" in which the military must shape the environment throughdeterrence and engagement , remain prepared to engage in a spectrum of conflicts ranging from small scalecontingencies to major theater war , and prepare for an uncertain future .

inaddition , the report acknowledged the military must contend with additional threats including the proliferation ofweapons of mass destruction , advanced technologies , the drug trade,organized crime , uncontrolled immigration , and threats to the u.s. homeland .

 ( 6 ) as with the bur and corm , the qdr retained the two - mtw construct asits force shaping tool .

as aresult , the1997 qdr was again criticized by many as a budget driven assessment of what military force structurewould be like if funded at present budget levels .

the military force structure review act of 1996 established the independent national defense panel ( ndp ) as a forum to review the results of the 1997 qdr .

the ndp report tookexception to what it termed broadly as the qdr's less than ambitious plan for defense transformation , stating that,"our current security arrangements - - will not be adequate to meetingthe challenges of the future. .

 ( 7 ) it also recommendeda comprehensive look at scaling back or cancelling "legacy systems. .

 ( 8 ) most significantly the ndp report challenged therequirement to fight two major theater wars simultaneously as simply a force sizing tool and not a viable strategy .

the two - mtw construct was criticized as a means to justify cold warbased force structure and as a roadblock to implementing transformation strategies enabling the military to preparefor future threats .

 ( 9 ) the second quadrennial defense review is now fully under way .

the 2001 qdr presents an opportunity to assess future u.s. security challenges and link them to an overarchingmilitary strategy designed to protect the interests of the u.s. as a whole .

its results however , are not binding , andmay be significantly altered by the administration .

the 106th congress created a permanent requirement for a quadrennial defense review by inserting section 118 into chapter 2 of title 10 , united states code , which states that everyfour years the secretary of defense will: .....conduct a comprehensive examination of the national defense strategy , force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budgetplan , and other elements of the defense program and policies of the united states with a view towards determiningand expressing the defense strategy of the united states andestablishing a defense program for the next 20 years .

 ( 10 ) the purpose of the 2001 qdr as stated in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 is to1 ) delineate a military strategy consistent with the most recent nationalsecurity strategy ( 11 ) , 2 ) define the defense programsto successfully execute the full range of missions assigned the military by that strategy , and 3 ) identify the budgetplan necessary tosuccessfully execute those missions at a low - to - moderate level of risk .

the questions listed below are intended to assist dod in formulating a comprehensive military strategy in lightof the evolving international security environment and rapidly emergingtechnologies .

congress specifically requires the secretary of defense to consider precision guided munitions , stealth,night vision , digitization , and communications as he formulates hispreferred force structure options for the next 20 years .

 ( 12 ) qdr input .

while osd is responsible for the integration of the qdr effort , it is the joint staff that will gather the data and formulatethe inputs from the individual services , the combatant commands , and defense agencies into the end result .

thejoint staff qdr organization is led by a general officer steeringcommittee that will receive input from eight different panels .

those panels are strategy and risk assessment ; forcegeneration , capability and structure ; modernization ; sustainment,strategic mobility and infrastructure ; readiness ; transformation , innovation and joint experimentation ; information superiority ; and human resources .

each panel's input will go to apreparation group which is assisted by an integration group providing budget , analysis , and administrative support .

the joint requirements oversight council , the service operationaldeputies , and the joint chiefs of staff will provide guidance and help resolve panel issues as needed .

recentinformation suggests that osd will form six major issue panels to developoptions and make recommendations for the qdr report .

those panels are tentatively: strategy ; force structure ; capabilities and investment ; information warfare , intelligence , and space ; personnel and readiness support infrastructure ; and joint organizations .

 ( 14 ) .

several process issues will garner attention as the qdr is undertaken .

first , the timing of the qdr itself may be called into question .

numerous major policy actions by the bushadministration must be considered prior to delineating the national security strategy .

second , determining theappropriate military strategy with which to frame the review will be acrucial step .

last , prior studies were criticized by some as being a budget driven process as opposed to strategydriven .

although the military strategy ultimately defined by the qdr willmost likely have budgetary limitations , it is deemed essential to provide a clear picture of how that strategyeffectively defends u.s. national interests .

timing of the qdr .

as discussed earlier , the qdr process was established as a title 10 requirement for the secretary of defense toconduct a qdr "every four years , during a year evenly divisible by four" and to submit the report to congress "notlater than september 30 of the year in which the review isconducted. .

 ( 15 ) the national security strategy isdue in june of 2001 with the qdr report to follow by september 30 , 2001 .

if the administration substantiallychanges previoussecurity strategy , dod will most likely require more time to formulate its strategy and concepts based on the newnational security strategy and delineate a coherent military strategywithin which to frame the qdr .

it has been suggested by some that the administration take a different approachto the review .

conducting a broad strategic review and using it toestablish priorities with a more extensive study to follow might allow both the administration and dod to take amore measured view .

 ( 16 ) this method could affectthe administration'sfirst budget submission in 2002 .

using results of qdr97 to shape the defense budget until the comprehensivestudy is complete might allow the administration to more coherentlytranslate its national security strategy into a different or revamped defense strategy .

this approach would requirecongress to amend the qdr legislation now in law .

appropriate strategy .

structuring our military forces on the premise the u.s. military will need to fight two simultaneous regionalconflicts provided a logical yardstick during the cold war and time frame immediately afterward .

some see it asa less likely occurrence in today's environment given the lack ofeligible adversaries that could muster the necessary forces and resources to create that scenario .

since that time,it has been criticized as being more an argument to retain the currentforce structure at the expense of restructuring .

opponents of the two - mtw construct contend it is difficult tosubstantiate the necessity of countering major , cross - border , conventionalconflicts in the current international security environment .

the emerging asymmetric threats of terrorism,narco - trafficking , weapons of mass destruction , information warfare,environmental sabotage , anti - access operations , and other low intensity operations may dictate a different approachto force sizing .

 ( 17 ) conversely , modifying orcompletely changing thecurrent strategy may have an impact on our allies around the world .

changing the two - mtw construct could beperceived by some allies as a lack of resolve and backing away fromcurrent security commitments .

strategy / budget mismatch .

the cost of most strategies considered will probably exceed current budget levels .

estimates range fromover $20 billion to $100 billion per year shortfall to fund the 1997 qdr force .

 ( 18 ) the iraqi no - fly zone enforcement , the balkans peacekeeping force , andnumerous other small scalecommitments continue to place a strain on the current budget .

budget estimates for transforming the military tomeet future threats while maintaining a credible force to deter currentthreats or win possible conflicts far outreach the proposed defense budgets in the current future years defenseprogram .

 ( 19 ) the overall goal of the qdr processis to create a defensestrategy , complementing the national security strategy , bounded by a budget that ensures a "low - to - moderate levelof risk" when executed .

in order to do this , most defense specialistssee a likely necessity to either increase the defense budget , restructure and reduce current costs , or reduce thedemands of the current defense strategy .

they have urged that the qdrapproach as monitored by congress address those hard choices .

besides the process issues mentioned above , congress may be interested in other aspects of the qdr .

it will be important to ensure the dod qdr organization is an effective analyticstructure that emphasizes jointness and total force thinking versus protection of individual service equities or servicebudget shares .

the roles of the regional commander - in - chiefsshould be analyzed as they compete for limited service resources during growing commitments .

the transformationstrategies of each service could require a reassessment ofprocurement decisions of systems designed for conventional battle as the united states moves further into theinformation age .

the methods of estimating the risks involved in changingthe strategy , the construct the strategy is based upon , and the transformation philosophies of the services could wellaffect the outcome of the qdr .

translating the qdr into a coherentand useful defense strategy to guide the united states into an uncertain future will require challenging choices bythe congress and bush administration .

