the federal housing administration ( fha ) is an agency of the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) that insures private mortgage lenders against the possibility of borrowers defaulting on certain mortgage loans .

if a mortgage borrower defaults on a mortgage — that is , does not repay the mortgage as promised — and the home goes to foreclosure , fha is to pay the lender the remaining amount that the borrower owes .

fha insurance protects the lender , rather than the borrower , in the event of borrower default ; a borrower who defaults on an fha - insured mortgage will still experience the consequences of foreclosure .

to be eligible for fha insurance , the mortgage must be originated by a lender that has been approved by fha , and the mortgage and the borrower must meet certain criteria .

fha is one of three government agencies that provide insurance or guarantees on certain home mortgages made by private lenders , along with the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and the united states department of agriculture ( usda ) .

of these federal mortgage insurance programs , fha is the most broadly targeted .

unlike va - and usda - insured mortgages , the availability of fha - insured mortgages is not limited by factors such as veteran status , income , or whether the property is located in a rural area .

however , the availability or attractiveness of fha - insured mortgages may be limited by other factors , such as the maximum mortgage amount that fha will insure , the fees that it charges for insurance , and its eligibility standards .

this report provides background on fha's history and market role and an overview of the basic eligibility and underwriting criteria for fha - insured home loans .

it also provides data on the number and dollar volume of mortgages that fha insures , along with data on fha's market share in recent years .

it does not go into detail on the financial status of the fha mortgage insurance fund .

for information on fha's financial position , see crs report r42875 , fha single - family mortgage insurance: financial status of the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) .

this section briefly describes some of the major features of fha - insured mortgages for purchasing or refinancing a single - family home .

single - family homes are defined as properties with one to four separate dwelling units .

fha's single - family mortgage insurance program is funded through fha's mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) .

cash flows into the mmi fund primarily from insurance premiums and proceeds from the sale of foreclosed homes .

cash flows out of the mmi fund primarily to pay claims to lenders for mortgages that have defaulted .

this section provides a brief overview of ( 1 ) how the fha - insured mortgages insured under the mmi fund are accounted for in the federal budget and ( 2 ) the mmi fund's compliance with a statutory capital ratio requirement .

for more detailed information on the financial status of the mmi fund , see crs report r42875 , fha single - family mortgage insurance: financial status of the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) .

the number of new mortgages insured by fha in a given year depends on a variety of factors .

in general , the number of new mortgages insured by fha increased during the housing market turmoil ( and resulting contraction of mortgage credit ) that began around 2007 , reaching a peak of 1.8 million mortgages in fy2009 before beginning to decrease somewhat .

fy2014 was the only year since fy2007 that fha insured fewer than 1 million new mortgages .

as shown in table 4 , fha insured just over 1 million new single - family purchase and refinance mortgages in fy2018 .

together , these mortgages had an initial loan balance of $209 billion .

about 77% ( 776,284 ) of the mortgages were for home purchases , while about 23% ( 238,325 ) were for refinancing an existing mortgage .

the overall number of mortgages insured by fha in fy2018 represented a decrease from fy2017 , when it insured 1.25 million mortgages .

many fha - insured mortgages are obtained by first - time homebuyers , lower - and moderate - income homebuyers , and minority homebuyers .

of the home purchase mortgages insured by fha in fy2018 , about 83% were made to first - time homebuyers .

over a third of all mortgages ( both for home purchases and refinances ) insured by fha in fy2018 were made to minority borrowers .

as shown in table 5 , at the end of fy2018 fha was insuring a total of over 8 million single - family loans that together had an outstanding balance of nearly $1.2 trillion .

since it was first established in 1934 , fha has insured a total of over 47.5 million home loans .

fha's share of the mortgage market is the amount of mortgages that are insured by fha compared to the total amount of mortgages originated or outstanding in a given time period .

fha's market share can be measured in a number of different ways .

therefore , when evaluating fha's market share , it is important to recognize which of several different figures is being reported .

first , fha's share of the mortgage market can be computed as the number of fha - insured mortgages divided by the total number of mortgages , or as the dollar volume of fha - insured mortgages divided by the total dollar volume of mortgages .

furthermore , fha's market share is sometimes reported as a share of all mortgages , and sometimes only as a share of home purchase mortgages ( as opposed to both mortgages made to purchase a home and mortgages made to refinance an existing mortgage ) .

a market share figure can be reported as a share of all mortgages originated within a specific time period , such as a given year , or as a share of all mortgages outstanding at a point in time , regardless of when they were originated .

finally , fha's market share is sometimes also reported as a share of the total number of mortgages that have some kind of mortgage insurance ( including mortgages with private mortgage insurance and mortgages insured by another government agency ) rather than as a share of all mortgages regardless of whether or not they have mortgage insurance .

fha's market share tends to fluctuate in response to economic conditions and other factors .

between calendar years 1996 and 2002 , fha's market share averaged about 14% of the home purchase mortgage market and about 11% of the overall mortgage market ( both home purchase mortgages and refinance mortgages ) , as measured by number of mortgages .

however , by 2005 fha's market share had fallen to less than 5% of home - purchase mortgages and about 3% of the overall mortgage market .

subsequently , as economic conditions worsened and mortgage credit tightened in response to housing market turmoil that began around 2007 , fha's market share rose sharply , peaking at over 30% of home - purchase mortgages in 2009 and 2010 , and over 20% of all mortgages ( including both home purchases and refinances ) in 2009 .

in 2017 , fha insured 19.5% of new home purchase mortgages and about 16.7% of new mortgages overall , a small decrease compared to its market share in 2016 .

figure 1 shows fha's market share as a percentage of the total number of new mortgages originated for each calendar year between 1996 and 2017 .

as described , fha's market share can be measured in a number of different ways .

the figure shows fha's share of ( 1 ) all newly originated mortgages , ( 2 ) just newly originated purchase mortgages , and ( 3 ) just newly originated refinance mortgages .

fha's share of home purchase mortgages tends to be the highest , largely because borrowers who refinance are more likely to have built up a greater amount of equity in their homes and , therefore , might be more likely to obtain conventional mortgages .

for the number of mortgages insured by fha in each year calendar since 1996 , see the appendix .

the increase in fha's market share after 2007 was due to a variety of factors related to the housing market turmoil and broader economic instability that was taking place at the time .

housing and economic conditions led many banks to limit their lending activities , including lending for mortgages .

similarly , private mortgage insurance companies , facing steep losses from past mortgages , began tightening the underwriting criteria for mortgages that they would insure .

furthermore , in 2008 congress increased the maximum mortgage amounts that fha can insure , which may have made fha - insured mortgages a more viable option for some borrowers in certain areas .

more recently , fha's market share has decreased somewhat from its peak during the housing market turmoil , although it generally remains somewhat higher than it was in the late 1990s and early 2000s .

a number of factors may have contributed to this decrease , including lower loan limits in some high - cost areas , higher mortgage insurance premiums , and greater availability of non - fha - insured mortgages .

while not the focus of this report , the appropriate market share for fha has been a subject of ongoing debate among policymakers .

it is likely to continue to be a topic of debate , both in the context of policies specifically related to fha as well as part of broader debate about the future of the u.s. housing finance system .

 table a - 1 provides data on the number of mortgages insured by fha in each calendar year since 1996 , along with fha's overall market share in each calendar year .

