rico outlaws the collection of an unlawful debt , or the patterned commission of two or more crimes from a series of designated state and federal crimes ( "racketeering activities" often referred to as predicate offenses ) , in order to acquire , invest in , or conduct the activities of an enterprise whose activities occur in , or affect , interstate or foreign commerce .

any person may violate rico .

the "person" need not be a mobster or even a human being ; "any individual or entity capable of holding a legal or beneficial interest in property" will do .

although the "person" and the "enterprise" must be distinct in the case of a subsection 1962 ( c ) violation ( conducting an enterprise's activities through racketeering activity ) , a corporate entity and its sole shareholder are sufficiently distinct to satisfy the enterprise and person elements of a subsection ( c ) violation .

the "person" and "enterprise" need not be distinct for purposes of subsection 1962 ( a ) ( investing the racketeering activity proceeds in an enterprise ) or subsection 1962 ( b ) ( acquiring or maintaining an enterprise through racketeering activity ) violations .

on the other hand , even though governmental entities may constitute or participate in a rico enterprise and may bring a rico cause of action , they are not considered capable of a rico violation .

rico addresses four forms of illicit activity reflected in the four subsections of section 1962: ( a ) acquiring or operating an enterprise using racketeering proceeds ; ( b ) controlling an enterprise using racketeering activities ; ( c ) conducting the affairs of an enterprise using racketeering activities ; and ( d ) conspiring to so acquire , control , or conduct .

the first , 18 u.s.c .

1962 ( a ) , was designed as something of a money laundering provision .

it introduces several features of its own and has been described as the most difficult to prove .

under its provisions , it is unlawful for ( 1 ) any person ( 2 ) who is liable as a principal ( a ) in the collection of an unlawful debt or ( b ) in a pattern of predicate offenses ( 3 ) to use or invest ( 4 ) the income from such misconduct ( 5 ) to acquire , establish or operate ( 6 ) a commercial enterprise .

the "person," the pattern of predicate offense , and the enterprise elements are common to all of the subsections .

for purposes of 1962 ( a ) , however , a legal entity that benefits from the offense may be both the "person" and the "enterprise. .

the person must have committed usury or a pattern of predicate offenses or aided and abetted in their commission , and have received income that would not otherwise have been received as a result .

the second proscription , 18 u.s.c .

1962 ( b ) , is much the same except that it forbids acquisition or control of an enterprise through the predicate offenses themselves rather than through the income derived from the predicate offenses .

it makes it unlawful for ( 1 ) any person ( 2 ) to acquire or maintain an interest in or control of ( 3 ) a commercial enterprise ( 4 ) through ( a ) the collection of an unlawful debt or ( b ) a pattern of predicate offenses .

as in the case of subsection 1962 ( a ) , the "person" and the "enterprise" may be one and the same .

there must be a nexus between the predicate offenses and the acquisition of control .

exactly what constitutes "interest" or "control" is a case by case determination .

the defendant must be shown to have played some significant role in the management of the enterprise but a showing of complete control is not necessary .

subsection 1962 ( c ) makes it unlawful for ( 1 ) any person , ( 2 ) employed by or associated with , ( 3 ) a commercial enterprise ( 4 ) to conduct or participate in the conduct of the enterprise's affairs ( 5 ) through ( a ) the collection of an unlawful debt or ( b ) a pattern of predicate offenses .

although on its face subsection 1962 ( c ) might appear to be less demanding than subsections 1962 ( a ) and ( b ) , the courts have not always read it broadly .

thus , in any charge of a breach of its provisions , the "person" and the "enterprise" must ordinarily be distinct .

the requirement cannot be avoided by charging a corporate entity as the "person" and the officers and employees through whom it must act as an "association in fact" enterprise .

a corporate entity and its sole shareholder , however , are sufficiently distinct for purposes of subsection 1962 ( c ) .

moreover , the supreme court has identified an entrepreneurial stripe in the "conduct or participate in the conduct" element of 1962 ( c ) under which only those who participate in the operation or management of the enterprise itself meet the definition .

nevertheless , conviction requires neither an economic predicate offense nor a predicate offense committed with an economic motive .

the heart of most rico violations is a pattern of racketeering activities , that is , the patterned commission of two or more designated state or federal crimes .

the list of state and federal crimes upon which a rico violation may be predicated includes murder , kidnaping , gambling , robbery , arson , bribery , extortion , dealing in drugs or obscene material , mail fraud , wire fraud , and federal crimes of terrorism , to name a few .

to constitute "racketeering activity," the predicate offense need only be committed ; there is no requirement that the defendant or anyone else have been convicted of a predicate offense before a rico prosecution or action may be brought .

conviction of a predicate offense , on the other hand , does not preclude a subsequent rico prosecution , nor is either conviction or acquittal a bar to a subsequent rico civil action .

as noted the supreme court's decision in h.j. , inc. v. northwestern bell telephone co. , 492 u.s. 229 ( 1989 ) , quoted below , the pattern of racketeering activities element of rico requires ( 1 ) the commission of two or more predicate offenses , ( 2 ) that the predicate offenses be related and not simply isolated events , and ( 3 ) that they are committed under such circumstances that suggest either a continuity of criminal activity or the threat of such continuity .

predicates : the first element is explicit in section 1961 ( 5 ) : "'pattern of racketeering activity' requires at least two acts of racketeering activity. .

the two remaining elements , relationship and continuity , flow from the legislative history of rico .

that history "shows that congress indeed had a fairly flexible concept of a pattern in mind .

a pattern is not formed by sporadic activity.... [a] person cannot be subjected to the sanctions [of rico] simply for committing two widely separate and isolated criminal offenses .

instead , the term 'pattern' itself requires the showing of a relationship between the predicates and of the threat of continuing activity .

it is this factor of continuity plus relationship which combines to produce a pattern. .

related predicates : the commission of predicate offenses forms the requisite related pattern if the "criminal acts ... have the same or similar purposes , results , participants , victims , or methods of commission , or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteristics and are not isolated events. .

continuity : "continuity" is a question of time .

"a party alleging a rico violation may demonstrate continuity ... by proving a series of related predicates , extending over a substantial period of time .

predicate acts extending over a few weeks or months and threatening no future criminal conduct do not satisfy this requirement. .

but this does not mean that no rico violation has occurred in the absence of continuity .

"often a rico action will be brought before continuity can be established... .

in such cases , liability depends on whether the threat of continuity is demonstrated. .

the court characterized a pattern , extending over a period of time but which posed no threat of reoccurrence , as a pattern with "closed - end" continuity ; and a pattern marked by a threat of reoccurrence as a pattern with "open - ended continuity. .

in the case of a "closed - ended" pattern , the lower courts have been reluctant to find predicate activity extending over less than a year sufficient for the "substantial period[s] of time" required to demonstrate continuity .

whether the threat of future predicate activity is sufficient to recognize an "open - end" pattern of continuity depends upon the nature of the predicate offenses and the nature of the enterprise .

"though the number of related predicates involved may be small and they may occur close together in time , the racketeering acts themselves include a specific threat of repetition extending indefinitely into the future , and thus supply the requisite continuity .

in other cases , the threat of continuity may be established by showing that the predicate acts or offenses are part of an ongoing entity's regular way of doing business. .

collection of an unlawful debt appears to be the only instance in which the commission of a single predicate offense will support a rico prosecution or cause of action .

no proof of pattern seems to be necessary .

the predicate covers only usury and the collection of unlawful gambling debts .

the prohibition seems to apply to both lawful and unlawful means of collection as long as the underlying debt is unlawful .

the statute defines "enterprise" to include "any individual , partnership , corporation , association , or other legal entity , and any union or group of individuals associated in fact although not a legal entity. .

the enterprise may be devoted to entirely legitimate ends or totally corrupt objectives , and rico reaches efforts involving both governmental and nongovernmental enterprises .

finally as noted earlier , a corporation or other legal entity may be both the defendant and the required "enterprise" under some circumstances .

as for "associated in fact" enterprises , the supreme court in boyle rejected the suggestion that such enterprises must be "business - like" creatures , having discernable hierarchical structures , unique modus operandi , chains of command , internal rules and regulations , regular meetings regarding enterprise activities , or even a separate enterprise name or title , boyle v. united states , 129 s.ct .

2337 , 2347 ( 2009 ) .

the statute demands only "that an association - in - fact enterprise must have at least three structural features: a purpose , relationships among those associated with the enterprise , and longevity sufficient to permit these associates to pursue the enterprise's purpose," id .

 , at 2346 .

to satisfy rico's jurisdictional element , the corrupt or corrupted enterprise must either engage in interstate or foreign commerce or engage in activities that affect interstate or foreign commerce .

an enterprise that orders supplies and transports its employees and products in interstate commerce is "engaged in interstate commerce" for purposes of rico .

as a general rule , the impact of the enterprise on interstate or foreign commerce need only be minimal to satisfy rico requirements .

where the predicate offenses associated with an enterprise have an effect on interstate commerce , the enterprise is likely to have an effect on interstate commerce .

however , more is required where the enterprise is not engaged in economic activity .

conspiracy under subsection 1962 ( d ) is ( 1 ) the agreement of ( 2 ) two or more ( 3 ) to invest in , acquire , or conduct the affairs of ( 4 ) a commercial enterprise ( 5 ) in a manner which violates 18 u.s.c .

1962 ( a ) , ( b ) , or ( c ) .

the heart of the crime lies in the agreement rather than any completed , concerted violation of the other three rico subsections .

in fact , unlike the general conspiracy statute , rico conspiracy is complete upon the agreement even if none of the conspirators ever commit an overt act towards the accomplishment of its criminal purpose .

moreover , contrary to the view once held by some of the lower courts , there is no requirement that a defendant commit or agree to commit two or more predicate offenses himself .

it is enough that the defendant , in agreement with another , intended to further an endeavor which , if completed , would satisfy all of the elements of a rico violation .

a conspirator is liable not only for the conspiracy but for any foreseeable substantive offenses committed by any of the conspirators in furtherance of the common scheme , until the objectives of the plot are achieved , abandoned , or the conspirator withdraws .

"to withdraw from a conspiracy , an individual must take some affirmative action either by reporting to authorities or communicating his intentions to his coconspirators. .

the individual bears the burden of showing he has done so .

the commission of a rico violation exposes offenders to a wide range of criminal and civil consequences: imprisonment , fines , restitution , forfeiture , treble damages , attorneys' fees , and a wide range of equitable restrictions .

criminal liability .

rico violations are punishable by fine or by imprisonment for life in cases where the predicate offense carries a life sentence , or by imprisonment for not more than 20 years in all other cases .

although an offender may be sentenced to either a fine or a term of imprisonment under the strict terms of the statute , the operation of the applicable sentencing guidelines makes it highly likely that offenders will face both fine and imprisonment .

the maximum amount of the fine for a rico violation is the greater of twice the amount of the gain or loss associated with the crime , or $250,000 for an individual , $500,000 for an organization .

offenders sentenced to prison are also sentenced to a term of supervised release of not more than three years to be served following their release from incarceration .

most rico violations also trigger mandatory federal restitution provisions , because the rico offense involves a crime of violence , drug trafficking , or a crime with respect to which a victim suffers physical injury or pecuniary loss .

moreover , property related to a rico violation is subject to confiscation .

even without a completed rico violation , committing any crime designated a rico predicate offense opens the door to additional criminal liability .

it is a 20-year felony to launder the proceeds from any predicate offense ( including any rico predicate offense ) or to use them to finance further criminal activity .

moreover , the proceeds of any rico predicate offense are subject to civil forfeiture ( confiscation without the necessity of a criminal conviction ) by virtue of the rico predicate's status as a money laundering predicate .

civil liability .

rico violations may result in civil as well as criminal liability .

"any person injured in his business or property by reason" of a rico violation has a cause of action for treble damages and attorneys' fees .

no prior criminal conviction is required , except in the case of liability based on certain securities fraud predicates .

although the united states is apparently not a "person" that may sue for damages under rico , the term does include local governments , state agencies , and foreign governments .

on the other hand , private parties may not bring a rico suit for damages against the united states or other governmental entities .

in order to recover , the plaintiff must establish an injury to his or her business or property directly or proximately caused by the defendant's rico violation .

the injury must involve a "concrete financial loss," a "mere injury to a valuable intangible property interest" such as a right to pursue employment will not do .

the courts agreed generally that section 1964 ( c ) does not permit recovery for personal injuries since they are not injuries to "business or property," but sometimes disagree on what constitutes a qualified injury .

if the underlying violation involves subsection 1962 ( a ) , it is the use or investment of the income rather than the predicate offenses that must have caused the injury .

if the underlying violation involves subsection 1962 ( b ) , it is the access or control of the rico enterprise rather than the predicate offenses that must have caused the injury .

while a criminal prosecution requires no overt act , the courts demand that rico plaintiffs whose claim is based on a conspiracy under subsection 1962 ( d ) prove an overt act since a mere agreement cannot be the direct or proximate cause of an injury .

moreover , the overt act itself must constitute a predicate offense .

notwithstanding the apparent inability of the united states to sue for damages under rico , the attorney general may seek to prevent and restrain rico violations under the broad equitable powers vested in the courts to order disgorgement , divestiture , restitution , or the creation of receiverships or trusteeships .

this authority has been invoked relatively infrequently , primarily to rid various unions of organized crime and other forms of corruption .

there is some question whether private plaintiffs , in addition to the attorney general , may seek injunctive and other forms of equitable relief .

on the procedural side , the supreme court has held that ( 1 ) state trial courts of general jurisdiction have concurrent jurisdiction over federal civil rico claims ; ( 2 ) under the appropriate circumstances parties may agree to make potential civil rico claims subject to arbitration ; ( 3 ) the clayton act's four - year period of limitation applies to civil rico claims as well , and the period begins when the victim discovers or should have discovered the injury ; and ( 4 ) in the absence of an impediment to state regulation , the mccarran - ferguson act does not bar civil rico claims based on insurance fraud allegations .

