for some 45 years , the primary international organization for coordinating restrictions on dual - use exports was cocom , the coordinating committee for multilateral export controls .

cocom was formed in 1949 to limit military - related transfers to communist countries .

at the time of its termination at the end of march 1994 , it consisted of 17 industrial countries , including all members of nato—except iceland—and japan and australia .

cocom operated on the basis of "consensus," and functioned without the existence of a treaty or specific international legal authorization .

in reality , cocom "consensus" gave any member—and that member was most likely to be the united states—a veto over the export by any other member of a controlled good or technology .

the day - to - day operations of cocom involved meetings of a secretariat in paris at which the members agreed upon the technical specifications of the dual - use items that were being considered for export to eastern europe , the former soviet union , and the people's republic of china .

the secretariat also decided whether to allow exceptions to agreed - upon restrictions .

irregular cocom "high level" meetings set or enunciated overall policy for the members .

to provide guidance , cocom created three lists of controlled items: an international industrial list , an international atomic energy list , and an international munitions list .

the export control organizations of the member countries then incorporated some variant of the listed items .

in the united states , the export administration regulations contained the u.s. version of the items on the cocom lists .

since cocom had no independent legal existence , implementation of cocom decisions depended upon the effectiveness of the export control laws and bureaucracies of each of the individual members .

it was the responsibility of cocom member countries to pass and enforce adequate laws and regulations to control exports .

the comprehensiveness of the member countries' export control regimes , the degree of high level attention given to export controls , and the effectiveness of the export control bureaucracies varied considerably .

in almost every instance , the united states was the most active in pursuing cocom limitations on exports , while its major trading partners—especially france , the united kingdom , and west germany—often seemed more concerned about facilitating exports .

after the dissolution of the soviet union , cocom members agreed , in november 1993 , to disband cocom , replace it with a new entity , and to move to "national discretion" in export licensing decisions as of january 1994 .

national discretion meant that each country , not cocom as an entity , would determine what should be exported , and no country could veto the export decisions of another .

beginning in november 1993 , clinton administration representatives undertook a major effort to create a "broadly based" replacement accord for cocom which , as initially conceived would include the formerly cocom - proscribed countries .

it was initially hoped that this successor accord would be in place by the time that cocom was disbanded on march 31 , 1994 .

that deadline was not met .

this effort resulted in the establishment of initial elements of the wassenaar arrangement , by 28 nations at the hague on december 19 , 1995 , subject to the approval of their governments .

after meetings in early april and mid - july 1996 , the secretariat of the arrangement was established in vienna in 1996 .

initially called the "new forum" , the wassenaar arrangement has as its primary focus two basic areas: ( 1 ) conventional weapons exports and , ( 2 ) sensitive dual - use items and technologies with military end uses .

the clinton administration viewed the new accord as the "centerpiece" of its efforts to promote "multilateral restraint" in conventional arms sales and transfers of sensitive military technologies .

the clinton conventional arms transfer policy , set out in february 1995 , was a restatement of a policy approach that has guided u.s. arms transfers since the reagan administration .

the wassenaar arrangement ( formally titled the wassenaar arrangement on export controls for conventional arms and dual - use goods and technologies ) does not appear to break any new ground in the multilateral conventional arms control area .

previous attempts to achieve regional conventional arms sales agreements—most notably the effort in 1991-1992 by the george h.w .

bush administration aimed at securing restraint on middle east arms sales by the five permanent members of the u.n. security council—failed due to the lack of consensus among the parties regarding which weapons could be sold and to whom .

elements of the wassenaar arrangement dealing with conventional weapons transfers depend for their success on securing the agreement of other weapons suppliers to forego activities that might otherwise be to their political or financial benefit .

there are four major areas of policy concern within the wassenaar arrangement .

these areas are membership , target countries , materials to be controlled , and organization / operational procedures .

the agreed membership criteria of the wassenaar arrangement basically rely upon statements by members that they will abide by fairly general standards .

since the russian export control system and those of other nis countries lack substantial transparency , what steps can be taken to ensure that the membership criteria will be complied with by these states and others with traditions of weak export control systems ? .

is there an effective means by which the united states can induce acceptance of higher standards for evaluating sensitive technology transfers by other participating states ? .

is legislation sanctioning nations that continue to transfer weapons and technology to aggressive nations in regions of tension such a mechanism ? .

would a greater emphasis on use of oversight mechanisms in u.s. law , such as the arms export control act , or the reauthorization of the export administration act provide the united states with a more effective means of achieving some of the fundamental goals it has been pursuing through the wassenaar arrangement ? .

