the committee of the whole has been an accepted practice in the united states congress since the first congress convened in 1789 .

it was used earlier in many of the colonial legislatures , as well as in the continental congress .

the custom has its antecedents in english parliamentary practice .

de alva stanwood alexander , an historian of the house of representatives and a former representative himself , wrote: this committee has a long history .

it originated in the time of the stuarts , when taxation arrayed the crown against the [house of] commons , and suspicion made the speaker a tale - bearer to the king .

to avoid the chair's espionage the commons met in secret , elected a chairman in whom it had confidence , and without fear of the king freely exchanged its views respecting supplies .

the informality of its procedure survived the occasion for secrecy , but to this day the house of commons keeps up the fiction of concealment , the speaker withdrawing from the hall when the committee convenes , and the chairman occupying the clerk's desk .

use of the committee of the whole in the current practice of the house of representatives has changed considerably from the form first used in 1789 .

until the early 1800s , the house used committees of the whole to work out the broad outlines of major legislation .

a select committee would then be appointed to draft a bill .

when the select committee reported the bill to the house , the house would then refer the measure to a committee of the whole for debate and amendment before itself considering the question of passage .

historian ralph volney harlow commended on the committee of the whole as a forum in which the broad outline of legislation could be discussed: the committee of the whole is really a compromise between a regular session , and an adjournment for purposes of discussion .

the latter method could not be used to advantage in any large assembly , because some restraining influence would be necessary .

but the primitive form of the committee of the whole was probably a short adjournment , during which members could move about from one to another , and freely discuss the merits of the matter under consideration .

gradually , the standing committee system grew up in the house of representatives , replacing the temporary select committees of the earlier era .

standing committees assumed the overview and drafting functions previously divided between a committee of the whole and a select committee .

as a result , the purpose for convening in committee of the whole began to change .

the concept found in current practice is that of the principal forum for discussion and amendment of legislation .

contemporary committee of the whole procedures are not without some restriction , but they are more flexible than those employed in the formal sessions of the house of representatives .

for a comparison of characteristics of the house and the committee of the whole in contemporary practice , please see table 1 at the end of this report .

when the house of representatives resolves itself into the committee of the whole , two simple rituals mark the transformation .

first , the mace — a column of ebony rods which sits on a green marble pedestal to the right of the speaker on the podium — is moved to a white marble pedestal positioned lower on the podium .

the mace represents the authority of the sergeant of arms to maintain order in the house .

when it is removed from the higher position on the podium , it signals the house is no longer meeting as the house of representatives in regular session , but in the committee of the whole .

second , the speaker descends the podium , and designates a majority party colleague to take his place and assume the duties of the presiding officer during the deliberations of the committee of the whole .

the member designated by the speaker thus becomes the chairman of the committee of the whole and is responsible for recognizing members , maintaining order , and ruling on points of order .

during meetings of the committee of the whole , members address the chair not as "mr. speaker" but as "mr. chairman" or "madam chairman. .

under the standing rules of the house , a measure that raises revenue , directly or indirectly appropriates money , or authorizes the expenditure of money must be considered in the committee of the whole .

other types of measures may be considered in the committee of the whole , if the house so decides , or if a rule - making statute so requires .

in either case , the house of representatives must first agree to resolve itself into the committee of the whole .

it does so in three ways: by unanimous consent , by adopting a motion to resolve into the committee of the whole , or by adopting a "special rule" that authorizes the speaker to declare the house resolved into the committee of the whole for the purpose of considering a specified measure .

in addition to making the consideration of a specific measure in order in the committee of the whole , each of these three approaches will most likely limit general debate time and assign its control .

they may also specify the number and types of amendments which may be offered , may designate debate time on amendments , and may waive points of order against house rules , if a provision in the measure could otherwise be held in violation of them .

once the house resolves itself into the committee , the measure before the committee is debated and amended .

in general , the committee of the whole observes the rules of procedure of the house of representatives insofar as they are applicable .

there are several important differences between proceedings in the house of representatives and proceedings in the committee of the whole that make legislative deliberation in the committee an attractive alternative .

the committee of the whole dissolves itself by "rising. .

if the committee has not completed consideration of the measure before it , the floor manager may offer a simple motion to rise .

at a later time , the house may choose to resolve itself again into the committee of the whole to resume consideration of the same measure .

if the committee has completed its deliberations , members may agree to a motion to rise and report to the house of representatives the actions and recommendations of the committee .

once the decision to rise has been made , the chairman of the committee descends the podium and the speaker ascends to take his place as presiding officer of the house of representatives .

the mace is returned to its original location .

the chairman then reports to the house those amendments that were adopted in the committee and the committee's recommendation on the question of final passage of the measure .

 ( neither second - degree amendments nor substitutes that were adopted nor any first or second - degree amendments that were defeated in the committee are reported to the house. ) .

the house must then formally agree to any amendments reported by the committee .

therefore , it is possible that amendments that were adopted by the committee of the whole could be defeated by the house of representatives .

the house may agree to all the amendments reported to it by the committee of the whole through one vote ( "en gros" ) , or separate votes may be demanded on any amendments agreed to in the committee .

the votes on amendments could also be structured pursuant to the provisions of a "special rule" adopted earlier .

votes are put on such amendments in the order in which they appear in the bill , not in the order by which the request was made .

the house then considers , with the possibility of several intervening motions such as a motion to recommit , the question of final passage of the measure .

