in recent years , our society has come to rely increasingly on medical information to perform basic functions and to make decisions about individuals .

however , a number of fundamental developments have threatened the confidentiality of health - care information , and are the cause of a great deal of concern .

the emergence of third - party payment plans ; the use of health - care information for non - health care purposes ; the growing involvement of government agencies in virtually all aspects of health care ; and the exponential increase in the use of computers and automated information systems for health record information have combined to put substantial pressure on traditional confidentiality protections .

in addition , an increasing number of parties involved in health care treatment , payment , and oversight have routine access to personally identifiable health records .

greater utilization of health - care information coupled with inadequate confidentiality protections has increased the potential for unauthorized uses and disclosures of medical information .

the disclosure of personally identifiable health - care information can profoundly affect people's lives .

"it affects decisions on whether they are hired or fired ; whether they can secure business licenses , and life insurance ; whether they are permitted to drive cars ; whether they are placed under police surveillance or labeled a security risk ; or even whether they can get nominated for and elected to political office. .

other secondary uses of health - care information , such as the use of genetic test results for employment and insurance purposes , have the potential to result in harm to the health - care subject if the information is disclosed for unauthorized purposes .

these factors accentuate the need for strong legal safeguards .

the confidentiality of health - care information is governed by various federal , state , and local statutes , ordinances , regulations , and case law .

also applicable are private accreditation standards , such as those of the joint commission on accreditation of healthcare organizations , internal policies of particular institutions , and ethical guidelines of professional organizations .

prior to the issuance of the hipaa privacy rule , federal laws did not address the confidentiality of health - care information collected and maintained by the private sector ( i.e .

 , doctors , hospitals , health plans , health insurers , and other health - care related entities ) .

a major impetus for the enactment of hipaa's privacy requirement was the absence of a comprehensive federal law that protected the confidentiality of patient records in all settings .

another impetus for the enactment of hipaa was the lack of uniformity among the states in their treatment of the confidentiality of health - care information .

there was substantial variation between the states on many aspects of medical records law .

these differences are becoming much more critical in the collection , maintenance , and disclosure of health - care information as it is transmitted through interstate commerce amongst patients , physicians , health - care facilities , employers , government agencies , and insurers located in different states and subject to different laws .

to address this disparity , hipaa provides that state law , except for certain specified laws ( concerning public health surveillance ) and state laws that are more stringent , is preempted by the federal privacy rule .

a compendium of state laws issued july 20 , 1999 and november 2002 by georgetown university's health privacy project , "the state of health privacy: an uneven terrain" , identifies medical records privacy provisions from state legislative codes .

the report covers only state statutes and divides them by patient access , restrictions on disclosure , privilege , and condition specific requirements .

several comprehensive medical records confidentiality bills were introduced during the past decade , with the end result being passage of the medical privacy requirements as part of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( "hipaa" ) .

the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , p.l .

104-191 , 42 u.s.c .

§§ 1320d et seq .

 , was created to improve the portability and continuity of health insurance coverage , to combat waste , fraud and abuse in health care , to promote the use of medical savings accounts , to improve access to long term care , and to simplify the administration of health insurance .

sections 261 through 264 of hipaa are known as the administrative simplification provisions .

the general administrative simplification rule requires health care payers and providers who transmit transactions electronically to use standardized data elements to conduct financial and administrative transactions .

section 262 directs hhs to issue standards to facilitate the electronic exchange of information , and to develop standards to protect the security of such information .

section 264 of hipaa requires hhs to submit to the congress detailed recommendations on standards with respect to privacy rights for individually identifiable health information .

the secretary made preliminary privacy recommendations to congress in september 1997 , based on the core fair information principles of notice , consent , access , security , and enforcement / redress , to: limit the use of an individual's health care information to health purposes only ; require organizations to provide adequate security measures to protect information from misuse or disclosure ; provide patients with new rights to control how their health information is used , such as the ability to get copies of records and propose corrections ; hold those who misuse personal health information accountable , and provide redress for persons harmed by its misuse through criminal and civil penalties ; and balance privacy protections with public responsibility to support national priorities , including public health , research , quality care , and reduction of fraud and abuse , including allowing law enforcement access to personal health information .

in the 106 th congress several proposals to protect health information were considered , but congress did not pass legislation .

none of the bills were reported out of committee , with disagreements over the patient's right to sue , parental notification of minor's access to health care , and preemption precluding agreement .

in the absence of the enactment of federal legislation , hipaa required hhs to issue privacy regulations .

the final privacy regulation was published in the federal register on december 28 , 2000 at 65 fed .

reg .

82462 , shortly before the clinton administration left office , and after hhs received over 52,000 comments on its initial proposal .

its original effective date of february 26 , 2001 was subsequently changed to april 14 , 2001 .

enforcement of the rule begins in april 2003 , except for small health plans ( annual receipts of $5 million or less ) who have until 2004 to comply .

the medical privacy rule prohibits covered entities from disclosing protected health information to any third parties , unless the rules otherwise permit the disclosure .

applicability .

the rule covers health plans , health care providers , and health care clearinghouses ( entities that process or facilitate the processing of nonstandard data elements of health information into standard data elements ) .

it only covers information that is electronically transmitted or maintained .

it covers protected health information in any form , whether oral , written or electronic .

individual rights .

individuals are given a right of access to their health information , a right to receive notice of the covered entity's privacy policies , a right to request amendments of their information , a right to an accounting of the disclosures made , and a right to file complaints regarding use or disclosure of their information .

individuals may request that restrictions be placed on the disclosure of their health information .

permitted uses and disclosures with consent or authorization .

the use of protected health information for treatment , payment , or health care operations ( a provider's or health plan's management and other activities necessary for support of treatment or payment ) requires the prior written consent of a patient .

disclosures for purposes other than treatment , payment , and health care operations require a prior written authorization .

permitted uses and disclosures without consent or authorization .

certain public priority uses and disclosures of information do not require prior written consent or authorization ( such as health system oversight , public health activities , certain research activities , law enforcement , judicial and administrative proceedings , emergency treatment , and imminent threats to the health or safety of any person ) .

covered entities are permitted to disclose information to law enforcement for purposes of health care oversight ( i.e. , investigations of health care fraud , government program fraud , and civil rights investigations ) , for general law enforcement investigations ( i.e. , in response to grand jury subpoenas and court orders ) , to avert a serious threat to health and safety , to coroners and medical examiners , for investigations involving abuse , neglect , or domestic violence .

information practices .

disclosures of protected health information other than for treatment purposes must use only the "minimum necessary" information .

covered entities must enter into contracts with "business associates" requiring them to protect individual health information , and must take action if they know of practices by their business associates that violate the contractual agreement .

covered entities must adhere to specific procedures in using information for fundraising or marketing .

there are special requirements that apply to both federal and privately funded research .

psychotherapy notes may not be used or disclosed to others without explicit authorization .

preemption .

state law , except for certain specified laws ( concerning public health surveillance ) and state laws that are more stringent , is preempted by the federal rule .

enforcement .

the secretary , covered entities , and others are required to ascertain compliance with , and enforcement of the privacy regulation .

any person may file a complaint with the hhs office for civil rights .

in cases of noncompliance , the secretary is directed to resolve the matter by informal means .

if the matter cannot be resolved informally , the secretary may issue written findings of non - compliance that may be used as a basis for initiating action ( civil monetary penalties ) or a criminal referral .

penalties .

violators will be subject to civil monetary penalties ( $100 per violation up to $25,000 per year ) , and criminal penalties ( up to $250,000 and imprisonment up to 10 years ) against covered entities that knowingly and improperly disclose identifiable health information .

the regulation does not authorize patients to sue .

instead , the law provides that individuals must direct their complaints to hhs' office for civil rights ( ocr ) .

ocr maintains a web site with information on the new regulation , including guidance at http: / / www.hhs.gov / ocr / hipaa / .

hhs also recently issued a 20 page "summary of the hipaa privacy rule. .

hhs will enforce the civil money penalties , and the department of justice will enforce the criminal penalties .

the final privacy rule was criticized by some for its complexity , and for the imposition of substantial administrative and financial burdens on the health care industry .

at the same time , the regulation was applauded by privacy advocates , consumer groups , and some health care industry participants .

the general accounting office found that considerable uncertainty existed regarding the actions needed to comply with the new privacy regulations .

major concerns among stakeholder groups and the congress centered on consent and authorization procedures ; contractual liability and business associates ; parental access to minors' health information ( typically related to substance abuse , mental health treatment , and reproductive care ) ; preemption of state laws ; law enforcement access to protected health information ; costs ; and technical assistance .

the bush administration and hhs re - opened the privacy rule to additional comment on february 8 , 2001 , and announced that it would accept further comments on the rule until march 30 , 2001 , see 66 fed .

reg .

12378 .

the scope and cost of the rule , coupled with the substantial nature of some concerns raised in the initial comment period , led hhs to conclude that an additional comment period was warranted .

on april 12 , 2001 , secretary thompson announced that hhs would immediately begin the process of implementing the patient privacy rule , of issuing guidelines , and of considering any necessary modifications .

several areas were targeted for clarification or modification: impediments to information sharing ; consent and authorization procedures ; parental access to minors' health information ; uses and disclosures for treatment , payment , and health care operations ; notices of privacy practices ; minimum necessary uses and disclosures ; oral communications ; business associates ; uses and disclosures for marketing ; parents as the personal representatives of unemancipated minors ; uses and disclosures for research purposes ; uses and disclosures for which authorizations are required ; and de - identification .

on july 6 , 2001 hhs issued interpretative guidance materials on the rule .

in response to numerous and extensive comments received by hhs , along with intense lobbying efforts by various stakeholders , in march 2002 the bush administration issued proposed modifications to the privacy rule in the federal register at 67 fed .

reg .

14775 , and permitted a 30-day comment period on its proposal .

on august 14 , 2002 , hhs published in the federal register the privacy rule with certain modifications , 67 fed .

reg .

53181 .

the august 2002 modification is virtually unchanged from the march 2002 proposal , does not require congressional approval , and has the force of law .

a summary of significant final modifications follows .

for detailed discussion of medical privacy issues , see crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questions and answers on the hipaa rule .

notice .

the august 2002 rule adds a new requirement for health care providers with a direct treatment relationship , that they make a good faith effort to obtain an individual's written acknowledgment of receipt of the provider's privacy notice .

consent and authorization .

the requirement for providers to obtain an individual's prior written consent to use or disclose protected health information for treatment , payment or health care operations was eliminated .

the august 2002 rule permits covered entities to obtain consent , but does not require it .

although patient authorizations will still be required to use and disclose information for purposes outside of treatment , payment , and health care operations , the august 2002 rule standardizes the core requirements in authorization forms , and allows health care groups to use a single type of authorization to get permission to use information for a specific purpose or disclosure .

minimum necessary .

the august 2002 rule exempts from the minimum necessary standards any uses or disclosures for which an authorization has been received .

incidental use and disclosure .

the august 2002 rule explicitly permits incidental disclosures resulting from activities such as discussions at nursing stations , the use of sign - in sheets , calling out names in waiting rooms , etc .

provided reasonable safeguards and minimum necessary requirements are met .

business associates .

the august 2002 rule allows covered entities , except small health plans , up to one year beyond the april 14 , 2003 enforcement date to change existing contracts with business associates .

marketing .

the august 2002 rule requires covered entities to obtain prior patient authorization for marketing , except for a face - to - face communication or a communication involving a promotional gift of nominal value .

the rule distinguishes between activities that are and are not marketing .

the definition of "marketing" in the new rules excludes communications by a health care provider promoting its own goods and services .

medical information of minors .

the december 2000 privacy rule generally gives control of health information about a minor to the parent , guardian , or person acting in loco parentis .

the august 2002 rule clarifies that state law governs in the area of parents and minors , and that hipaa does not overturn state laws that give providers discretion to disclose or deny health information to parents .

research .

the december 2000 privacy rule provides that protected health information may not be used or disclosed for research without either a written authorization or a waiver of authorization approved by an institutional review board or a privacy board .

in the august 2002 rule , hhs significantly simplified the administrative burdens for obtaining authorizations and assessing requests for waivers of authorization .

disclosures to obtain payment .

the december 2000 rule prevents a provider from disclosing protected health information to another entity for other than treatment purposes .

a covered entity is permitted to disclose protected health information to other covered entities and to noncovered health care providers to enable for payment purposes .

s. 16 , the equal rights and equal dignity for americans act , would , among other things , reverse august 2002 modifications to the privacy rule ( section 903 ) .

