 figure 1 and table 1 show bankruptcy filings since 1980. business filings peaked in 1987 , but the number of consumer filings continued to grow through 2005 .

in that year , the number of filings surpassed 2 million — there was a "rush to the courthouse" before the bankruptcy abuse prevention and consumer protection act of 2005 ( bapcpa ; p.l .

109-8 ) took effect in october 2005 .

in 2006 , filings dropped sharply , suggesting that the new law caused many to accelerate their filings , and that many petitions that would have been filed in 2006 ( or later ) were pushed forward by bankruptcy reform .

whether bapcpa will reduce filings in the long run is still unclear .

filings rose steadily from the 2006 lows until 2010 , when they exceeded 1.5 million , which was approximately the level during the four years before bapcpa .

over the first three quarters of 2011 , there was a slight decline from the year - earlier numbers .

 table 2 shows figures on household debt .

the major categories of household debt are mortgage debt and consumer credit , which together comprise about 97% of all household indebtedness .

consumer credit consists of ( 1 ) revolving credit , or credit card debt , and ( 2 ) non - revolving debt , which is dominated by auto and college loans ( though it also includes loans for boats , mobile homes , vacations , and so on ) .

mortgage debt is borrowing secured by real estate .

a subcategory within mortgage debt , home equity lending , is broken out in the table because it may substitute for consumer credit in many cases .

table 2 also includes federal reserve estimates of the burden of debt service — that is , the percentage of household disposable income that goes to repay loans .

over the past decade , this measure rose steadily ( but not dramatically ) , until the recession and financial crisis that began in 2007 .

the debt burden figures in table 2 fluctuate within a fairly narrow range: from 10.80% to 13.93% .

 ( during the 1980s , the range was similar: from 10.6% to 12.5%. ) .

although the burden of debt has risen since the 1980s , the increase has been gradual and would not appear to explain much of the fivefold increase in personal bankruptcy filings over the past two decades .

moreover , the decline in the debt service ration since 2007 has not been accompanied by a significant reduction in bankruptcy rates .

interest rates paid by consumers — particularly mortgage rates — declined in recent years to the lowest levels since the 1950s , and they remain low .

the relative stability of the debt burden in the face of falling and historically low interest rates implies that the ratio of debt outstanding to income has been rising .

this ratio — the sum of consumer and mortgage debt expressed as a percentage of disposable personal income — is shown in the far right column of table 2 .

the increases in this figure , which between 1990 and 2007 rose more than twice as fast as the debt burden , suggest that further increases in bankruptcy filings ( and perhaps problems for lenders ) may lie ahead if interest rates should rise suddenly or unexpectedly .

since 1980 , however , declining interest rates have permitted households to take on more debt without a comparable increase in the interest payments required to service that debt .

the aggregate household debt numbers mask important differences among families: some have done very well in the long booms of the 1980s and 1990s , while others have taken on debt that they have difficulty repaying .

table 3 below , based on the federal reserve's survey of consumer finances , shows the percentages of families at various income levels that devote more than 40% of their income to debt service , for selected years from 1995 through 2007 .

two noteworthy facts emerge from the data in table 3 .

the first is the high rate of distress among lower - income families , who are the most likely to file for bankruptcy .

second , like the debt burden figures shown in table 2 , there is no sharply rising trend that would explain the dramatic increase in personal bankruptcy filings .

the percentage of all families in distress in 2007 was little changed from the 1998 level .

the 2007 figures do show a notable increase among families in the upper income percentiles ; this may be attributable to increased mortgage debt taken on during the housing boom that ended in that year .

the question remains why so many families at or below the national median income take on high levels of debt and end up in bankruptcy court .

some explanations focus on particularly vulnerable populations: the sick and uninsured ( or underinsured ) , the divorced , or residents of states without mandatory uninsured motorist coverage .

supporters of the bankruptcy reform measure finally enacted in 2005 argued that the bankruptcy code was too debtor - friendly and created an incentive to borrow beyond the ability to repay , or in some cases without the intention of repaying .

opponents of reform claimed that financial distress is often a by - product of the marketing strategies of credit card issuers and other consumer lenders .

lack of a consensus explanation for the rise in consumer bankruptcy filings suggests that the issue will remain controversial .

in december 2007 , the u.s. economy went into recession , in the midst of global financial panic .

household debt levels began to fall in three of the four categories shown in table 2 .

the decline in debt balances continued for 11 calendar quarters , until debt outstanding rose slightly in the second quarter of 2011 .

in the third quarter , debt levels fell again .

on a percentage basis , home equity and credit card debt led the decline , as shown in table 4 .

in dollar terms , however , mortgage debt ( other than home equity loans ) accounted for most of the drop .

several factors appear to have contributed to the fall in debt balances .

some households may be paying down their debt , others may be borrowing less , and the amount of debt written off by lenders as uncollectible has increased .

some lenders have tightened their credit standards for new loans .

mortgage balances have fallen because of mortgage modifications or other negotiations that reduce principal outstanding , and because foreclosed homes are often sold for less than the amount of the old mortgage .

causes and implications of deleveraging are discussed in crs report r41623 , u.s. household debt reduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

