rs21237 - - indian and pakistani nuclear weapons updated february 17 , 200 .

almost 50 years of nuclear ambiguity were swept away by the may 1998 nuclear tests of india and pakistan .

optimists hoped that overt nuclear weapons capabilities could help providemore conventional stability and that limited nuclear arsenals might dampen competition in missile development .

 ( 1 ) the 1999 conflict in kargil and 2002 crisis in kashmirchallengedthis viewpoint .

 ( 2 ) south asia remains a nuclearflashpoint , and , potentially , a source for terrorists of access to weapons of mass destruction .

india began its nuclear program shortly after independence in 1947 .

after a humiliating defeat in a border war with china in 1962 , followed by china's first nuclear test in 1964 , thedrive for nuclear weapons intensified .

the 1974 test of a "peaceful nuclear device" was an important milestone,but it took several more years to develop a nuclear weapons capability .

simultaneously , india developed a nuclear infrastructure that supported both civilian and military purposes .

forexample , india's development of reprocessing capabilities supportedboth its use of mixed oxide fuel ( plutonium and uranium ) for its nuclear power plants and its plutonium - basedweapons .

the size of india's nuclear stockpile has been a topic of considerable debate within scientific and defense communities .

 ( 3 ) estimates vary from a few to 100,but several converge onaround 30-35 weapons , probably stored in component form .

the u.s. department of defense believes that indiais capable of manufacturing complete sets of components forplutonium - based weapons and has a small stockpile of such components .

india "probably can deploy a few nuclearweapons within a few days to a week...and can deliver these weaponswith fighter aircraft. .

 ( 4 ) most agree that india isexpanding its stockpile , and that if india uses unsafeguarded reactor - grade plutonium , the potential to expand itsstockpile is verysignificant .

india's delivery capability has long reflected two very different contingencies - - china and pakistan .

because of the distances involved and india's lack of long - range bombers,capability against china inevitably required ballistic missiles .

against pakistan , however , indian officialsrecognized early on that aircraft would be more valuable , particularly in aretaliatory strike ; the indian air force is significantly more sophisticated and capable than pakistan's .

 ( 5 ) india has some 35 mirage 2000 fighters that arenuclear - capable , although otheraircraft could also be used .

ballistic missiles add considerable instability into the security equation because they are high priority targets ; the pressure to use them quickly and , for the other side , to strike thempreemptively , is great .

indian officials have said short - range prithvi ballistic missiles ( 150km and250km ranges ) are conventionally armed .

while nuclear - capable and able to reachalmost all of pakistan , the use of nuclear - armed prithvi s could pose major risks of fallout to india .

 ( 6 ) india has deployed agni - ii missiles witha 1500 km range and tested an 800 kmrange version of the agni earlier this year .

these solid - fueled missiles , which reportedly can belaunched within minutes , considerably enhance india's ability to respond rapidly in acrisis situation .

in january 2003 , the ministry of external affairs released to the public a short document on india's nuclear doctrine .

the doctrine reiterated some of the points in the 1999 draftdocument on nuclear doctrine produced by the national security advisory board .

and refined others .

in summary,the document committed india to a credible minimum deterrent,defined as: 1. a posture of "no first use" and no use against non - nuclear weapon states , with the exception of theright to retaliate with nuclear weapons against a "major attack againstindia , or indian forces anywhere , by biological or chemical weapons ; " 2 .

civil control in the form of the primeminister as head of the nuclear command authority ; 3 .

nuclearretaliation against a first strike as massive and designed to inflict unacceptable damage .

 ( 7 ) the document described the nuclear command authority as being composedof a politicalcouncil ( chaired by the prime minister and authorize the use of nuclear weapons ) and an executive council ( chairedby the national security advisor ) .

pakistan's nuclear program dates back to the 1950s , but it was the humiliating loss of east pakistan ( now bangladesh ) that reportedly triggered a political decision in january 1972 ( justone month later ) to begin a crash nuclear weapons program .

unlike india , pakistan focused on the uranium routeto weapons .

pakistan sought technology from many sources , includingchina and north korea .

 ( 8 ) this extensive assistanceis reported to have included , among other things , uranium enrichment technology from europe , blueprints for asmall nuclearweapon from china and missile technology from china .

most observers estimate that pakistan has enough nuclear material ( highly enriched uranium and a small amount of plutonium ) for 30 to 50 nuclear weapons .

 ( 9 ) likeindia , pakistan isthought to have "a small stockpile of nuclear weapons components and can probably assemble some weapons fairlyquickly. .

 ( 10 ) pakistan could deliver its nuclear weapons using f - 16s it purchased from the united states ( 28 f - 16 and 12 trainer aircraft ; 8 are no longer in service ) , provided the appropriate "wiring"has been added to make them nuclear - capable .

in the 1980s , pakistan moved assiduously to acquire ballistic missilecapabilities and now deploys short - range ballistic missiles and asmall number of medium - range missiles .

aq khan , former head of khan research laboratories , maintained thatonly the medium - range ghauri missiles would be usable in a nuclearexchange ( given fall - out effects for pakistan of shorter - range missiles ) .

other observers view the 30 to 50 hatf2 short - range ( 300km ) missiles ( modified chinese m - 11s ) as potentialdelivery vehicles for nuclear weapons .

ghauri missiles ( 1350 and 2300km ) , which reportedly are basedon the north korean no - dong and taepo - dong - 1 , are capable of reaching newdelhi with large payloads .

 ( 11 ) pakistan has not yet enunciated a nuclear doctrine , but it is clear that pakistan's nuclear arsenal is seen as the key to military parity with india .

because of its fears of being overrun bylarger indian forces , pakistan has rejected the doctrine of no - first - use .

in may 2002 , pakistan's ambassador to theun , munir akram , stated that "we have not said we will use nuclearweapons .

we have not said we will not use nuclear weapons .

we possess nuclear weapons .

so does india ...wewill not neutralize the deterrence by any doctrine of no first use. .

 ( 12 ) on june 4 , 2002 , president musharraf went further: "the possession of nuclear weapons by any state obviouslyimplies they will be used under some circumstances. .

 ( 13 ) in recent years , pakistan apparently has taken steps toward refining command and control of nuclear weapons .

in april 1999 , general musharraf announced that the joint staffheadquarters would have a command and control arrangement and a secretariat , and a strategic force commandwould be established .

 ( 14 ) the connection to civilianleadership wasunclear , given a recent account of the 1999 kargil incursion which suggested that prime minister sharif wasunaware that his own nuclear missile forces were being prepared foraction .

 ( 15 ) pakistan established a nationalcommand authority ( nca ) in february 2000 , but little is publicly known about it .

pakistani officials haverepeatedly said that their nuclearcapabilities are safe .

the new nca is believed to be responsible for nuclear doctrine , as well as nuclear researchand development , wartime command and control , and advice topresident musharraf about the development and employment of nuclear weapons .

 ( 16 ) .

kashmir has been a flashpoint since indian and pakistani independence in 1947 .

many analysts have feared that nuclear weapons could be used if conventional hostilities over kashmirwere to spiral out of control , especially if , as in 1965 indo - pakistan conflict , india opened a new front on the punjabplains to break a stalemate in pakistan or attempt to settle the issuedecisively by confronting pakistan with a mortal threat to its territorial integrity .

 ( 17 ) under these circumstances , some have suggested pakistan might be temptedto detonate a smallnuclear weapon on its own territory to halt forward indian movement .

other observers , however , believe such astrategy would be akin to a state acting as a suicide bomber .

 ( 18 ) somemedia reports have suggested that paradoxically , "the fact that both countries have very small nuclear arsenalsincreases the pressure on both sides to use their weapons againsthigh - value targets. .

 ( 19 ) regardless of whethernuclear weapons might be used to stop war or to gain a military advantage , many observers agree that uncertaintyabout intentions couldworsen stability .

since 1998 , both india and pakistan appear to be integrating nuclear weapons into security strategy and planning .

with the ominous logic of nuclear deterrence , each side's desire tomake its nuclear forces more credible may make those nuclear forces more usable .

ballistic missiles offer both sidesadvantages over using aircraft as delivery vehicles , but the shortranges create a hair - trigger situation .

from launch to impact , missile flight times may be as short as 5 minutes .

inthe past , both sides appeared to use the separation of warheadcomponents as a form of command and control ( in the sense of lowering the risk of unauthorized or accidental use ) .

some observers have noted that this approach becomes risky whenthe other side can launch short - range ballistic missiles against which there is no defense .

these observers havecalled for improving command and control of nuclear forces , whilenoting , ironically , that reduced ambiguity could conversely increase the likelihood of war .

 ( 20 ) the defense intelligence agency reportedly has estimated that a nuclear exchange could kill between 9 and 12 million persons on both sides , with 2 to 6 million injured .

theseestimates are likely predicated on nuclear exchanges aimed at cities ; eg , indian defense secretary yogendra narainsuggested in 2002 that "india would retaliate against pakistaniaggression and that both sides should be prepared for mutual destruction. .

president musharraf's interview in june2002 with cnn offered respite from the nuclear rhetoric when hestated , "i don't think either side is that irresponsible to go to that limit [i.e. , nuclear conflict] .

... one shouldn't evenbe discussing these things , because any sane individual cannot eventhink of going into this unconventional mode , whatever the pressures. .

 ( 21 ) .

india and pakistan have a 30-year history of confidence - building measures .

these include hotlines between army commanders and prime ministers , a joint india - pakistan militarycommission ( created in 1990 ) , and agreements to provide prior notification of troop movements and ballistic missiletests .

in 1991 , both sides agreed not to attack nuclear facilities .

 ( 22 ) implementation , however , has been sporadic .

 ( 23 ) in february 1999 , the two parties concluded the lahore agreement .

that agreement envisioned a plan for futurework , to includemeasures to reduce the risk of unauthorized or accidental use of nuclear weapons , reviews of confidence - buildingmeasures and communications links , prior notification of ballisticmissile tests , continuation of unilateral moratoria on nuclear testing , and dialogue on nuclear and security issues .

the lahore process was undermined by the summer 2001 militaryincursion by pakistan in the vicinity of kargil , but the two sides began a dialogue in 2004 .

in september 2004 , indiaand pakistan announced 13 confidence - building measures .

threesecurity - related ones included: experts' meetings on conventional and nuclear cbms , including discussions on a draft agreement on advance notification of missile tests ; biannual meeting between indian border security force ( bsf ) and pakistan rangers ; implementation of the agreement reached between the defense secretaries in their talks in august todiscuss "modalities for disengagement and redeployment" onthe siachen glacier .

 ( 24 ) foreign secretaries reported progress in their discussions on missile notifications in december 2004 .

 ( 25 ) .

since the passage of the 1978 nuclear nonproliferation act , congress has been closely involved in efforts to prevent or slow the development of nuclear arsenals by india and pakistan .

in the light of the global war on terrorism , and limited pakistani cooperation in nonproliferation , congress mightconsider the following questions: what sources of leverage does the u.s. now have toward india and pakistan ? .

are new sources of leverage vis - a - vis indian and pakistani proliferation needed ? .

should new leveragebe focused on averting nuclear use rather than on limitingnuclear proliferation ? .

should india and pakistan be priority recipients of cooperative threat reduction assistance ? .

whatoptions exist in this regard that do not undermine u.s. obligationsas a party to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ? .

how effective are economic or other sanctions , and which might work best ? .

