rs21539 - - vacancies and special elections: 108th congress updated january 12 , 200 .

vacancies in congress occur when a senator or representative dies , resigns , declines to serve , or is expelled orexcluded by either house .

the constitution requires that vacancies in both houses be filled by special election ; butinthe case of the senate , it empowers the state legislatures to provide for temporary appointments to the senate by thegovernor until special elections can be scheduled .

 ( 1 ) senate .

prevailing practice for senate vacancies is for state governors to fill them by appointment , with the appointee serving until a special election can be held .

the winnerofthe special election then serves for the balance of the term .

in the event that the seat becomes vacant between thetimeof a statewide election and the expiration of the term , the appointee usually serves the remainder of the term .

oregonand wisconsin are the only states that do not provide for gubernatorial appointments ; their senate vacancies canonlybe filled by election .

house of representatives .

all house vacancies are filled by special election .

scheduling for special elections is largely dependent upon the amount of time remaining beforethenext regular elections for the house .

when a vacancy occurs during the first session of congress , a special electionisalways scheduled for the earliest possible time , preferably to coincide with elections regularly scheduled for otherpurposes in the district .

if , however , a seat becomes vacant within six months of the end of a congress , some states hold a special election forthe balance of the congressional term on the same day as the regular election .

winners of special elections in thesecases are sometimes not sworn in immediately as members of the house , congress having often adjourned sine die before election day .

they are , however , accorded the status of incumbent representatives for the purposes ofseniority , office selection , and staffing .

other states do not provide for a special election in these circumstances,andthe seat remains vacant for the balance of that particular congress .

for additional information , see crs report 97-1009 ( pdf ) , house and senate vacancies: how are they filled ? .

by sula p.richardson and [author name scrubbed] .

table 1 .

special elections in the u.s. house of representatives: 108th congress ( 2003-2004 ) a in california , rep. robert t. matsui died on jan. 1 , 2005 , three days before the convening of the 109th congress , towhich he had been reelected .

a special primary election to fill the vacancy will be held on mar .

8 , 2005 .

the namesof all candidates , regardless of party affiliation , will appear on the march ballot .

if no candidate receives a majorityofvotes , the top vote - getters from each party will advance to a special runoff election on may 3 , 2005. b three days before the 108th congress convened on january 7 , 2003 , a special election was held to fill the vacancycaused during the 107th congress by the death of rep .

patsy mink , who had been re - elected posthumously to the 108thcongress .

 ( rep .

patsy mink died two days after the deadline for replacing her name on the ballot for re - electionto the108th congress. ) .

on january 4 , 2003 , ed case defeated 43 other candidates in a special election tofill that vacancy .

the other candidates in the open special election were: kabba anand ( n ) , whitney t. anderson , paul britos ( d ) ,john s. ( mahina ) carroll ( r ) , brian g. cole ( d ) , charles ( lucky ) collins ( d ) , doug fairhurst ( r ) , frank f. fasi ( r ) ,michael gagne ( d ) , alan gano ( n ) , carolyn martinez golojuch ( r ) , g. goodwin ( g ) , richard h. haake ( r ) , chrishalford ( r ) , colleen hanabusa ( d ) , s. j. harlan ( n ) , herbert jensen ( d ) , kekoa d. kaapu ( d ) , moanakeaulana - dyball ( n ) , kimo kaloi ( r ) , jeff mallan ( l ) , barbara c. marumoto ( r ) , sophie mataafa ( n ) , mattmatsunaga ( d ) , bob mcdermott ( r ) , mark mcnett ( n ) , nick nikhilananda ( g ) , richard ( rich ) payne ( r ) , john ( jack ) randall ( n ) , jim rath ( r ) , mike rethman ( n ) , art p. reyes ( d ) , pat rocco ( d ) , bartle lee rowland ( n ) ,billrussell ( n ) , john l. sabey ( r ) , nelson j. secretario ( r ) , steve sparks ( n ) , steve tataii ( d ) , marshall ( koo koo ) turner ( n ) , dan vierra ( n ) , clarence h. weatherwax ( r ) , and solomon ( kolomona ) wong ( n ) .

prior to winningthejanuary 4 , 2003 special election , mr. case had also won the special election that had been held on november 30,2002 , to fill the remainder of rep. mink's term for the 107th congress .

he was not sworn in,however , as the 107thcongress was not in session .

 ( for further information on the 107th congress vacancy and specialelection see crs report rs20814 ( pdf ) , vacancies and special elections: 107th congress . ) .

c in kentucky , rep. ernie fletcher resigned from the house on december 9 , 2003 , and was sworn in as governor ofkentucky .

a special election to fill the vacancy caused by rep. fletcher's resignation was held on february 17,2004,at which time the house was in recess until feb. 24 , 2004 .

representative albert benjamin "ben" chandler wassworn in on feb. 24 , 2004. d in nebraska , no special election was held to fill the seat vacated by rep. doug bereuter , who resigned from thehouse on aug. 31 , 2004 .

the vacancy continued throughout the remainder of the 108th congress .

e in north carolina , a special election to fill the vacancy in the 1st congressional district was held on july 20 , 2004 , tocoincide with the state's primary elections .

f in south dakota , a special election to fill the vacancy in the at - large district was held on june 1 , 2004 , to coincidewith the state's primary elections .

g in texas for the special election , which was held on may 3 , 2003 , the names of 17 candidates ( regardless of party ) appeared on a single ballot and the voters could choose any of these candidates: richard bartlett ( r ) , john d. bell ( r ) , jamie berryhill ( r ) william m. ( bill ) christian ( r ) , mike conaway ( r ) , thomas flournoy ( c ) , kaye gaddy ( d ) ,e.l. "ed" hicks ( i ) , carl h. isett ( r ) , david r. langston ( d ) , donald may ( r ) , randy neugebauer ( r ) , juliapenelope ( g ) , richard ( chip ) peterson ( l ) , jerri simmons - asmussen ( d ) , vickie sutton ( r ) , and stace williams ( r ) .

a candidate who received a majority of the votes would have been elected to the office .

because no candidatereceived a majority of the votes , a special runoff election was held on june 3 , 2003 , and the names of the two topvotegetters were on that ballot .

key to abbreviations for party affiliation c constitution d democratic g green i independent l libertarian n nonpartisan r republica .

