in january 2004 , the washington post reported that the dc water and sewer authority ( wasa ) had found elevated lead levels in the drinking water of more than 4,000 homes in washington , dc , during testing done in 2003 .

subsequently , water suppliers , local officials , and regulators have undertaken numerous actions intended to respond to citizens' concerns ; to abate further exposures to lead from tap water ; to identify the cause of the problem ; and , ultimately , to reduce the occurrence of lead in dc's water and assess whether similar problems are occurring in other cities .

the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) directs epa to promulgate national primary drinking water regulations for contaminants that may pose public health risks and that are likely to be present in public water supplies .

these regulations generally include an enforceable numerical standard ( maximum contaminant level ( mcl ) ) to limit the amount of a contaminant that may be present in drinking water .

if it is not economically and technically feasible to determine the level of a contaminant , epa may establish a treatment technique in lieu of an mcl ( §1412 ( b ) ( 7 ) ( a ) ) .

at least once every six years , epa must review , and revise as needed , each drinking water regulation ( §1412 ( b ) ( 9 ) ) .

the 1986 sdwa amendments directed epa to issue a new lead regulation , and in 1991 , epa issued the lead and copper rule ( 56 fr 26460 , june 7 , 1991 ) .

this rule replaced an interim lead standard of 50 parts per billion ( ppb ) , which was outdated and not protective of public health .

moreover , the interim regulation did not require sampling at the tap to show compliance with the standard .

in 1988 , epa had proposed a lead rule that would have lowered the mcl for lead to 5 ppb ( applied to water leaving the plant ) and also would have required a treatment technique ( corrosion control ) to further reduce lead in water .

many expressed concern with the proposed rule , arguing that a standard applicable at the treatment plant would not indicate the amount of lead in tap water , and that compliance at the tap was essential .

epa and utilities were concerned that an mcl applied at the tap was not workable , because lead in household plumbing could be a major cause of violations — a situation beyond the control of the water system .

some utilities also were concerned that setting an mcl for source water in addition to a treatment technique for corrosion control would result in confusion among the public and the regulated community ( 56 fr 26472 ) .

the final 1991 lead and copper rule ( lcr ) did not include an enforceable standard ( mcl ) .

instead , the lcr established a treatment technique ( corrosion control ) to prevent lead and copper from leaching into drinking water .

other requirements include tap water monitoring , public education , source water treatment , and lead service line replacement .

some members of congress and environmental groups argued that , because lead is measurable , the law required epa to establish an mcl rather than a treatment technique .

however , epa concluded that an mcl at the tap was not feasible because lead levels are often influenced by factors beyond the control of the water utility .

the rule generally required all large water systems ( serving more than 50,000 people ) to conduct corrosion control studies and recommend an optimal corrosion control treatment to the state or epa .

smaller systems were required to optimize corrosion control when tap water monitoring showed that it was necessary .

the state or epa then approved or designated a treatment as optimal , and water systems were given two years to install optimal corrosion control and one year to conduct further monitoring .

the lead rule also established a lead "action level" of 15 ppb at the tap , based on the 90 th percentile level of water samples .

water systems are required to sample tap water in locations that are at high risk of lead contamination ( primarily homes with lead pipes and / or lead service lines ) .

the number of samples a water system must take depends on the system's size and the results of earlier testing .

large systems generally must take 100 samples in a six - month monitoring period .

however , systems that meet the action level or maintain optimal corrosion control treatment for two consecutive six - month periods may reduce the number of sampling sites ( to 50 sites for systems serving more than100,000 people ) and reduce collection frequency to once a year .

monitoring may be reduced to once every three years if the 90 th percentile lead levels are 5 ppb or lower .

if lead concentrations exceed the action level in more than 10% of samples , the water system has 60 days to deliver an epa - developed public education program to customers .

the education program must contain information about lead's health effects and sources , and explains steps to take to reduce exposure to lead .

the water system also must offer to sample the tap water of any customer who requests it .

 ( the system is not required to pay for sample collection or analysis. ) .

if a water system still exceeds the action level after installing optimal corrosion control treatment and source water treatment , it must replace annually 7% of the lead service lines under its ownership .

the water system must offer to replace the privately owned portion of a service line ( at the owner's expense ) .

the safe drinking water act allows epa to delegate primary enforcement authority ( primacy ) for the public water system supervision ( pwss ) program to states .

states that have primacy oversee water systems and their compliance with federal drinking water regulations .

if primacy is not delegated to a state , epa is responsible for implementing the program .

 ( all states except wyoming have primacy for the pwss program. ) .

epa region 3 directly implements the program for the district of columbia .

the water systems for the district of columbia that are overseen by epa region 3 are the washington aqueduct ( owned by the u.s. army corps of engineers ) , which treats the city's drinking water , and the dc water and sewer authority ( wasa ) , which buys water from the washington aqueduct and distributes it throughout washington , dc .

the aqueduct also provides water to several communities in northern virginia .

in march 2004 , epa reported that wasa exceeded the action level at the 90 th percentile for taps monitored during 6 out of 15 reporting periods since january 1992 ( three times before 1994 and three times since 2002 ) .

epa , wasa , and other local officials worked with the corps of engineers to determine the cause of the elevated levels .

it appears that changes in treatment processes at the washington aqueduct made the water more corrosive , causing more lead to leach from lead pipes in the distribution system and from lead plumbing inside homes .

in november 2000 , the corps had changed its secondary disinfection treatment from free chlorine to chloramines to comply with a new epa regulation that placed strict limits on disinfection byproducts .

after that , more than 10% of tap water samples taken by wasa exceeded the action level .

as a result of this finding , the corps of engineers worked with a technical work group to develop a new corrosion control process .

in june , the corps tested a process that uses orthophosphate , and found no negative effects .

this commonly used compound is expected to form a protective coating in pipes and reduce lead leaching .

in august , epa approved use of the process for the entire aqueduct service area and imposed supplemental monitoring and reporting requirements on the affected public water systems .

epa determined that wasa had failed to comply with numerous sampling , public notification , and reporting requirements contained in the lead rule .

epa and wasa reached a consent agreement requiring wasa to improve its public education program , upgrade its database management systems , and replace more than 1,600 lead service lines .

in response to high lead levels in washington , dc tap water , the dc department of health ( doh ) and the u.s. public health service offered blood testing for residents .

through may 2004 , 5,331 individuals had been screened .

of that total , 1,954 individuals were from their target population ( children under the age of six , and pregnant and nursing women ) .

within that population , 40 children ( 2.2% ) had elevated lead levels ( i.e. , 10 μg / dl or higher ) ; 26 lived in homes without lead service lines .

all except one of the homes of the children with elevated blood lead levels were found to have dust and / or soil lead levels that exceed federal guidelines .

also , a recent cdc analysis of blood lead levels among dc residents found an overall decline in blood lead levels since 1998 .

none of the 201 persons tested who live in homes with the highest levels of lead in drinking water ( i.e. , above 300 ppb ) had blood lead levels above cdc's levels of concern .

the detection of high lead levels in washington , dc , tap water , and the failure of officials to effectively notify the public of the detections , renewed congressional interest in examining the adequacy of the lead rule , including its monitoring and public notification requirements and overall enforcement of , and compliance with , the lead rule .

during the 108 th congress , the house energy and commerce and government reform committees and the senate environment and public works committee held hearings on this issue , and bills were introduced to strengthen the regulation of lead in drinking water .

in march 2004 , members of the house government reform committee requested that the epa administrator review the lead rule .

the committee members and others argued that regulatory gaps appear to be undermining the rule's effectiveness in protecting public health .

issues that were raised include the following: ( 1 ) monitoring under the lcr may not be broad or frequent enough to indicate the level of lead exposure in a community ; ( 2 ) allowing 10% of samples to exceed the action level without requiring systems to take steps to reduce lead levels allows known exposures to continue ; ( 3 ) the rule does not require systems to notify homeowners of monitoring results ; ( 4 ) systems are given 15 years to replace lead service lines , and once the action level is met in 90% of samples , the system may discontinue this effort ; and ( 5 ) unlike an mcl , the action level is not enforceable ( exceedances of the action level trigger other regulatory requirements ) .

critics expressed concern that this regulatory structure may have delayed the response to high lead levels in washington , dc , and could allow significant lead problems to go undetected or unaddressed in cities nationwide .

epa is conducting a thorough review of the lead rule to determine how well it has worked , whether it is being effectively implemented and enforced , and whether it needs revision .

elements of the rule receiving most scrutiny include the public notification , monitoring , and lead service line replacement requirements .

in october 2004 , the agency announced that the national data from 73,000 water utilities demonstrated that lead in drinking water is not a widespread problem .

however , epa did determine that systems needed more guidance for collecting samples and calculating the lead 90 th percentile to determine compliance with the rule .

in november , epa issued guidance to clarify requirements for lead sampling and calculating compliance .

as part of its effort to address compliance issues , epa has offered workshops to improve water system compliance , and issued new guidance to states to improve implementation and enforcement of the rule .

as with other drinking water regulations , an issue central to effective implementation of the lead rule is the need for cities to upgrade their water infrastructure .

s. 2550 , a water infrastructure funding bill reported in the 108 th congress , included provisions to address lead contamination .

similarly , consideration of this issue in the 109 th congress could occur in tandem with discussions of water infrastructure financing legislation .

 ( see also , crs issue brief ib10118 , safe drinking water act: implementation and issues . ) .

