rs21685 - - coup in georgia [republic]: recent developments and implications updated december 4 , 200 .

 ( 1 ) former president eduard shevardnadze had led georgia since 1972 , except for 1985-1992 , during which he primarily served as the pro - western foreignminister of the soviet union .

shevardnadze's constitutional limit of two terms in office expired in 2005 , whichmade the november 2 , 2003 , legislativeelection a critical bell - weather of who might succeed him .

nine party blocs and twelve parties contested 150legislative seats in a party list vote , and another 75seats were contested in single constituencies .

shevardnadze's party , the citizens' union of georgia ( cug ) , had become deeply unpopular as economic conditions failed to noticeably improve .

tostrengthen its chances in the election , in april 2003 the cug formed an alliance termed "for a new georgia" ( fng ) with other pro - shevardnadze parties .

three opposition parties that had split from the cug contested for seats: the national movement ( led by formerjustice minister mikhail saakashvili ) ; theunited democrats ( led by former speaker zurab zhvania and speaker nino burjanadze ) ; and the businessmen - lednew right party .

other major partiesincluded the revival party ( led by ajaria's regional leader aslan abashidze ) , and the populist labor party .

campaigning tended to focus on personal attacksrather than ideology or platforms .

saakashvili called for forcing shevardnadze to resign , raising pensions andwages , taxing the rich , and fighting corruption .

abashidze also criticized shevardnadze's policies , but some observers speculated that revival and fng had covertlyformed an alliance ( center for strategicand international studies , caucasus election watch , oct. 27 ) .

the pro - shevardnadze and oppositioncamps both appealed to nationalism by accusing eachother of selling out georgia's sovereignty to russia .

the observer mission of the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) reported on november 3 that the electoral processes appearedsomewhat more democratic than in the past , but still did not meet the standards of a free and fair election .

it mainlyfocused on problems with voters' lists , butalso mentioned ballot box - stuffing in ajaria and some districts .

it also raised concerns that pro - government partymembers dominated district and precinctelectoral commissions and that ajaria carried out its own electoral processes virtually independently and blockedmost opposition party campaigning in theregion .

ajaria's announcement on november 6 of its large vote for revival seemed to overwhelm and marginalize the partial vote counts being announced for theopposition parties , galvanizing their resistance to shevardnadze .

voter turnout in ajaria was reportedly 98% , ofwhom 95% endorsed the revival party .

these results meant that revival would be a major force in the legislature , which was unacceptable to those whofelt that ajaria's vote tally was a sham .

thedutch ambassador to the osce reportedly stated later that the "gross manipulation" of the vote in ajaria was theworst of the irregularities in the election ( ap ,nov. 26 ) .

opposition leaders broke off negotiations with shevardnadze on november 9 , after he refused theirdemand to hold a new election .

to displaysupposed mass support for the election results , the next day he traveled to ajaria to address an assembled crowdof ostensible supporters , and abashidze senthundreds of police and other supporters to tbilisi to march in support of the election .

final electoral results were announced on november 20 .

the fng bloc won the highest percentage of the party list vote , 21.3% , and revival the secondhighest , 18.8% , prospectively giving the pro - shevardnadze forces the largest share of seats .

the nationalmovement received 18.8% of the party list vote , thelabor party 12% , the united democrats 8.8% and the new right 7.8% of the vote .

in single constituencies,fng - affiliated or independent ( but probablypro - presidential ) candidates won the largest number of seats .

unlike the other opposition parties , new right didnot challenge the electoral returns and did notjoin opposition street protests .

the crisis deepened in georgia following the announcement of final vote counts , with major demonstrations in the capital by pro - presidential ajarian policeand opposition supporters prominently led by saakishvili , who demanded shevardnadze's resignation and newelections .

protestors were galvanized by pollsbefore and during the election ( conducted with the guidance of u.s. and british ngos ) that indicated that thenational movement and the united democratscould each expect over 20% of the vote .

georgians also were motivated by extensive coverage of the election bythe independent rustavi - 2 television station .

saakashvili eschewed violence , urging his followers to emulate the peaceful protesters who helped oust formeryugoslav dictator slobodan milosevic in 2000 .

georgian activists over the past few months had closely conferred with democracy advocates in serbia on campaignand demonstration tactics ( washingtonpost , nov. 25 ) .

although many in georgia at first viewed shevardnadze's role in the suspect vote count as uncertain , they saw his bid for support from abashidze and defenseof the results as indicating that he at least condoned , if not orchestrated , the suspect tally ( fbis , nov.22 , doc .

no .

cep - 16 ) .

shevardnadze hurriedly convenedthe rump legislature on november 22 ( national movement and the united democrats boycotted the session ) , buthe was chased from the podium whendemonstrators broke into the chamber .

burjanadze announced that she was assuming the presidency pendingelections .

shevardnadze declared emergency rule,but cautioned his security forces not to use force .

in an ultimatum delivered to the protestors the next day,shevardnadze insisted that the new legislature hadconvened , replacing the old , and was now the supreme representative body .

however , he seemingly offered todiscuss moving up the date for new legislativeand presidential elections .

shevardnadze's ouster .

russian foreign minister igor ivanov mediated between opposition leaders andshevardnadze on the evening of november 23 in the face of saakashvili's threat to storm the president's residence .

reportedly with u.s. concurrence , ivanovstressed to shevardnadze that he should not risk civil war by resorting to force against the opposition , but shouldnegotiate a settlement , presumably to includenew legislative elections ( washington post , nov. 25 ; see below for an alternative explanation ) .

alsocritical to shevardnadze's decision to resign were reportsthat top defense , security , and internal ( police ) officials - - whom shevardnadze stated he would rely on to suppressthe protests - - told him that they would notaccept such orders .

faced with this lack of support , shevardnadze and the opposition leaders reached agreementon his resignation .

saakashvili hailed thiscoup a "rose revolution" to signify that it had not been violent .

in a speech to the country on november 24 , acting president burjanadze called for order to be re - established and for presidential elections within aconstitutionally - mandated 45 days .

she directed that the prorogued 1999 legislature would resume its work untilnew legislative elections could be held .

shequickly met with security officials , and tedo japaridze ( who broke with shevardnadze during the crisis ) wasconfirmed as secretary of the presidential securitycouncil ( composed of the heads of the security ministries ) .

he later was named foreign minister .

she also declaredthat georgia would continue its existingforeign policy aimed at integration with europe and nato .

the georgian constitutional court the next day lentsome legitimacy to the coup and plans fornew elections by ruling that the november 2 election was a fraud .

on november 26 , the three opposition leaders announced their plans for sharing power , with burjanadze stating that her party would back saakashvili forpresident .

she appointed zhvania the minister of state ( the top executive branch office under the president ) , butrecommended that the constitution be changedto give the office more power .

saakashvili , in turn , stated that the opposition hoped to sweep both the presidentialand legislative elections , and that burjanadzewould top the party list , perhaps assuring that she would become the speaker of a new legislature .

perhaps toalleviate some concerns raised among many ofshevardnadze's supporters by a statement by burjanadze that investigations were being opened into electoralirregularities and that the guilty would bepunished , saakashvili called for a unity government that would include all progressive georgians of all parties , andpledged that no one in the old governmentwould be prosecuted .

he called for the police to maintain order and for the military to suppress possible dissidentelements in its ranks .

the central electoral commission announced on december 2 that fifteen people had applied to gather signatures for the january presidential election .

osceforeign ministers met in early december and pledged up to $6 million to help administer presidential and legislativeelections ( osce , press release , dec. 2 ) .

according to most observers , the legislative race marked an extraordinarily determined struggle for power as a prelude to the presidential election in 2005 .

ensconced and corrupt officials were determined to gain dominant legislative influence in order to maintain theirpower and to control the prospectivepresidential race , and the opposition parties were determined to block these efforts , in this view ( fbis ,nov. 25 , doc .

no .

cep - 274 ; transitions online , nov.3 ) .

it was anticipated that the new pro - presidential legislature would elect a kindred politician as speaker , a crucialpost in the run - up to the 2005 presidentialrace .

the speaker becomes the interim head of state in case the president resigns or dies .

according to thisspeculation , abashidze , with tacit russian militarybacking , aimed to assume the speakership and perhaps later the presidency .

all the political players in the crisis seemed intent on avoiding a repeat of the bloody 1992 coup that toppled independent georgia's first president .

the threeprincipal opposition leaders agreed on power - sharing and quickly moved to reaffirm or appoint able individuals tothe critical finance , foreign , and defenseministries .

nonetheless , some observers warn that there is no pre - eminent political figure behind which the countrycan rally , so factional disputes couldeventually lead to violence .

some observers argue that saakashvili's personal volatility may not make him apresident able to unify and bring stability togeorgia ( institute for advanced strategic and political studies , policy briefings , nov. 19 ; thedaily telegraph , nov. 24 ) .

some observers warn thatindependent georgia has witnessed frequent violence and uprisings by military and paramilitary groups .

saakashvili , concerned about rumors that reactionarygroups might be mobilizing , on november 28 urged the avoidance of bloodshed but also threatened that "we willdeal with [armed attacks] mercilessly" ( fbis ,nov. 28 , doc .

no .

cep - 282 ) .

if the prospective government receives a solid mandate as expected at the polls , it may receive the legitimacy and time it needs to implement changes that mightotherwise tax an impatient populace .

the prospective government faces widespread poverty , official corruption,and separatism in its abkhazia and southossetia regions .

among the immediate domestic problems it must address are a budget deficit and rising crime .

the new government also will need to carryout confidence - building with ajaria , abkhazia , and south ossetia .

abashidze has asserted that ajaria will notaccept orders from the interim government .

atthe same time , however , he has firmly stated that ajaria will not formally secede .

south ossetia has re - emphasizedthat it wants to join russia .

the prospective government must also reassure its neighbors .

azerbaijan's president ilkham aliyev , who had just won a controversial election himself,supported shevardnadze during the crisis and has appeared cool toward the interim leadership .

japaridze met withaliyev in late november to pledge thatexisting cooperation would continue .

armenia , which depends on energy from russia that transits georgia , calledfor peaceful elections and economic reformsthat would bolster regional trade .

russia's ivanov made clear that russia was not happy that the coup had occurred,but accepted it and would pursue closestrategic ties with georgia .

he also stated that russia was concerned that "outside pressure" had contributed to thecoup ( itar - tass , nov 25 ; nov. 26 ) .

according to some observers , putin was critical of the coup because it appeared to negate the added influence thatrussia would have gained throughabashidze's increased power .

but he also accused shevardnadze of bringing on his own downfall by failing tomaintain "traditional" close ties to russia or toprotect , he seemed to imply , the legacy of soviet - style economic and political rule ( fbis , nov. 24 , doc.no .

cep - 252 ; nov. 25 , doc .

no .

cep - 141 ) .

ivanovmet with several cis foreign ministers on november 25 , and they seemed to accept the change of government ingeorgia , but pointedly called fornoninterference by "outside powers" ( seemingly referring to u.s. interests ) in georgia's domestic affairs ( itar - tass , nov. 25 ) .

according to the state department , "georgia plays a key role in furthering u.s. interests" in the caspian region .

georgia cooperates in the war on terrorismand is a "key conduit" for caspian oil and gas pipelines to western markets , thereby increasing the diversity of worldenergy suppliers .

the united states seeksto strengthen civil society and the rule of law in georgia , and provides military assistance to combat terrorism,secure borders , and enhance participation innato's partnership for peace and interoperability with u.s. and coalition forces ( congressional budgetjustification for fy2004 ) .

congress has earmarked orallocated $1.1 billion in aid to georgia ( among the highest for eurasia in per capita terms ) over the period1992-2002 to buttress these goals .

the statedepartment on november 21 indicated that the administration had spent $2.4 million to support a democraticelection on november 2 .

most of the georgianparties running in the november election endorsed cooperation with the united states on these goals , and the leadersof the acting government have reaffirmedthese goals .

the administration's assessment of the november election became more negative after the final results were announced .

the u.s. state department issuedstatements on november 20-21 , 2003 , expressing deep disappointment that "massive vote fraud" had taken place,and in the face of rising protests in georgia,called for all sides to abjure violence .

secretary of state colin powell on november 22 encouraged shevardnadzeto peacefully resolve the crisis , but did noturge him to resign or hold new elections , according to the state department .

after shevardnadze resigned , powellcalled to thank him for peacefully resolvingthe crisis and the state department issued a statement praising shevardnadze as a "towering figure in georgia'shistory and a close friend of the united states,"and as contributing to freeing millions from soviet communism .

the united states quickly recognized burjanadze as interim president , with secretary powell reportedly telephoning her on november 23 to offer u.s. supportand to urge that new elections be free and fair .

burjanadze reported that she talked with president bush onnovember 26 and that he offered electoral aid andthat the united states "will guarantee georgia's safety if the country is threatened. .

he also asked for and receivedassurances about shevardnandze's personalsafety ( fbis , nov. 26 , doc .

no .

cep - 309 ) .

the european union on november 24 also expressedsupport for the interim government and called for democraticelections .

u.s. strategic interests in stability in georgia seemed underlined by state department spokesman richard boucher on november 25 , when he announced thatseveral u.s. agencies would send advisors to the interim government to discuss aid for the upcoming elections andhelp in democratization .

the next day , thewhite house announced that president bush in his phone call to burjanadze pledged continued u.s. support forgeorgia's sovereignty , independence , territorialintegrity , and democratic and economic reforms .

on november 28 , burjanadze met with the head of the azerbaijaninternational oil consortium ( a group ofu.s .

and other international energy firms that are developing caspian offshore oilfields ) and reassured him that theinterim government backed the completionof the pipeline .

georgia's interim government also has indicated that its peacekeepers will remain on duty withnato in kosovo and with the u.s. - ledcoalition in iraq .

the backgrounds of several of the new officials , including saakashvili , who was educated in theunited states , and japaridze , the formerambassador to the united states , also appeared reassuring to many u.s. observers .

many oppositionists in georgia hailed the u.s. censure of the november election as a major contribution to shevardnadze's decision to resign .

otherscriticized the united states for not sending a top emissary to georgia and instead depending on russia to defusethe crisis .

some also were critical of what theyviewed as long - term u.s. efforts to prop up shevardnadze's rule .

some pro - shevardnadze supporters were highlycritical of what they viewed as u.s.indifference to - - if not active support for - - shevardnadze's ouster .

shevardnadze lent credence to this view onnovember 26 when he ruefully questionedthe u.s. role , stating that "i was one of the biggest supporters of u.s. policy" ( the daily telegraph , nov. 27 ; fbis , nov. 25 , doc .

no .

cep - 227 ; and nov. 24,doc .

no .

cep - 358 ) .

some observers supposed that different u.s. groups may have operated at cross - purposes , withsome supporting the shevardnadzegovernment and others the opposition parties ( fbis , nov. 24 , doc .

no .

cep - 142 ) .

russian federationcouncil head mikhail margelev on november 22seemed to suggest that the united states had criticized the election results without fathoming that this couldencourage shevardnadze's overthrow ( interfax ,nov. 22 ; fbis , nov 22 , doc .

no .

cep - 148 ) .

commentators varied widely on whether shevardnadze's resignation would bolster u.s. or russian influence in georgia .

some viewed shevardnadze'sputative "tilt" toward russia as a feint to spur the united states to rush to his aid .

one advocate of this view statedthat the coup amounted to the replacementof one pro - u.s. government by another that would be even more pro - american ( fbis , nov. 25 , doc.no .

cep - 259 ) .

such a government could press harder formore u.s. aid and for integration into western institutions , including admission into nato ( alexander rahr , fbis , nov. 24 , doc .

no .

cep - 287 ) .

othersargued that shevardnadze's alliance with abashidze threatened a strategic tilt toward russia ( center for strategicand international studies , caucasus electionwatch , nov. 18 ) .

supporting this view , a german analyst concluded that russia was playing an increasingrole in georgia that the west would have toaccommodate ( hamburg financial times , nov. 25 ) .

a third view is expressed by those who suggestthat both u.s. and russian interests in georgia couldsuffer if it becomes a harbor for terrorism or otherwise becomes more unstable , so that u.s. - russian cooperationthere is essential ( dmitriy trenin , fbis , nov.24 , doc .

no .

cep - 287 ) .

on november 27 , saakashvili appeared to endorse this perspective , arguing that georgiashould seek security and economicassistance from both russia and the united states .

zhvania too has argued for economic ties with both the unitedstates and russia .

