rs21055 - - nato enlargement updated may 5 , 200 .

congress is now considering enlargement of nato , an issue addressed at the allied summit in prague , in november 2002 .

during the last round of enlargement , the senate voted 80-19 on april 30 , 1998 , in favor of admitting poland , theczechrepublic , and hungary to nato .

 ( a two - thirds senate majority is necessary to admit new states becauseenlargement isconsidered an amendment to the original north atlantic treaty. ) .

other members of the alliance followed suit , andthe threecountries became members in march 1999 .

it was the fourth time that nato had admitted new states , withmembershipincreasing from the original 12 to 19 today .

at the previous nato summit in april 1999 , the allies underscored that they were open to further enlargement .

theycreated a membership action plan ( map ) , outlining structured goals for candidates , such as ending the danger ofethnicconflict , developing a democratic society with transparent political and economic processes and civilian control ofthemilitary , and pledging commitment to defense budgets to build military forces able to contribute to missions fromcollectivedefense to peacekeeping .

 ( 1 ) at prague , on november 21 , 2002 , the current members' heads of state designated the three baltic states ( latvia , lithuania,and estonia ) , slovenia , slovakia , bulgaria , and romania , as prospective members .

in 1998 , the congressional debate over nato enlargement covered such issues as costs , mission , and qualifications of thecandidates .

the issue of costs has now seemingly been put to rest because entry of poland , the czech republic , andhungary does not appear to have required extra u.s. funds .

most observers believe that the three countries havecontributedto stability in europe , and have made significant political contributions to the alliance in such matters as enhancingnato'sunderstanding of central and eastern europe , russia , and the balkans , given the history of the new members'involvementwith these regions .

militarily , their contribution is less apparent ; each of the three contributes forces to thenato - led peaceoperations in the balkans , and is building forces to defend its borders .

pentagon officials believe that poland hasmade thegreatest strides in restructuring and modernizing its military , and that the czech republic and hungary have madeconsiderably less progress .

 ( 2 ) it should be noted thata period of years is normally necessary to rebuild a military that has hadan authoritarian tradition and convert it to one having civilian control , purge it of old - guard elements , reform itstraining,and purchase equipment compatible with a new set of allies .

there has been some sentiment that nato should delay invitations to candidate states until democratic processes are firmlyentrenched .

for example , the recent hungarian government of victor orban was criticized for an ethnic "status law"thatsome interpreted as cloaking hungarian aspirations for territory from neighboring states having hungarianminorities .

 ( 3 ) others reject such sentiments , noting that orban was freely elected , and dismissing the status law as nothing morethan apassing example of nationalist politics before a close election .

nonetheless , it is possible that the period betweennamingcandidate states for accession negotiations at prague in november 2002 and the moment when current natomembergovernments decide whether to admit those candidates ( such as the vote in the u.s. senate ) , could see debates overwhethereach candidate continues to meet criteria for democracy , particularly if there is an election bringing in a governmentthatmember states view as extremist .

the north atlantic treaty does not contain a provision for expelling ordisciplining amember state .

another factor for consideration could prove to be a prospective member's efforts to persuade its people that natomembership is desirable .

slovenia held a referendum on march 23 , 2003 ; 66% of those voting , 66% supportednatomembership , despite popular opposition to the war in iraq that approaches 80% .

no other candidate state intendsto hold areferendum on nato membership .

the essence of the current enlargement debate is over qualifications , with no apparent consensus .

of an original ninecandidates , two candidates , albania and macedonia , did not receive invitations at prague .

 ( 4 ) each of these countries issmall , with comparably small militaries potentially capable of specialized functions , such as transport or medicalcare , forexample , but only minimally capable of building forces able to contribute to high - intensity conflict .

in the view ofsomeobservers , to adhere to the letter of the military qualifications outlined in the 1999 summit communiqué,requiring newmembers to contribute to missions from peacekeeping to collective defense , would be tantamount to excluding theirentry .

many participants in the debate favor different standards that , in their view , reflect the current political situation in europe,where russia is no longer a military threat but ethnic conflict , nationalism , and terrorism are a danger .

in suchcircumstances , they contend , political stability and a modernized military at least able to contribute to border defenseand topeace operations are an appropriate standard .

secretary of state powell seemed to suggest such a standard in hisconfirmation hearing when he stressed a need for candidates to modernize their militaries , and to strengthen theirdemocratic structures .

 ( 5 ) an opposing view is that nato should first clearly define its mission , above all with an agreement on what types ofout - of - area threats , such as terrorism , proliferation , or a disruption of the flow of oil , should be met with a possiblemilitaryresponse .

at that point , enlargement should be considered , with a determination about which prospective membersmightcontribute to the mission .

some observers , also hesitant about enlargement , note that the united states flew over60 percentof combat missions in the kosovo conflict .

they prefer prospective members that could relieve the u.s. burden .

yet another view is that there is no clear dichotomy between collective defense ( high - intensity conflict undertaken inresponse , for example , to the attacks of september 11 , 2001 ) and collective security ( peace operations andhumanitarianassistance ) .

in this view , countries contributing to peace operations assist in building stable societies and preventing"blackholes," such as bosnia or afghanistan , where terrorism may take root .

countries involved in peace operations , then,arecontributing to the prevention of terrorism , and thereby to collective defense .

the terrorist attacks against the united states on september 11 , 2001 , are affecting the enlargement debate .

a likely part ofthe enlargement debate will be how prospective members might contribute to the conflict against terrorism or actto stem theflow of weapons of mass destruction .

nato seemed partially to settle one aspect of the debate over its missionshortlyafter the attacks when member states invoked article v , the alliance's collective defense clause , to come to the aidof theunited states in the conflict against terrorism .

previously , the european allies had resisted any statement that articlevshould be invoked in an out - of - area action against terrorism .

at a nato ministerial meeting in reykjavik in may2002 , theallies agreed that they must be able "to carry out the full range of... missions , ... to field forces wherever they areneeded,sustain operations over distance and time , and achieve their objectives. .

 ( 6 ) however , not all member states have sufficiently mobile or appropriately trained forces for the current tasks in afghanistanand iraq , for example .

few allies besides the united states have special forces or mobile , large - formation combatforceswith the potential to contribute meaningfully to such conflicts .

at the same time , a number of allies have anintelligencecapability , transport , medical units , and political influence that might assist in such conflicts .

as the terrorism conflict unfolds , current members may examine how prospective members might be able to contribute.contributions might include political influence and support , for example in the united nations or with russia ormuslimstates , and not necessarily military potential .

they might also examine the level of internal security in the candidatecountries and ability to control borders , disrupt terrorist financial networks or apprehend terrorist suspects on theirsoil.elements of the map that emphasize an end to corruption may be increasingly underscored , given thepost - september 11importance of preventing money - laundering , and combating a black economy .

the alliance experienced sharp divisions over whether to use military force against iraq .

in january 2003 , bush administration officials applauded the decision of the 7 candidate states ( and others ) to sign a letter that , in general,endorsed the u.s. position on iraq ; some candidates state representatives complained that they had been bullied bytheadministration into signing the letter .

six of the seven candidate states joined the coalition .

slovenia was theexception,but allowed overflight by u.s. and uk forces .

the failure to achieve consensus in the north atlantic council overhow andwhether to aid turkey in the event of an attack by iraq exposed serious divisions in the alliance .

 ( 7 ) the fractious debate inthe nac led some administration officials and members of congress to raise the issue of changing natodecision - makingprocedures .

 ( 8 ) .

the debate over enlargement is quite different in 2001 than it was in 1998 .

in 1998 , several european allies stronglysupported enlargement .

today , most member states couch discussion of enlargement in careful terms .

most member states agree that slovenia is politically qualified for membership ; in addition , hungary urges slovenia'smembership , once nato criteria for entry are met , for strategic reasons .

hungary is not contiguous with any othernatostate .

slovenia's entry into the alliance would provide hungary with a land bridge to italy , a clear advantage givenneutralaustria's refusal during the kosovo war to permit nato overflights to hungary .

slovakia is a credible candidatein somenato capitals , given the return in september 2002 elections of key elements of its reform government .

somenortherneuropean allies , such as poland , strongly support membership for the baltic states ; they contend that the baltic stateshavemet osce and eu political guidelines for democracy , and cite the three countries' work to build stability in theregion andto establish better relations with russia .

u.s. officials state that the baltic states have made the most progress inmeetingmap requirements , although there is some criticism of how latvia has handled sensitive documents .

italy , greece , and turkey are strong supporters of bulgaria's and romania's entry .

they contend that these two countriescan contribute to stability in the balkans , where europe's greatest security needs lie .

critics counter that romaniaandbulgaria continue to suffer from corruption in their governing structures , and that each must make stronger effortstomodernize its military .

bulgaria has also had a succession of governments that have followed an uncertain coursetowardspolitical and economic reform .

the views of the russian government play a role in the debate .

putin's softer rhetoric against nato enlargement since theseptember 11 terrorist attacks has allayed concerns that his government would strongly oppose enlargement .

it ispossiblethat putin now views a unified front against terrorism , in part due to moscow's ongoing conflict in chechnya , asmoreimportant than potential divisions with the allies over enlargement .

the duma and much of russia's military andintelligence bureaucracy remain adamantly opposed to enlargement , which they view as a u.s. - led effort to movea militaryalliance closer to their territory .

officials from allied states often counter such an argument by underscoring thatenlargement's purpose in large part is to ensure stability in europe , and that the addition of new member statesprovidesstability , and therefore security , to russia's west .

putin may also view the entry of estonia and latvia into nato ( and theeu , in 2004 ) as a means to protect russian minorities in those countries , given nato and eu strictures over thetreatmentof ethnic minorities .

in the spring of 2003 , both the senate foreign relations committee and the senate armed services committee beganhearings on enlargement .

some individual members have expressed their views , and relevant legislation has beenintroduced .

the senate foreign relations committee produced a report on enlargement , together with theresolution ofratification ( executive report 108-6 ) , the instrument on which the senate will vote to give its advice and consenttorevision of the north atlantic treaty .

in the 107th congress , rep. shimkus and others introduced h.con.res .

116 , which calls for nato invitationsto the baltic states for membership at the 2002 summit , as long as they satisfy the alliance's qualifications .

it passedbyvoice vote on october 7 , 2002 .

on october 24 , 2001 , legislation was introduced in both houses supporting further enlargement .

representative bereuterintroduced h.r .

3167 , the freedom consolidation act of 2001 ; speaker hastert and others cosponsored thebill .

an identical senate bill , s. 1572 , with cosponsors including senators durbin , lieberman , lott , lugar,andmccain , was also introduced .

the bill recalled and approved legislation of the four previous congresses that urgedenlargement and provided funding for particular candidates .

the bill designated slovakia as eligible to receive u.s.assistance under section 203 ( a ) of the nato participation act of 1994 ( title ii of p.l .

103-447 ) .

this section givesthepresident authority to establish a program of assistance with a government if he finds that it meets the requirementsofnato membership .

in the 107th congress , representative gallegly introduced h.res .

468 , which described nato as key to u.s.interests in europe and encourages a continued path of improving relations with russia .

it strongly urged invitationstomembership for the 7 countries ultimately invited at prague .

it passed the house 358-9 on october 7 , 2002 .

the senate foreign relations committee marked up the resolution of ratification on april 30 , 2003 .

the resolution isthe instrument on which the senate will vote to give its advice and consent to admission of the candidate states .

thecommittee's report accompanying the resolution reviews the strengths and weaknesses of the candidate states,assessingtheir political , economic , and military policies .

it also reviews nato's mission and capabilities , relations withrussia , rolein the balkan wars , and the prague nato summit .

secretary of defense rumsfeld has stirred nato waters by suggesting the presence of an "old" and "new" europe , theformer consisting of such countries as france and germany , the latter consisting of recent new members andcandidatestates .

secretary rumsfeld has suggested that the alliance's future belongs to the united states and the "new"europe , withthe "old" europe increasingly marginalized .

european critics , some of them in the candidate states , oppose suchacategorization , noting that germany has the largest economy in europe , and that only france , with britain , has amilitaryable to move its forces considerable distances for engagement in combat .

these critics express concern that adividednato will not be effective in confronting threats that face each member state .

 ( 9 ) .

accession negotiations between nato and the candidate states were completed on march 26 , 2003 , and the candidate stategovernments signed protocols that have been sent to the 19 member states , each of which will follow itsconstitutionalprocedures to amend the north atlantic treaty to admit new members .

all 19 members must agree on a prospectivemember's qualifications for it to enter nato .

the bush administration would like for the senate to vote onenlargementbefore that august 2003 recess .

nato hopes to admit the successful candidates in may 2004 .

