rs21868 - - u.s. - dominican republic free - trade agreement updated january 3 , 200 .

on august 5 , 2004 , representatives of the united states , the dominican republic , and five central american countries signed a regional free - trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) among their countries .

the united states first had concluded a free - trade agreement with the centralamerican countries ( cafta ) in january2004 .

later , on march 15 , 2004 , the united states and the dominican republic announced that they had concludeda bilateral trade agreement that from theoutset of negotiations was intended to be integrated into ( or "docked onto" ) cafta .

 ( 8 ) the ustr described the outcome at the time: "with its integration intothe cafta , the dominican republic has assumed the same set of obligations and commitments as costa rica,honduras , el salvador , guatemala , andnicaragua .

as with the central american countries , individual market access schedules were negotiated with thedominican republic for goods , agriculture,services , investment and government procurement. .

 ( 9 ) under the agreement reached with the dominican republic fta , 80% of u.s. exports of non - agricultural products would become duty - free immediately , withremaining duties phased out over 10 years .

 ( 10 ) u.s.sectors that would have immediate duty - free access include information technology products , agriculturaland construction equipment , paper products , wood , pharmaceuticals , and medical and scientific equipment .

u.s.autos and auto parts would be able to enterduty - free after five years .

more than half of u.s. agricultural exports would receive duty - free treatment immediately , including corn , cotton , wheat , soybeans , many fruits and vegetables,and processed food products .

tariffs would be phased out on most agricultural products within 15 years and on allagricultural products by 20 years .

beef,pork , poultry , rice , and dairy products would become duty - free under tariff - rate quotas .

most u.s. agriculturalproducers support the agreement .

for example,the u.s. grains council announced that , in partnership with the national grain sorghum producers and the nationalcorn growers association , it"...applaud[s] the successful negotiations..." of the fta .

 ( 11 ) an official with the grocery manufacturers of america said the dominican republic "'...is a greatmarket for food , agriculture , and beverage products,'...[and] an excellent potential market for u.s. beer , snack foods,pet food , nuts , and breakfast cereals. .

 ( 12 ) the sugar provisions in the agreement with the dominican republic do not seem as controversial as those reached with the central american countries .

thecontinuing precedent of market - opening , however , worries the u.s. sugar industry .

the tariff - rate quota ( trq ) onsugar for the dominican republic wouldincrease by 10,000 metric tons the first year , increase by 2% annually for years 2-15 , then increase by a smalleramount in perpetuity .

the tariff on above - quotaimports would not change .

dale hathaway , a senior fellow at the national center for food and agriculture policy,said the increase in the dominicanrepublic's cap on sugar was "not significant. .

 ( 13 ) the u.s. sugar industry group argued , however , that more imports from the dominican republic couldjeopardize the stability of domestic prices , which would help neither country .

 ( 14 ) textiles and apparel from the dominican republic would become duty - free and quota - free immediately , if they met the agreement's rules of origin , whichinclude general rules for all signatories and specific rules for each country .

as with the other cafta parties , thedominican republic would be allowed to useinputs also from mexico or canada to meet cumulation requirements for apparel or clothing .

the american textilemanufacturers institute , which representsu.s .

textile producers , said that cafta could lead to reduced u.s. employment in the textile industry .

 ( 15 ) the american apparel and footwear association ( aafa ) , which represents the north american apparel industry and its suppliers , said however , "...because manyu.s .

companies maintain production - sharingrelationships with the [dominican republic] , swift implementation of the [fta] will likely have a positiveeconomic impact in the united states...." ( 16 ) an unresolved issue would be apparel made under co - production arrangements with haiti .

cbtpa benefits expire the earlier of: ( 1 ) september 30 , 2008 ; or ( 2 ) the date on which the ftaa or another fta as specified enters into force between the united states and acbtpa beneficiary country ( p.l .

106-200 ,section 211 ) .

thus , if the fta between the dominican republic and the united states enters into force , articlesco - produced by haiti and the dominicanrepublic might no longer qualify under cbtpa .

the administration said it would work with the congress so thathaiti could continue to be eligible undercbtpa for apparel with inputs from the dominican republic .

 ( 17 ) the dominican republic signed on to the principles and standards under cafta's chapter on intellectual property rights with its own transition periods formeeting certain obligations .

in late 2003 , the international intellectual property alliance ( iipa ) , a coalition of tradeassociations representing copyrightindustries , called broadcast piracy in the dominican republic "...the worst in the entire hemisphere. .

 ( 18 ) as part of the bilateral fta , the dominicanrepublicsigned two side documents committing it to act against broadcast or cable piracy .

u.s. industry advisors want theu.s .

government to monitor vigilantly theimplementation of the side documents and the agreement .

 ( 19 ) the ustr also expressed uncertainty , saying the fta "...will require the dominican republic toupgrade considerably the level of intellectual property protection...." ( 20 ) on government procurement , cross - border trade in services , financial services , and investment , the dominican republic signed on to the general principles ofeach cafta chapter but negotiated its own list of specific concessions .

for example , in the chapter on governmentprocurement , all signatories , including thedominican republic , would accept general principles such as national treatment and transparency , but eachsignatory would observe these principles only withrespect to its own negotiated list of agencies and its own thresholds for contract amounts covered by the chapter .

similarly , the chapters on cross - border tradein services , financial services , and investment include general principles such as nondiscriminatory treatment , butthey have their own negotiated lists ofservices that are exempt from the general principles .

the dominican republic acceded to almost all of the other provisions concluded in the cafta , including the chapters on labor and the environment .

underthose chapters , cafta parties agreed they would enforce their domestic labor and environmental laws but wouldretain the right to exercise discretionregarding investigations and related matters .

they recognized that it is inappropriate to weaken labor andenvironmental laws to encourage trade , and agreed toensure access to judicial proceedings .

the text would establish governmental labor and environmental committeesto oversee implementation , and other bodieswould do further cooperative work .

the labor and environment chapters link to a dispute process under which , ifa party wins a labor or environmentalcomplaint , the losing party could be assessed monetary damages .

the u.s. trade representative says that the fta with the dominican republic "...will ensure effective enforcement of domestic labor laws , establish acooperative program to improve labor laws and enforcement , and build the capacity of the dominican republic tomonitor and enforce labor rights. .

 ( 21 ) theu.s .

department of state , however , has recognized that there have been widespread problems with putting workerrights into practice , even though theconstitution of the dominican republic and its 1992 labor code provide for broad worker rights .

 ( 22 ) representatives of the afl - cio and thedominican laborgroup consejo nacional de unidad sindical ( cnus ) have called for further reform of dominican laws , effectiveenforcement provisions that allow for tradesanctions , and protection against trade law violations .

 ( 23 ) human rights watch reports that women "...who become pregnant are routinely fired from jobsandshut out of employment in the dominican republic's export - processing sector," and such abuse of workers wouldbe allowed to continue , because caftadoes not prohibit workplace discrimination .

 ( 24 ) workers' groups also fear the loss of protections under current u.s. unilateral trade programs such as cbi .

 ( 25 ) the dominican republic also acceded to other chapters of cafta , including dispute settlement , trade remedies , electronic commerce , andtelecommunications .

these chapters would establish a process for resolving disputes , set out rules for safeguards,keep transmission of digital productsduty - free , and ensure certain standards affecting suppliers of telecommunications services .

there are also chapterson customs administration , technical barriersto trade , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , and transparency of laws and regulations .

the agreement wouldestablish a committee on trade capacitybuilding .

in the last months of 2004 , a newly passed tax in the dominican republic made that country's participation in the fta tenuous .

in september 2004 , thedominican republic enacted a revenue measure to meet conditions for a loan by the international monetary fund .

the revenue measure included a 25%increase in the tax on soft drinks with high - fructose corn syrup .

u.s. trade officials warned that the 25% taxthreatened the fta that the two countries justsigned .

senate finance committee chairman grassley warned that the tax would jeopardize senate support for theagreement .

 ( 26 ) representative rangel,ranking member on the house ways and means committee , however , called the administration's threat to dropthe dominican republic from the tradeagreement "inappropriate and unfortunate. .

 ( 27 ) thedominican republic responded to the opposition by repealing the 25% tax in the last days of 2004 .

it is uncertain when the administration might submit implementing legislation for dr - cafta to the congress .

regardless of when legislation might beintroduced , it is expected to be controversial .

