rs21542 - - department of homeland security: issues concerning the establishment of federally funded researchanddevelopment centers ( ffrdcs ) updated november 13 , 200 .

ffrdcs are not - for - profit organizations which are financed on a sole - source basis , exclusively or substantially by an agency of thefederal government , which are not subject to office of personnel management regulations .

they operate as privatenon - profitcorporations , although they are subject to certain personnel and budgetary controls imposed by congress and / or theirsponsoringagency .

each center is administered , through a contract with the sponsoring federal agency , by either an industrialfirm , a university,or a nonprofit institution .

center personnel are not considered federal employees , but rather employees of theorganization thatmanages and operates the center .

ffrdcs were established by the federal government during and immediatelyfollowing world warii .

for various reasons , the federal government was not able to attract the top scientific and technological talent dueto lower pay thanin the private sector and slow hiring procedures necessary to meet its broad r&d requirements .

becauseffrdcs are not allowed tocompete for federal or private sector contracts , government officials have often asserted they are free from conflictof interest , and in abetter position to protect classified and / or proprietary information .

there are four categories of ffrdcs: research laboratories , r&d laboratories , study and analysis centers , and systemsengineering / systems integration centers ( see table ) .

a research laboratory is usually limited tobasic and applied research thatincludes efforts directed towards the solution of specific problems , but short of engaging in major developmentrelated activities .

an r&d laboratory engages in a variety of research activities , ranging from basic and appliedresearch through the actual developmentof hardware for experimental or demonstration purposes .

study and analysis centers are involvedin analytical activities in whichvery little hardware - related laboratory research or development is carried out .

these study centers were initiallyestablished toprovide the office of the secretary of defense , the three services , and the defense advanced research projectsagency with help insolving organizational or operational problems .

systems engineering / systems integration ( se / si ) centers primarily provide systemsengineering , r&d systems integration , and management support for definition and development of largetechnical systems .

dod established these centers because it lacked certain in - house capabilities in large systems development , integration,and verification .

summary of current ffrdcs 1 .

parts of the faa's ffrdc also are identified as a study and analysis center and a systems engineering center .

eight federal agencies currently operate a total of 36 ffrdcs .

as indicated in the table , the department ofenergy ( doe ) and thedepartment of defense ( dod ) together sponsor 26 ffrdcs , with doe operating 16 centers and dod operating10 .

the other 10ffrdcs are operated by the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , thenationalaeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the nuclear regulatorycommission ( nrc ) ,and the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

of the 16 doe ffrdcs , nine are administered by a single university ora consortium ofuniversities , three are managed by a private sector company , and four through a not - for - profit organization .

dod's10 centers includethree r&d laboratories , five study and analysis centers , and two systems engineering , systems integrationcenters .

those 10centers are administered by two universities and eight not - for - profit organizations .

according to the national science foundation , in fy2000 the federal government spent $77.4 billion on r&d , of which $6.385billion or 8.3% was obligated for ffrdcs ( 1 ) .

of the$6.385 billion spent on r&d at ffrdcs , doe accounted for $3.897 billion or61% of total federal ffrdc expenditures .

this represents 57% of doe's total federal r&d budget of $6.063billion , in fy2000 .

asa result , doe is more reliant on ffrdcs to meet its research , development and acquisition requirements than anyother federalagency .

as a matter of comparison , nasa's only ffrdc , the jet propulsion laboratory , received $1.202 billionin fy2000,comprising 12.3% of the agency's $9.755 billion r&d budget .

dod's 10 ffrdcs received $783 million infy2000 , representingonly 2.4% of its rdt&e budget .

the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) letter 84-1 , and the federal acquisition regulations ( far ) which implement thepolicy letter , are the two primary regulatory documents that govern the establishment of an ffrdc .

 ( 2 ) the purpose of the letter was toestablish government - wide policies for the establishment , utilization , and evaluation of ffrdcs .

in 1990 , the officeof federalprocurement issued regulations to implement the policy letter .

 ( 3 ) in general , the implementation regulations state that ffrdcs shouldnot be established unless the agency cannot accomplish the activity in - house , through other government agencies,or throughtraditional procurement procedures .

the regulation also states there should be sufficient work to be performed bythe ffrdc ; thatcost controls should be established to protect the government ; and that the parameters of the mission of the ffrdcare spelled outclearly enough to enable the differentiation between ffrdc responsibilities and the agency's non - ffrdc work .

 ( 4 ) to establish an ffrdc , an agency must follow the guidelines of the ofpp .

according to the national science foundation , once theagency implements the ofpp guidelines , the new ffrdc should have the following characteristics: ( 1 ) its primaryactivities shouldinclude: basic research , applied research , development , or management of research and development ; ( 2 ) it is aseparate operationalunit within the parent organization or is organized as a separately incorporated organization ; ( 3 ) it performs actualr&d or r&dmanagement either upon direct request of the federal government or under a broad charter from the federalgovernment , but in eithercase under direct monitoring by the federal government ; ( 4 ) it receives its major financial support ( 70% or more ) from the federalgovernment , usually from one agency ; ( 5 ) it has , or is expected to have , a long - term relationship with its sponsoringagency ( usually 5years , with a review of the center's progress conducted by the sponsoring agency during the third year of theagreement ) ; ( 6 ) most orall of its facilities are owned by , or are funded under contract with , the federal government , ( 7 ) it has an averageannual budget ( operating and capital equipment ) of at least $500,000 ; and ( 8 ) when renewing the sole - source contract , thesponsoring agency isrequired to determine if it still needs to sponsor an ffrdc or if the work could be done in a federal facility , orthrough a traditionalprivate sector contract .

 ( 5 ) to minimize conflicts of interest , centers are established as not - for - profit entities that cannot compete with for - profit companies foradditional government contracts and are not allowed to produce and market commercial products .

as a result,government officialsargue that ffrdcs are allowed access to key government officials and highly sensitive data from industry andgovernment sources.such privileged access enables the centers to address complex long - term problems with a high degree of objectivitybased on theirrestrictions concerning selling products to the government , or joining forces with those who do , while remainingoutside of thegovernment itself .

while centers are not - for - profit entities , they are allowed to charge the government fees aboveand beyond thecost of carrying out their responsibilities .

some centers charge fees to cover ordinary and necessary costs of doingbusiness that arenot otherwise reimbursable , but that the government recognizes must be incurred .

these fees can also be used byan ffrdc toconduct independent research .

the far acknowledges the legitimacy of such fees .

 ( 6 ) .

within title iii , science and technology in support of homeland security , of the homeland security act ( p.l.107-296 ) there are twoprovisions that call for the establishment of ffrdcs .

section 305 of the act states that "the secretary , actingthrough theundersecretary for science and technology , may establish or contract with one or more ffrdcs to carry out otherresponsibilities ofthe act , including the coordination and integration of the agency's extramural and intermural research programs. .

 ( 7 ) section 312directs the secretary of dhs to establish an ffrdc known as the homeland security institute .

according to thelegislation , theinstitute , among other things , "should conduct systems analysis , risk analysis , and simulation and modeling todeterminevulnerability of the nation's critical infrastructure. .

 ( 8 ) however , the legislation also states that "the institute shall terminate threeyears after the effective date of this act. .

some have raised concerns that this provision could make it difficult fordhs to recruit thebest people for this center .

this legislative language provides the secretary of homeland security with the authority the agency needs to establish multipleffrdcs , as long as the department complies with ofpp letter 84-1 , and the implementing far 35.017-2 .

oncethese requirementshave been met , the dhs can develop a request for proposals to establish one or more ffrdcs .

it should be notedthat thecompetition in contracting act ( cica ) permits the government to use sole - source procedures to establish or sustainan ffrdc.proponents of this practice contend this allows the government to select the highest quality bid , rather than thelowest cost bid thatapplies to traditional federal procurement actions .

however , to help control costs , congress can set ceilings on thetotal annualspending and / or established personnel levels for the center .

in addition to universities and private sector firms,existing ffrdcs canalso compete to operate and manage a dhs sponsored ffrdc , if the mission of the proposed ffrdcis similar to the existingffrdc .

ffrdcs operate under a five year contract , with a review of the center's performance by the sponsoringagency after thethird year of operation .

this review is to determine if the ffrdc should be renewed for another 5 years,re - competed as an ffrdc,abolished , or decertified as an ffrdc while continuing to operate as an independent nonprofit organization .

once the dhs selects the organization that will administer and operate an ffrdc , the board of trustees for the ffrdc willestablish operating procedures , and select the director of the ffrdc .

 ( 9 ) while the sponsoring agency has some input in the selectionof the center's director , the board of trustees is ultimately responsible for selecting the director of the ffrdc.the director is thenresponsible for hiring the remainder of the center's personnel who , like the director , are employees of theorganization that operatesthe ffrdc , not the sponsoring federal agency .

the primary objective of this unique arrangement between thesponsoring agency andthe center is to help ensure the independence of the center while concomitantly establishing a long - term , closepartnershiprelationship , as opposed to the "arms length" required with for - profit federal contracts .

further , the personnelpolicies allow theffrdc to rapidly employ , if necessary , new scientific and technical expertise that are difficult to recruit , sustain,and manage throughthe federal civil service system .

 ( 10 ) .

for many years ffrdcs have attracted the attention of congress .

in their early years of operation , congress' primary concernsregarding ffrdcs centered around the growing number of centers , cost to the government , insulation from thecompetitiveenvironment , and the quality of products .

more recently , congressional concerns have focused on the continuingneed for ffrdcs,diversification into areas beyond the centers' original mission , and each sponsoring agency's oversight of itsffrdc's activities .

public sector advocacy groups , such as the professional services council ( psc ) , have pointed out that the nation's scientific,engineering , and technological capabilities have increased dramatically since ffrdcs were first introduced in thelate 1940s.specifically , psc contends that , given that the private sector has developed significant capabilities to perform studies and analysisand systems - engineering and integration work , it seems logical that this work could be performed in the privatesector .

however,proponents of ffrdcs argue that the responsibility of the proposed dhs ffrdc includes "the coordination andintegration of theagency's extramural and intermural research programs" which they contend is ideal , since ffrdcs are not allowedto compete forfederal contracts and are not allowed to develop commercial products .

finally it is unlikely that any of the dhsffrdcs will beperforming systems integration activities .

with the end of the cold war and declining dod r&d budgets , observers in the private and public sectors are concerned thatffrdcs might have diversified into areas beyond their originally defined missions .

some individuals inside andoutside of congressassert that this has already happened .

representatives from the psc have also argued that these centers havereceived a number ofcontracts from various federal agencies for which private service companies had originally competed .

however,representatives fromdod and doe have indicated that their respective ffrdcs have been asked to develop definitions of their corework for eachcenter .

as a result of this exercise each agency has identified work that could be competed through a traditionalprocurement process .

 ( 11 ) some members of congress have expressed concerns about the adequacy of the oversight of many ffrdcs .

in a general accountingoffice ( gao ) report , prepared for the house appropriations subcommittee on energy and water , gao stated that"despite doe'smany reforms , our review of more than 200 audit and consulting reports issued since 1995 reveals that thedepartment has persistentmanagement weaknesses that have led directly to a wide range of performance problems , including major costoverruns and scheduledelays in a variety of noteworthy projects. .

 ( 12 ) tocontrol cost and maintain mission focus at dod's ffrdcs , congress continues tomandate employee ceiling levels for each dod center .

while these are legitimate congressional concerns , it isimportant to note thatdod and doe ffrdcs employ thousands of people and have budgets in the hundreds of millions of dollars .

incontrast , dhsffrdcs are likely to be smaller centers with initial employment levels ranging from 50-100 people , along with budgets rangingfrom $15 million to $30 million .

