concern that government documents obtained by wikileaks and disclosed to several newspapers could reveal the identities of united states intelligence agents or informants focused attention on whether the disclosure or publication of such information could give rise to criminal liability .

this report provides background and summarizes the intelligence identities protection act ( iipa ; p.l .

97-200 ) , enacted by congress in 1982 to address the unauthorized disclosure of information that identifies u.s. intelligence agents .

the act , as amended , is codified at 50 u.s.c .

sections 421-426 , and provides criminal penalties in certain circumstances for intentional , unauthorized disclosure of information identifying a "covert agent" by a person who knows that the information identifies a covert agent as such and that the united states is taking affirmative measures to conceal the covert agent's foreign intelligence relationship to the united states .

the act also provides exceptions and defenses to prosecution , makes provision for extraterritorial application of the law if the offender is a u.s. citizen or permanent resident alien , includes reporting requirements to congress , and sets forth definitions of the terms used in the act .

prosecutions under this act have been rare , despite some high - profile incidents involving the exposure of u.s. intelligence agents .

although some officials have expressed concern that the wikileaks disclosures could endanger the lives of persons who provided information to assist u.s. forces in iraq or afghanistan or to embassy officials , no prosecutions appear to have resulted .

there was , however , one prosecution brought related to the revelation of the identities of cia interrogators .

the 111 th congress increased the penalties for violations by persons with access to classified information ( p.l .

111-259 ) .

the intelligence identities protection act was enacted into law as an amendment to the national security act of 1947 in response to concerns of members of the house and senate intelligence committees and others in congress "about the systematic effort by a small group of americans , including some former intelligence agency employees , to disclose the names of covert intelligence agents. .

the senate judiciary committee's report also discussed the efforts of philip agee , lewis wolf , and others to identify and disclose u.s. intelligence officers as part of "a systematic effort to destroy the ability of [u.s.] intelligence agencies to operate clandestinely," and their apparent repercussions .

such disclosures preceded and may have contributed to circumstances resulting in the death or attempted assassination of some central intelligence agency ( cia ) officers , expulsion of others from a foreign country following charges of spying , and impairment of relations with foreign intelligence sources .

two of agee's books revealed over 1,000 names of alleged cia officers .

wolf was co - editor of the "covert action information bulletin," a publication which contained a section entitled "naming names. .

wolf claimed to have revealed the names of over 2,000 cia officers .

he also provided addresses , phone numbers , license tag numbers , and colors of the automobiles of some alleged intelligence agents .

these disclosures set the stage for the consideration and passage of the intelligence identities protection act .

the intelligence identities protection act provides criminal penalties for the intentional , unauthorized disclosure of information identifying a covert agent with knowledge that the information identifies a covert agent as such and that the united states is taking affirmative measures to conceal the covert agent's foreign intelligence relationship to the united states .

covert agents include officers and employees of a u.s. intelligence agency ( including military officers assigned to an intelligence agency ) whose identities as such are classified and who are serving ( or have served within the last five years ) outside the united states ; as well as a u.s. citizen residing abroad ( or working for certain fbi components within the united states ) or a foreign national anywhere , who acts as an informant , agent , or source to an intelligence agency , and whose relationship with the u.s. government is classified .

the act prescribes punishments for disclosing the identities of covert agents with increasing severity according to the level of access to classified information the offender exploited .

offenders without authorized access to classified information are subject to punishment only if they participated in a pattern of activity designed to discover and reveal the identities of covert agents and have reason to believe that such disclosure will harm u.s. intelligence operations .

to date , there have been no reported cases interpreting the statute , but it did result in two convictions pursuant to guilty pleas .

in 1985 , sharon scranage , a former cia clerk , pleaded guilty for providing classified information regarding u.s. intelligence operations in ghana to a ghanaian agent with whom she was romantically involved .

she was initially sentenced to five years in prison , but a federal judge reduced her sentence to two years in light of the relatively lenient treatment received by the ghanaian agent , who was sentenced to 20 years after pleading no contest to espionage but was soon thereafter returned to ghana as part of a spy exchange .

in 2012 , a former cia officer pleaded guilty to one count of violating the iipa for having given the names of two covert agents to two journalists .

the defendant , john kiriakou , was initially charged under the espionage act , 18 u.s.c .

section 793 , as well , but these charges were dropped as part of the plea agreement .

he was sentenced to 30 months in prison .

the disclosures came to light after defense counsel for certain high - value detainees at the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , filed classified papers in connection with military commission trials that included photographs of the agents .

investigators concluded that the detainees' defense team had not violated any statute .

other spies whose crimes are known to have resulted in the deaths of covert agents were charged with more serious offenses under the espionage act , 18 u.s.c .

section 794 , but not under the intelligence identities protection act .

aldrich ames , whose activities resulted in the executions of 10 soviet sources to the fbi and cia , pleaded guilty to espionage and was sentenced to life imprisonment .

robert hanssen , whose work as an fbi "mole" for the soviet and later russian security services resulted in the deaths of at least three covert agents , pleaded guilty in 2001 to multiple counts of espionage and likewise received a life sentence .

in 2003 , the department of justice opened an investigation to determine whether a violation of the intelligence identities protection act had occurred after syndicated columnist robert novak published the name of cia officer valerie plame .

no charges under section 421 were pursued ; however , the existence of the provision and its possible breach were held to overcome any privilege on the part of reporters to refuse to disclose their source to a grand jury .

i. lewis libby , then vice president dick cheney's chief of staff , was convicted of obstruction of justice , perjury , and making a false statement to federal investigators in connection with the incident , and was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment , two years' probation , and a $250,000 fine .

president george w. bush commuted the prison portion of the sentence after mr. libby was denied release on bond pending his appeal .

in a related case , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit interpreted the statute as neither providing for nor precluding a remedy for a covert agent whose identity is disclosed by a government employee , but as counseling against the creation of a bivens remedy for such an agent because permitting a lawsuit "would inevitably require an inquiry into 'classified information that may undermine ongoing covert operations.' .

