president bush signed s. 714 , the junk fax prevention act ( "the act" or jfpa ) , on july 9 , 2005 .

this law vacated previous rules promulgated by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) in july 2003 relating to unsolicited facsimile ( fax ) advertising ; those rules amended section 227 of the communications act of 1934 ( 47 u.s.c .

227 ) .

the jfpa contains the following specific provisions relating to fax advertising .

provides an "established business relationship" ( ebr ) exemption , allowing businesses , political organizations , and trade associations to send advertisements and solicitations to persons with whom they have an existing relationship .

requires organizations to place a "clear and conspicuous" notice on the first page of each fax informing the recipient how to opt out of future faxes — the notice must include u.s. telephone and fax numbers and a "cost - free" way for recipients to make their requests .

requires that businesses be able to accept opt - out requests 24-hours a day , seven days a week .

the jfpa also directed the fcc to conduct a rulemaking to implement certain portions of the act ( see below , " fcc activity " ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) to issue a report on the effectiveness of the fcc's junk fax enforcement policies by april 5 , 2006 ( see below , " gao activity " ) .

the jfpa required the fcc to adopt rules concerning unsolicited fax advertising as well as issue an annual report on its enforcement activities .

as required under the jfpa , on april 5 , 2006 , the gao submitted its report to congress on the fcc's enforcement of the junk fax law .

the report addressed the following .

the fcc's junk fax procedures and outcomes .

the strengths and weaknesses of fcc's procedures .

the fcc's junk fax management challenges .

the gao found that the fcc had instituted procedures for receiving and acknowledging the increasing number of junk fax complaints , but that the numbers of investigations and enforcement actions had remained mostly the same .

for example , the gao stated that in 2000 , the fcc recorded about 2,200 junk fax complaints ; in 2005 , the fcc recorded over 46,000 complaints .

however , in total , the gao found that the fcc's enforcement bureau issued only 261 warnings from 2000 through 2005 .

further , the gao discovered that although the bureau had ordered six companies to pay forfeitures totaling over $6.9 million for continuing to violate the junk fax rules after receiving warnings , none of that total had been collected by the department of justice .

the gao also stated that fcc officials cited competing demands , resource constraints , and the rising sophistication of violators in hiding their identities as hindrances to enforcement .

with respect to strengths and weaknesses in the fcc's procedures , the gao determined that an emphasis on customer service , an effort to document consumers' complaints , and an attempt to target enforcement resources efficiently were strengths in fcc's procedures ; however , inefficient data management , resulting in time - consuming manual data entry , data errors , and — most importantly — the exclusion of the majority of complaints from decisions about investigations and enforcement , continue to be weaknesses .

further , the gao stated that the fcc does not provide consumers with adequate guidance or information to support the fcc's enforcement efforts .

finally , the gao stated that fcc faces management challenges in carrying out its junk fax responsibilities .

the fcc has no clearly articulated long - term or annual goals for junk fax monitoring and enforcement , and it is not analyzing the data it collects .

without analysis , the fcc cannot assess whether it needs to change its rules , procedures , or consumer guidance guidelines .

most importantly , the gao found that without performance goals and measures and without analysis of complaint and enforcement data , it was not possible to explore the effectiveness of current enforcement measures .

