nearly all of the outstanding debt of the federal government is subject to a statutory limit .

for years , the public debt limit has been codified in section 3101 ( b ) of title 31 of the united states code .

periodic adjustments to the debt limit typically have taken the form of amendments to 31 u.s.c .

3101 ( b ) , usually by striking the current dollar limitation and inserting a new one .

in recent years , such legislation has taken the form of suspending the debt limit through a date certain , with an increase to the dollar limit made administratively at the end of the suspension period .

the congressional budget process provides for the annual adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget , which sets forth appropriate levels of the public debt — along with levels of revenues , spending , and the deficit or surplus — for the upcoming fiscal year and at least four additional years .

the budget resolution , however , does not become law .

therefore , subsequent legislation is necessary in order to implement budget resolution policies , including changes to the statutory limit on the public debt .

in addition , congress may consider adjustments to the public debt limit outside the context of the budget resolution , such as when the house and senate are unable to agree on a budget resolution or when the current debt limit is not sufficient to meet existing financial obligations .

under current legislative procedures , the house and senate may originate and consider legislation adjusting the debt limit in several different ways .

they may consider such legislation under regular legislative procedures , either as freestanding legislation or as a part of a measure dealing with other topics .

alternatively , they may change the debt limit as part of the budget reconciliation process provided for under the congressional budget act of 1974 .

in addition , congress has twice established special procedures for congressional disapproval of adjustments to the debt limit authorized by certain statutes .

finally , the house has originated debt limit legislation under its former house rule xxviii ( the so - called gephardt rule ) ; the house repealed the rule at the beginning of the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) .

although the constitution requires that revenue measures originate in the house , this requirement is not considered to apply to debt limit measures .

over the years , however , most debt limit legislation has originated in the house .

the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee exercise jurisdiction over debt limit legislation .

it is extremely difficult for congress to effectively influence fiscal and budgetary policy through action on legislation adjusting the debt limit .

the need to raise ( or lower ) the limit during a session is driven by many previous decisions regarding revenues and spending stemming from legislation enacted earlier in the session or in prior years .

nevertheless , the consideration of debt limit legislation often is viewed as an opportunity to reexamine fiscal and budgetary policy and is marked by controversy .

consequently , house and senate action on legislation adjusting the debt limit often is complicated , hindered by political difficulties , and subject to delay .

the three ways the house and senate have originated and considered debt limit legislation , as well as the congressional disapproval procedures first established under the budget control act of 2011 , are discussed briefly below .

in the past six years , legislation adjusting the debt limit twice has included congressional disapproval procedures , effectively providing congress with a second opportunity to consider the adjustment to the debt limit .

in the first instance , enacted as part of the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , signed into law on august 2 , 2011 , special procedures allowed for congressional disapproval of the increases to the debt limit authorized by the act .

the act authorized increases to the debt limit by at least $2.1 trillion ( and up to $2.4 trillion ) in three installments .

first , upon the certification by the president that the debt subject to limit was within $100 billion of the debt limit , the debt limit was increased by $400 billion immediately .

second , if congress did not enact into law a joint resolution of disapproval within 50 calendar days of receipt of the certification , the debt limit was to be increased by an additional $500 billion .

the house passed a disapproval resolution ( h.j.res .

77 ) , but the senate did not .

if congress had enacted a joint resolution of disapproval ( presumably over a presidential veto ) , the debt limit would not have been increased by the additional $500 billion , and the office of management and budget would have been required to sequester budgetary resources on a "pro rata" basis , subject to sequestration procedures and exemptions provided in sections 253 , 255 , and 256 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended .

third , after the debt limit had been increased by the first $900 billion and upon another certification that the debt subject to limit was again within $100 billion of the debt limit , congress had 15 calendar days to enact into law a joint resolution of disapproval to prevent the third automatic increase in the debt limit ( again over a presumed presidential veto ) .

if congress did not enact such resolution , the debt limit was to be increased by one of three amounts: ( 1 ) $1.2 trillion ; ( 2 ) an amount between $1.2 trillion and $1.5 trillion if congress passed and the president signed into law legislation introduced by the joint select committee on deficit reduction ; or ( 3 ) $1.5 trillion , if a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget was submitted to the states for ratification .

the house again adopted another disapproval resolution ( h.j.res 98 ) , but the senate subsequently rejected a motion to proceed to the resolution .

therefore , the debt limit was increased by $1.2 trillion , because other criteria that would have allowed for a larger amount were not met .

in summary , while an initial increase in the debt limit of $400 billion was effective immediately and not subject to congressional disapproval , subsequent additional increases of $500 billion and $1.2 trillion were subject to congressional disapproval .

that is , for either of the two subsequent additional increases in the debt limit , if congress had enacted a joint resolution of disapproval , the debt limit would not have been increased .

expedited procedures that limited debate and prevented amendments were established for the joint resolution of disapproval to ensure timely consideration .

although only a majority of each chamber would have been necessary to agree to a resolution of disapproval , to prevent an increase , supermajority support would have been necessary .

this is because if the treasury had advised the president that further borrowing was required to meet existing commitments , the president might normally be expected to veto the congressional resolution of disapproval .

congress can override a presidential veto , but to do so would require the support of two - thirds of each chamber .

in 2013 , similar congressional disapproval procedures were included in legislation suspending the debt limit through february 7 , 2014 ( h.r .

2775 , 113 th congress ) .

in this instance , congress had 22 calendar days to enact , presumably over the president's veto , legislation disapproving the suspension and subsequent adjustment to the debt limit authorized by the default prevention act of 2013 ( section 1002 of p.l .

113-46 , continuing appropriations act , 2014 , enacted on october 17 , 2013 ) .

on october 30 , pursuant to the act and h.res .

391 , the house passed a joint resolution disapproving the suspension of the debt limit by a vote of 222-191 .

on october 29 , 2013 , however , the senate rejected a motion to proceed to its own disapproval resolution ( s.j.res .

26 ) by a vote of 45-54 , effectively precluding any further congressional action .

a total of 96 debt limit measures have been enacted into law since 1940 ( see figure 1 ) .

the number of laws rose steadily from the 1950s through the 1980s , from six to 24 , but dropped to 13 in the 1990s .

six of the 13 laws enacted in the 1990s were temporary extensions over a three - month period in 1990 , enacted largely to accommodate lengthy negotiations during a budget summit between congress and the president .

nine debt limit laws were enacted in the 2000s , and six debt limit laws have been enacted so far in this decade .

as mentioned previously , debt limit legislation has been developed and considered under regular legislative procedures in both chambers , pursuant to the house's so - called gephardt rule , or as part of the budget reconciliation process .

of the total 96 debt limit measures enacted into law since 1940 , 77 were considered under regular legislative procedures , 15 were initiated pursuant to the gephardt rule , and four were considered as part of omnibus budget reconciliation legislation .

compared with regular legislative procedures , the gephardt rule accelerates action in the house ( but not the senate ) , and the budget reconciliation process expedites consideration in both chambers .

table 1 provides information on the 28 measures adjusting the public debt limit enacted since 1990 .

of these 28 measures , 21 were considered under regular legislative procedures in both chambers either as stand - alone legislation ( 9 measures ) or as part of legislation involving other matters ( 12 measures ) , 4 were initiated pursuant to the gephardt rule , and 3 were considered as part of omnibus budget reconciliation legislation .

in two instances , the debt limit legislation also included procedures to provide for a congressional disapproval process .

