rs21582 - - north korean crisis: possible military options july 29 , 200 .

the korean peninsula lies at a nexus of military , economic , and political concerns with global implications .

from north korea'sperspective , it is surrounded by world powers: to the west and north are china and russia , to the east is japan , andto the south issouth korea and military forces of the united states .

since the korean war began in 1950 , the north koreandictatorship haspresented continuous military and economic challenges to its neighbors .

recent challenges have included a specterof economiccollapse and a threat to develop a nuclear arsenal .

north korea , with a population of 22 million , maintains a large military force of over 1 million active soldiers and 4.7 millionreservists .

its force structure includes some 20 army corps with armor , mechanized infantry , and infantry units ; notable enhancementsinclude 88,000 special purpose forces and a range of artillery , rocket , and missile forces ( some reportedly capableof deliveringchemical and biological agents ) ( 1 ) .

naval forcesinclude some 300 patrol and coastal combatants , 26 submarines , and 66inshore / coastal submarines for inserting special forces .

air forces deploy over 500 russian fighter and attackaircraft and some 300utility helicopters .

detracting from the potency of this large force are the age and obsolescence of many combatsystems and lowtraining hours afforded to their crews .

many draftees may reflect weakness stemming from ten years of malnutrition .

directly facing the north korean threat is south korea with some 48 million people .

it has 686,000 personnel on active military dutyand can muster 4.5 million reservists .

the south korean army is organized into some 10 corps , with equipmentgenerally better thanthat found to the north - - for example , half of its tanks are comparable to the u.s. abrams tank .

its fleet of over350 helicoptersincludes u.s. ah - 1 cobras , ch - 47 chinooks , and uh - 60 blackhawks .

the navy deploys 26 submarines , 39principal surfacecombatants , 84 patrol and coastal combatants , and a 2-division force of 28,000 marines .

the air force flies over530 combat aircraft , including the f - 16c / d .

the south korean level of training is considered generally higher than that of north korea .

integral to the defense of south korea is the direct presence of some 37,000 u.s. military personnel .

major units are two brigades ofthe 2d infantry division , combat and support units of the eighth army ( including patriot missile batteries ) , and u.s.air force unitsdeploying 90 combat aircraft .

dedicated reinforcement and supporting forces are considerable , including a newstryker brigade ( 2 ) and a corps headquarters in fort lewis , washington and the 25th infantry division in hawaii .

powerful air force , marine corps , andnavy forces ( totaling 48,000 personnel ) are nearby in japan , including the seventh fleet .

availability of additionalarmy forces inthe near term , however , would be limited by ongoing commitments in iraq , afghanistan , the balkans , and otherplaces .

 ( 3 ) a unique strength of the defense of south korea resides in the command arrangements , both joint and combined .

a u.s. officer,general leon j. laporte , as commander of the combined forces command , would command all allied forces insouth korea duringwartime , as well as all u.s. forces .

a south korean general would be the ground component commander and haveoperationalcontrol of u.s. ground forces assigned to him by general laporte .

higher headquarters integrate both u.s. andsouth koreanintelligence and operational planning , an area of frequent testing and exercise .

major military action on the korean peninsula could create a challenge exceeding that recently met by the united states and its alliesin iraq .

some 80% of the peninsula , about the size of utah , is covered by rugged hills and mountains .

 ( 4 ) the winters are bitterly cold,while the summers are hot and humid with periodic torrential rains and flooding .

much of the north korean forceis protected by asystem of underground caves and tunnels .

about two - thirds of the north korean force is forward deployed alongthe demilitarizedzone ( dmz ) , the northern boundary of south korea .

complicating military defensive planning is the location ofseoul , the capital ofsouth korea .

seoul , a metropolis of some 10 million people , sits astride the major trafficable corridor betweennorth and southkorea , as close as 25 miles to the dmz .

in a surprise attack , the north could inflict artillery and missile devastationupon seoul - - referred to by the north as a "sea of fire" ( 5 ) - - andpossibly reach the city with a coordinated ground and special operations attack .

should resort to force be deemed necessary , there are several military actions that the united states could contemplate to achievepolicy objectives on the korean peninsula .

north korea , unfortunately , has a history of unpredictable , and oftenviolent , reactions toeven slight provocations .

therefore , even the most modest u.s. military action risks escalation to higher levels ofconflict and mostanalysts agree that no military option should be chosen without full recognition of such danger .

also , acombination of options couldbe chosen or even anticipated to ensue .

u.s. allies and other nations in northeast asia are aware of these dangersand the unitedstates would likely undertake some form of consultation with them - - their active or passive cooperation could beneeded .

some suggest that , in light of potentially large casualties , proceeding without south korean agreement "would be immoralas well asill - advised. .

 ( 6 ) status quo .

current u.s. policy involves maintaining a stable military situationwhile diplomacy proceeds to solve the north korean nuclear crisis .

south korea and the united states maintainstrong defenses alongthe dmz .

periodic military exercises elicit complaints from north korean officials , but , over time , they generallyseem accustomedto and respect the existing military situation .

 ( 7 ) somehave suggested withdrawal or drawdown of u.s. forces , but other analystsbelieve this could , in a time of tensions , send unintended messages to north korea or even to one or more of itspowerful neighbors .

ongoing studies and negotiations propose to relocate u.s. ground forces and headquarters , primarily by movingthe u.s. 2d infantrydivision from the north to the south of seoul .

 ( 8 ) sucha move would give u.s. forces greater flexibility to maneuver and make themless vulnerable to a surprise attack - - essentially lessening the "tripwire" effect of having u.s. forces close to thedmz .

whethersuch an action will make the military situation more or less stable could be argued either way , ( 9 ) but the overall effect should notunduly change the military status quo on the korean peninsula .

improve defensive posture .

recognizing that the current situation is unusuallytense , the united states and south korea could adopt a policy of temporarily increasing military preparedness todeter a northkorean military strike , ( 10 ) improve allied odds todefeat such a strike , or reinforce diplomatic firmness .

the least provocative actionmight be to add more robust intelligence and warning activities , both those based in south korea and those usingspace assets andadjoining air and sea access .

other options include: upgrading and testing alternate command headquarters,including thoseunderground , as well as information and communications networks ; adding more air and missile defense assets toprotect additionalkey government and military facilities in south korea and japan ; and , strengthening unit reception plans andfacilities forreinforcements .

in so far as the north korean crisis is recognized as a priority military challenge to the unitedstates , the measuresabove are , in some cases , underway , according to recent press reports .

 ( 11 ) although possible , it is unlikely that north korea wouldattack solely in response to such gradual , defensive measures .

it might , however , feel greater pressure to either reacha diplomaticsolution or expend more resources on its own military establishment .

calling up south korean reservists or moving additional u.s. combat forces into the peninsula might also be considered .

unlessdone in response to overtly hostile north korean actions or intentions , such actions would most likely be construedas a seriousprovocation or possibly a prelude to an allied attack .

north korean sensitivity is illustrated by statements of concerneven whentemporary u.s. buildups and exercises are held in okinawa .

 ( 12 ) military enforcement of sanctions .

should north korea attempt to export weapons of mass destruction , longer range missiles , or the materials to create such things , interception on the highseas or in the air bymilitary forces might be considered .

 ( 13 ) u.s. andinternational policy objectives would be to enforce nonproliferation goals and,perhaps secondarily , to restrict hard currency gains from such transactions .

such a "blockade," "quarantine," or"containment," to beeffective , would require large , dedicated u.s. navy and air force participation , and at least some coast guardassets .

it wouldrequire the cooperation of other nations and international organizations , not least being a commitment from chinaand russia toactively seal their land , sea , and air borders from penetration by north korean conveyances and those of theircustomers .

risks for such an operation are that innocent trade and other activities of many nations could be inconvenienced ; north korea mightcircumvent even sophisticated intelligence and interception operations ; and , since a blockade is considered an actof war , north koreamight respond with military action .

 ( 14 ) preemptive strike on nuclear facilities .

the administration's national securitystrategy reserves the option for the president to order a preemptive strike to forestall a weapons of mass destructionattack against theunited states , its military forces , or its allies .

 ( 15 ) in this case , the possession of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles could threaten,now or in the short term , u.s. forces and allied populations in south korea and japan .

in the longer term , a fewobservers areconcerned that north korea could threaten more distant targets , to include parts of the u.s. homeland .

 ( 16 ) there is also the possibilitythat north korean nuclear materials and weapons could be exported to third parties - - terrorist groups or rogue states - - that mightwish to harm the united states .

in any event , a policy option would be to destroy identified weapons and materialsand associatedproduction facilities in north korea ; it would be complicated by the north korean's ability to hide or protect suchtargets , oftendeeply underground .

the united states has the ability to deliver both conventional and nuclear weapons against some underground targets , and is studying "robust nuclear earth penetrators. .

 ( 17 ) some targetscould presumably also be neutralized with special forces operations .

a risk with apreemptive strike option is that all identified targets , if they do exist , might not be accurately located and that somemay be deeply oreffectively protected against u.s. weapons .

 ( 18 ) surviving capabilities might be used in retaliatory strikes , possibly creating calamitiesthat u.s. policy was trying to prevent .

u.s. strikes would undoubtedly be considered acts of war , and north koreacould attempt tolaunch selective or massive conventional attacks against south korea in response .

 ( 19 ) it is , therefore , unlikely that south korea wouldsupport a preemptive strike option under most circumstances .

preemptive war .

initiating general war with north korea is an unlikely option forthe united states , as south korea would be unwilling to sustain the resultant , huge costs on its population withoutextremeprovocation .

in theory , however , two policy objectives might be met .

first , should regime change in north koreabecome a prioritypolicy objective , a military march to pyongyang might be the only sure means available .

second , should a majornorth korean attacksouth appear imminent , the policy of preemptive attack might offer advantages: the initial allied targeting andassaults could reducenorth korean capabilities to destroy seoul , wmd could be destroyed or captured , and allied commanders wouldbe able to executetheir plan with nonattritted forces - - a particular advantage if the united states followed a doctrine of rapid , joint,and coordinatedattacks throughout the depth of north korea .

in considering a war option , certain assumptions and risks would need to be assessed .

first , international support for the war wouldbe desirable , given u.s. reliance on global communications and transport ; china's reaction would be key - - at theminimum it wouldhave to be neutral .

next , it would be difficult to mask attack preparations by u.s. and south korean forces .

northkorea couldlaunch its own preemptive attack , possibly creating some of the adverse consequences u.s. policy was trying tocircumvent .

also,timing is a problem - - due to heavy commitments in iraq and many other places , the u.s. army is currently stretchedvery thin , andwould find it difficult to contribute the major ground forces needed .

 ( 20 ) to sustain such an operation , it is likely that many armynational guard and army reserve units not already on active duty would have to be mobilized , as well asconsiderable numbers ofindividual reservists to fill out units and replace casualties .

it is likely that much of any post - war occupation ofnorth korea requiredcould be accomplished by south korea .

finally , american public acceptance of a more difficult and protracted war than it might expect based on recent , quick u.s. militaryvictories in southwest asia and the balkans may be a requisite .

in addition to geographic problems highlightedabove and a largerenemy force that has possibly learned through observation how the united states fights , the north korean soldiermay not surrendereasily .

the korean war of 1950-1953 is a cautionary example: one u.s. veteran of that conflict said , "i'd ratherfight the chinese anyday than the north koreans , who were more tenacious , more fanatical , and more disciplined. .

 ( 21 ) others would point out that today'snorth korean soldier is physically weaker , may resent state oppression , is severely outclassed in weaponry andexperience withmodern warfare - - and the current limits of his tenacity are not known .

should a military option be deemednecessary , the executivewould be expected to consult with appropriate congressional bodies .

