the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , a part of the department of commerce , is the executive branch's principal advisory office on domestic and international telecommunications and information technology issues and policies .

among its objectives , it has a mandate to provide greater access for all americans to telecommunications services ; to provide support for u.s. attempts to open foreign telecommunications and information markets ; to advise the secretary of commerce , the president , and vice president and the executive branch in international telecommunications and information negotiations ; to fund research grants for new technologies and their applications ; and to assist non - profit organizations in converting to digital transmission in the 21 st century .

generally , congressional policymakers have supported the ntia's mandate and objectives through the appropriations process .

the recent history of the ntia budget , fy2000-fy2007 , is as follows ( appropriations for fy2008 will be included once the final bill has been passed ) : it should be noted that in fy2001 , the clinton administration requested additional funding for digitizing existing public broadcasting transmissions and construction of new public digital broadcasting facilities .

while the final appropriations did not match the clinton administration's request of $423 million , it represented a substantial increase in ntia's historical budget .

congress has generally maintained consistent funding for ntia in its appropriations , regardless of the request .

for fy2009 , the bush administration has proposed a continued reduction in the ntia budget , primarily reflected in eliminating ntia's program to construct and maintain public telecommunications facilities .

the administration also sees ntia having a larger role in national emergency planning ( see below ) .

until fy2004 , the ntia budget had three major components: salaries and expenses ; information infrastructure grants programs ; and public telecommunications facilities , planning and construction .

however , the infrastructure grants program was eliminated in fy2005 .

in both fy2006 and fy2007 , the bush administration requested ending funding for the public telecommunications facilities , planning and construction program .

policymakers continue to examine the proper role of ntia in supporting its programs and policies , as well as the overall budget for ntia to support its mission .

according to some , the telecommunications act of 1996 set into law a de - regulatory environment that requires less , not more , federal direction of telecommunications and information technology use .

the explosive growth of the internet since the mid - 1990s has reached nearly every part of america , and internet access is virtually ubiquitous .

therefore , beyond budget issues , the role of ntia has changed in some policy areas .

two important issues facing ntia's administration of public telecommunications policy are domain name registration and use of spectrum .

regarding domain names , the expiration of the department of commerce / ntia mou with icann on september 30 , 2006 , has led to speculation over whether , and how , the mou might be renewed .

it also has raised concerns over the extent to which ( if at all ) ntia might ultimately relinquish control over icann and the domain name system .

second , some are concerned that ntia is seeking to develop a larger and broader policy role in spectrum management as a result of losing funding in other program areas , such as the top program and perhaps eventually the ptfpc program .

because spectrum and its use is an important alternative to terrestrial communications transmission and reception , federal policy regarding its use and applications is an important national issue .

some question whether ntia's evolving role in spectrum management is being fully coordinated with other federal institutions , such as that of the federal communications commission .

a second important issue is the role of ntia in the auction and management of spectrum .

the third ntia program that is administered by ntia but not directly funded by appropriated money comes out of the 2005 deficit reduction act .

that law ( p.l .

109-171 ) called for the creation of a digital transition and safety public fund , which would provide funding for further use of the electromagnetic spectrum , by offsetting receipts received from the auction of licenses to use the older analog spectrum for other purposes .

the initial auction was held on january 24 , 2008 .

the receipts from the auction will fund the following programmatic functions at ntia , perhaps the most notable ( and receiving the most public attention ) is a digital - analog converter box program to assist consumers in meeting the february 2009 deadline for receiving television broadcasts in digital format .

congress is watching this transition period , and ntia's role in it , very closely .

concerns about changes in ntia's mission and objectives also has been raised regarding the bush administration's elimination of funding for the top program and reducing funding for the ptfpc program .

the administration contends that the efforts of the former will be picked up by the private sector , and the latter by the corporation for public broadcasting .

some still contend that it is not clear whether all of the possible areas of information infrastructure development have been saturated through the top program ; or if not yet saturated , whether industry will find it profitable to provide the "last mile" of telecommunications and internet connections in areas not yet served .

for public telecommunications and facilities planning and construction , an issue may arise as to whether the corporation for public broadcasting has the resources to administer a facilities construction program .

the ultimate question may be whether this change will fundamentally affect the pace at which national broadcasting is converted to digital transmission .

