in the three decades since its enactment , the clean air act ( caa ) has seen many skirmishes over how its text should be interpreted .

a current , and major , one involves the extent to which a power plant or factory may alter its facilities or operations without bringing about a "modification" of that emissions source .

a "modification" turns an existing emissions source into a "new source," which has to meet more stringent air pollution control requirements in the caa than does an existing source .

legally speaking , the issue is — what changes to an "existing stationary source" of air pollution are significant enough to be a "modification" so as to trigger the caa's new source performance standards ( nspss ) and pre - construction "new source review" ( nsr ) ? .

our topic in this report , however , is narrower .

it is the widely used exemption to what constitutes a modification for "routine maintenance , repair , and replacement" ( rmrr ) at stationary sources .

on the meaning of this vague phrase turns considerable sums of money , since routine maintenance , repair , and replacement , by virtue of the exemption , does not require the facility to install the state - of - the - art , often expensive , pollution controls demanded by nspss and nsr .

this report surveys the original statutory , regulatory , and case law landscape on rmrr , then describes more recent regulatory and judicial developments .

in enacting the caa of 1970 , congress drew a sharp line between existing and new stationary sources of air pollution .

for many existing stationary sources , congress believed , retrofitting the latest air - pollution control technology would not be economically or technologically feasible .

but new sources , built as they are after adoption of a new pollution standard , could feasibly install state - of - the - art controls , and given the caa's goal of cleaning the air and avoiding new pollution problems , it was imperative they do so .

so the caa of 1970 adopted different approaches for existing and new stationary sources .

for existing sources of major air pollutants ( but not hazardous emissions ) , states were given wide discretion to set emission ceilings for individual sources .

by contrast , for new sources of air pollutants that "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare," epa itself sets the standards — the earlier - mentioned nspss — rather than give the states discretion .

nspss are strict technology - based standards , set at the emissions rate that can be achieved by use of the best adequately demonstrated technology .

the 1977 amendments went further .

in areas where the air is either cleaner than national ambient standards require ( "prevention of significant deterioration," or psd , areas ) or dirtier than national standards ( "nonattainment areas" ) , proposed "major" new sources must undergo nsr before they can be built .

both psd - area nsr and nonattainment - area nsr are complex , requiring among other things that the would - be builder obtain a pre - construction permit containing emission limits based on "best available control technology" ( psd areas ) or "lowest achievable emission rate" ( nonattainment areas ) .

the rmrr issue arises because the caa says that not only newly constructed stationary sources , but also modifications of existing sources , are subject to nspss and nsr .

in the act's words , nspss apply to any "new source," defined as — any stationary source , the construction or modification of which is commenced after the publication of regulations ( or , if earlier , proposed regulations ) prescribing a [nsps] which will be applicable to such source .

the psd and nonattainment - area portions of the act , mandating nsr , are to similar effect .

nsr in such areas is triggered by proposals to build either "major" new sources or modifications of existing sources .

enhancing the similarity , the act says that the meaning of "modification" for determining applicability of nsr is the same as for applicability of nspss .

thus , the pivotal issue is — precisely what changes to a stationary source constitute a " modification " ? .

the caa defines "modification" as — any physical change in , or change in the method of operation of , a stationary source which increases the amount of any air pollutant emitted by such source or which results in the emission of any air pollutant not previously emitted .

to reiterate , this definition determines both which changes in a source are subject to nspss , and which trigger nsr .

note that it does not cover just any "physical change ... or change in the method of operation," but only those that result in an increase in emissions .

the definition leaves many questions unanswered , as it does not define its component phrases — "physical change," "change in the method of operation," and "increases the amount of any air pollutant. .

the meaning of each of these phrases has been the subject of litigation .

given that a mere modification triggers nspss and nsr , it is unsurprising that an entire "reconstruction" of an existing facility does so as well .

epa defines a "reconstruction" as — replacement of components of an existing facility to such an extent that ( 1 ) [t]he fixed capital cost of the new components exceeds 50 percent of the fixed capital cost that would be required to construct a comparable entirely new facility , and ( 2 ) [i]t is technologically and economically feasible to meet the applicable [nspss] .

observe that in contrast with modifications , a change in a facility can constitute a reconstruction irrespective of whether it increases emissions .

but let's return to modifications .

epa's definition of "modification" echoes the act's definition , but also states six kinds of changes in a stationary source the agency does not consider to be modifications — based on its view that congress could not have intended that every change at a source , no matter how minor , would subject the source to heightened pollution - control requirements .

the most debated of these epa - developed exceptions is for rmrr — that is: [m]aintenance , repair , and replacement , which the [epa] administrator determines to be routine for a source category.... until recently ( see below ) , epa regulations did not further specify the kinds of activities included as rmrr .

rather , eligibility for the rmrr exemption was through case - by - case analysis , "weighing the nature , extent , purpose , frequency , and cost of the proposed work , as well as other relevant factors , to arrive at a common sense determination. .

this case - by - case approach of epa was approved in the leading case of wisconsin electric power co. v. reilly ( " wepco " ) .

wepco had concluded that "extensive renovation" of its generating units was needed and submitted a proposed "life extension" program to the state .

among the renovations proposed were repair and replacement of the turbine generators , boilers , mechanical and electrical auxiliaries , and the common plant support facilities .

epa determined that wepco's proposal triggered both nsps and psd - area nsr , requiring a permit before construction could begin .

relevant here , epa dismissed wepco's argument that the proposal was rmrr .

in wepco , the seventh circuit ruled that using epa's case - by - case approach , the agency's ruling that the proposal went beyond rmrr was proper .

the extent of the work on the plant , said the court , was substantial and unprecedented .

also , the purpose of the project ( "life extension" ) , its infrequency ( only once or twice in the unit's life ) , and its high cost all pointed to non - routineness .

in recent years , the rmrr exemption has assumed center stage .

the curtain - raising act was the filing of caa enforcement actions by the clinton administration against electric utilities across the midwest and south ( involving 36 power plants , several owned by tva ) , accusing them of making plant changes that exceeded "routine maintenance" without installing the more stringent nsr controls .

following this , in may , 2001 , president bush's national energy policy development group issued a recommended national energy policy , directing epa to review the impact of nsr on investment in new utility and refinery generation capacity , energy efficiency , and environmental protection .

this resulted in epa's june , 2002 report to the president on the impact of nsr , which asserted the desirability of specifying certain categories of activities that categorically qualify as "routine maintenance. .

on december 31 , 2002 , epa published final regulations that affect how , for nsr purposes , sources are to calculate emission increases resulting from a change , and that amend other features of its nsr rules .

more relevant here , epa on the same day proposed a rule purporting to clarify the rmrr exception in the manner recommended in its report — by specifying activity categories that will be considered rmrr without regard to other considerations .

epa v. whitman .

while this rmrr proposal was pending , the eleventh circuit rendered its long - awaited decision in epa v. whitman .

whitman arose when the epa determined that the tva violated the caa through various rehabilitation projects at its coal - fired electric power plants that went beyond rmrr , but were undertaken without permits .

it embodied this determination in an administrative compliance order ( aco ) .

the aco was affirmed by epa's environmental appeals board , which also endorsed the agency's multi - factor test for rmrr applied in wepco .

the eleventh circuit , however , found that although the caa empowers epa to issue acos with the status of law , the caa was unconstitutional to the extent that severe civil and criminal penalties can be imposed by a court for noncompliance with such an agency order , generally issued without an adjudication .

rather , epa must prove the caa violation in district court .

hence , the court held , tva was free to violate the acos here without fear of penalty .

note that this decision , important as it is to enforcement of the rmrr exception , did not speak to the contours of the exception itself .

the october , 2003 final rule .

the contours of rmrr were significantly reshaped , however , when epa in october , 2003 finalized its equipment - replacement rule proposal of the previous december .

the final rule declares a set of equipment replacement activities that will be viewed as per se rmrr , in contrast to the old case - by - case approach .

according to the regulatory preamble , the new approach is "intended to provide greater regulatory certainty without sacrificing the current level of environmental protection...." and addresses the criticism that the case - by - case approach "hamper[s] activities important to assuring the safe , reliable , and efficient operation of existing plants. .

 ( the new rule represented final action on only part of the agency's december , 2002 proposal .

for the moment , epa is not taking action on the proposed annual maintenance , repair , and replacement "allowance. .

the allowance was an annual maintenance cost allowance established for each facility based on an industry - specific percentage. ) .

the new rule specifies that the replacement of components of a process unit with identical components or their functional equivalents constitutes rmrr , provided the replacement cost ( including related costs such as labor and equipment rentals ) is less than 20% of the current replacement value of the process unit of which the component is a part , the replacement does not change the unit's basic design parameters , and the unit continues to meet enforceable emission limitations and any operational limitations that constrain emissions .

the agency acknowledges that the new approach will allow replacement of components under more circumstances than the former case - by - case approach — the key trigger of the controversy over the new rules .

the former approach remains available as an "alternative and / or supplement," but it is anticipated that the higher thresholds of the new per se approach will make resort to the case - by - case approach uncommon .

finally , the new rule imposes no recordkeeping requirements , on the belief that records normally kept by a business , together with epa's broad caa authority to inspect facilities , will allow proper enforcement .

the new rule applies only to conduct after the rule's effective date , and thus does not constitute a defense to pending caa enforcement actions based on failure to meet rmrr .

state of new york v. environmental protection agency .

in multiple lawsuits filed in the d.c .

circuit , fifteen states ( mostly in the northeast , plus california , illinois , new mexico , wisconsin , and the district of columbia ) , plus several localities and environmental groups , argue that the equipment - replacement rmrr rule goes beyond epa's authority under the caa .

these suits have been consolidated under the name state of new york v. environmental protection agency .

on december 24 , 2003 , the court granted petitioners' motion to stay the rule pending the court's full review .

"petitioners," said the court , "have demonstrated the irreparable harm and likelihood of success on the merits" required for the issuance of such a stay .

because stays pending review are not often granted , one may assume that this judicial statement betokens an uphill climb by epa in defending the rule .

with the new rule thus suspended ( it was to have taken effect on december 26 , 2003 ) , the old case - by - case approach continues to apply .

the court on december 24 also declined to consolidate the above actions with another group of consolidated cases that challenged the december , 2002 final rule .

it did agree , however , to designate the same panel for the equipment - replacement rule cases as has been assigned for the december , 2002 final rule cases , due to the related nature of the two groups of cases .

