between 1969 and 1999 , almost 3,500 people died as a result of political violence in northern ireland , which is a part of the united kingdom ( uk ) .

the conflict , which has its origins in the 1921 division of ireland and is often referred to as "the troubles," has reflected a struggle between different national , cultural , and religious identities .

protestants in northern ireland ( 48% ) largely define themselves as british and support continued incorporation in the uk ( unionists ) .

catholics in northern ireland ( 45% ) consider themselves irish , and many catholics desire a united ireland ( nationalists ) .

more militant unionists are often termed loyalists , while more militant nationalists are referred to as republicans ; in the past , loyalists and republicans have been willing to use force to achieve their goals .

the latest version of the troubles was sparked in late 1968 , when a civil rights movement was launched in northern ireland mostly by catholics , who had long faced discrimination in areas such as electoral rights , housing , and employment .

this civil rights movement was met with violence by some unionists , loyalists , and the police , which in turn prompted armed action by nationalists and republicans .

increasing chaos and escalating violence led the uk government to deploy the british army on the streets of northern ireland in 1969 and to impose direct rule from london in 1972 ( between 1920 and 1972 , northern ireland had its own regional government at stormont , outside belfast ) .

for years , the british and irish governments sought to facilitate a negotiated political settlement to the conflict in northern ireland .

after many ups and downs , the two governments and the northern ireland political parties participating in the peace talks announced an agreement on april 10 , 1998 .

this accord became known as the good friday agreement ( for the day on which it was concluded ) ; it is also known as the belfast agreement .

at the core of the good friday agreement is the "consent principle" — that is , a change in northern ireland's status can come about only with the consent of the majority of its people ( as well as with the consent of a majority in ireland ) .

while the agreement acknowledged that a substantial section of the population in northern ireland and a majority on the island desired a united ireland , it recognized that the majority of people in northern ireland wished to remain part of the uk .

if the preferences of these majorities were to change , the agreement asserted that both the british and irish governments would have a binding obligation to bring about the wish of the people ; thus , the agreement included provisions for future polls to be held in northern ireland on its constitutional status should events warrant .

the good friday agreement set out a framework for devolved government — the transfer of specified powers over local governance from london to belfast — and called for establishing a northern ireland assembly and executive committee in which unionist and nationalist parties would share power .

to ensure that neither unionists nor nationalists could dominate the assembly , the agreement specified that "key decisions" must receive cross - community support .

the executive committee would be composed of a first minister , deputy first minister , and other ministers with departmental responsibilities ( eg , health , education , employment ) .

in addition , the good friday agreement contained provisions on several issues viewed as central to the peace process: decommissioning ( disarmament ) of paramilitary weapons ; policing ; human rights ; uk security normalization ( demilitarization ) ; and the status of prisoners .

negotiations on many of these areas had been extremely contentious .

experts assert that the final agreed text thus reflected some degree of "constructive ambiguity" on such issues .

finally , the good friday agreement created new "north - south" and "east - west" institutions .

a north - south ministerial council was established to allow leaders in the northern and southern parts of the island of ireland to consult and cooperate on cross - border issues .

a british - irish council also was formed , composed of representatives of the two governments and the devolved administrations of northern ireland , scotland , wales , the channel islands , and the isle of man to discuss matters of regional interest .

voters in northern ireland and the republic of ireland approved the good friday agreement in separate referendums on may 22 , 1998 .

elections to the new northern ireland assembly , which had 108 seats at that time , took place on june 25 , 1998 .

the two biggest and mainstream unionist and nationalist parties at the time — the ulster unionist party ( uup ) and the social democratic and labour party ( sdlp ) — won 28 and 24 seats respectively .

the harder - line democratic unionist party ( dup ) , despite its continued opposition to many parts of the good friday agreement , won 20 seats ; sinn fein , the associated political party of the irish republican army ( ira ) , won 18 ; and a number of smaller parties claimed the rest of the assembly seats .

despite a much - improved security situation since the signing of the good friday agreement in 1998 , full implementation has been difficult .

for years , decommissioning and police reforms were key sticking points .

sporadic violence from dissident republican and loyalist paramilitary groups that refused to accept the peace process and sectarian strife between protestants and catholics also helped to feed ongoing mistrust between the unionist and nationalist communities .

in light of the 2007 political agreement to restore northern ireland's devolved government , the transfer of policing and justice powers in 2010 , and the extensive police reforms , many analysts view the implementation of the most important aspects of the good friday agreement as having been completed .

in march 2011 , the northern ireland assembly and executive concluded its first full term in office in 40 years .

the regularly scheduled assembly elections in may 2011 and may 2016 produced successive power - sharing governments led by the dup and sinn fein .

nevertheless , deep distrust persists between unionists and nationalists and their respective political parties .

a series of events over the past few years — including protests over the use of flags and emblems , a crisis over implementing welfare reform , a controversy over a past deal for republican "on the runs," and the arrest of a sinn fein leader in connection with the murder of a former ira member — have highlighted the fragility of community relations and periodically threatened the stability of the devolved government .

in january 2017 , after only 10 months in office , the devolved government led by first minister arlene foster of the dup and deputy first minister martin mcguinness of sinn fein collapsed , prompting snap assembly elections .

over the past few years , the northern ireland political parties and the british and irish governments have made several attempts to resolve outstanding issues related to the peace process , reduce tensions between the unionist and nationalist communities , and promote reconciliation .

such efforts also have sought to address concerns such as ongoing sectarian strife , paramilitary and dissident activity , and northern ireland's legacy of violence ( often termed "dealing with the past" ) .

major endeavors include the 2013 haass initiative , the 2014 stormont house agreement , and the 2015 fresh start agreement .

although northern ireland has made considerable progress in the years since the 1998 good friday agreement , the search for peace and reconciliation remains challenging .

controversial issues include bridging sectarian divisions and managing key sticking points ( especially parading , protests , and the use of flags and emblems ) ; dealing with the past ; curbing remaining paramilitary and dissident activity ; and furthering economic development .

as noted , the 2013 haass initiative , the 2014 stormont house agreement , and the 2015 fresh start agreement all attempted to tackle at least some aspects of these long - standing challenges .

some measures agreed in these successive accords have been delayed amid the current absence of a devolved government .

significant concerns also exist about the possible implications of brexit for northern ireland .

successive u.s .

administrations have viewed the good friday agreement as the best framework for a lasting peace in northern ireland .

the clinton administration was instrumental in helping the parties forge the agreement , and the george w. bush administration strongly backed its full implementation .

u.s. officials welcomed the end to the ira's armed campaign in 2005 and the restoration of the devolved government in 2007 .

the obama administration remained engaged in the peace process .

in october 2009 , then - u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton visited northern ireland , addressed the assembly , and urged northern ireland's leaders to reach an agreement on devolving policing and justice powers .

in february 2010 , president obama welcomed the resulting hillsborough agreement .

in june 2013 , president obama visited northern ireland in the context of a g8 summit meeting and noted that the united states would always "stand by" northern ireland .

the obama administration welcomed the conclusion of both the december 2014 stormont house agreement and the november 2015 fresh start agreement .

like its predecessors , the trump administration has offered support and encouragement to northern ireland .

in march 2017 , vice president mike pence noted that , "the advance of peace and prosperity in northern ireland is one of the great success stories of the past 20 years" and paid tribute to senator mitchell and his role in the peace process .

in november 2017 , the state department spokesperson expressed regret at the impasse in discussions to restore northern ireland's power - sharing institutions , urged continued dialogue , and asserted that the united states remained "ready to support efforts that ensure full implementation of the good friday agreement and subsequent follow - on cross - party agreements. .

many members of congress have actively supported the peace process for decades .

encouraged by progress on police reforms , several members prompted the bush administration in december 2001 to lift a ban on contacts between the federal bureau of investigation and the new psni .

congress had initiated this prohibition in 1999 because of the former ruc's human rights record .

more recently , congressional hearings have focused on the peace process , policing reforms , human rights , and the status of public inquiries into several past murders in northern ireland in which collusion between the security forces and paramilitary groups is suspected ; these murders have included the 1989 slaying of belfast attorney patrick finucane and the 1997 killing of raymond mccord , jr .

some members of congress have urged the trump administration to name a special envoy for northern ireland to signal that the united states remains committed to the region , especially in light of the stalemate in reestablishing the devolved government .

on the economic front , the united states is an important source of investment for northern ireland .

according to one study , foreign direct investment by u.s. - based companies in northern ireland totaled £1.48 billion ( nearly $2.1 billion ) between 2003-2004 and 2015-2016 and was responsible for creating 13,875 jobs .

between 2009 and 2011 , a special u.s. economic envoy to northern ireland worked to further economic ties between the united states and northern ireland and to underpin the peace process by promoting economic prosperity .

the united states has provided aid to the region through the international fund for ireland ( ifi ) , which was created in 1986 .

although the ifi was established by the british and irish governments based on objectives in the anglo - irish agreement of 1985 , the ifi is an independent entity .

the ifi supports economic regeneration and social development projects in areas most affected by the civil unrest in northern ireland and in the border areas of the republic of ireland ; in doing so , it has also sought to foster contact , dialogue , and reconciliation between nationalists and unionists .

the united states has contributed more than $540 million since the ifi's establishment , roughly half of total ifi funding .

the eu , canada , australia , and new zealand also have provided funding for the ifi .

during the 1980s and 1990s , u.s. appropriations for the ifi averaged around $23 million annually ; in the 2000s , u.s. appropriations averaged $18 million each year .

according to the fund , the vast majority of projects that it has supported with seed funding have been located in disadvantaged areas that have suffered from high unemployment , a lack of facilities , and little private sector investment .

in its first two decades , ifi projects in northern ireland and the southern border counties focused on economic and business development and sectors such as tourism , agriculture , and technology .

in 2006 , amid an improved economic situation , the ifi released a five - year "sharing this space" program , in which the ifi announced that it would began shifting its strategic emphasis away from economic development and toward projects aimed at promoting community reconciliation and overcoming past divisions .

successive u.s .

administrations and many members of congress have backed the ifi as a means to promote economic development and encourage divided communities to work together .

support for paramilitary groups in northern ireland has traditionally been strongest in communities with high levels of unemployment and economic deprivation .

thus , many observers have long viewed the creation of jobs and economic opportunity as a key part of resolving the conflict in northern ireland and have supported the ifi as part of the peace process .

many u.s. officials and members of congress also encouraged the ifi to place greater focus on reconciliation activities , and were pleased with the ifi's decision to do so in 2006 .

however , critics have questioned the ifi's effectiveness , viewing some ifi projects as largely wasteful and unlikely to bridge community divides in any significant way .

others suggest that the ifi was never intended to continue in perpetuity .

some also argue that it is time to move the u.s. relationship with ireland and northern ireland onto a more mature and equal footing , and that u.s. development assistance undermines this goal .

between fy2006 and fy2011 , neither the bush nor the obama administration requested funding for the ifi in the president's annual budget request .

administration officials maintained that the lack of a funding request for the ifi did not signal a decreased u.s. commitment to northern ireland ; rather , they asserted that the ifi was expected to begin winding down as an organization .

the 2006 "sharing this space" program was intended as the "last phase" of the ifi , and in its 2009 annual report , the ifi stated that it would no longer be seeking contributions from its donors .

despite the lack of an administration request , congress continued to appropriate funding for the ifi between fy2006 and fy2010 ( $17 million for fy2010 ) , viewing these contributions as an important and tangible sign of the ongoing u.s. commitment to the peace process .

in fy2011 , however , amid the u.s. economic and budget crisis , some members of congress began to call for an end to u.s. funding for the ifi as part of a raft of budget - cutting measures .

many asserted that u.s. contributions to the ifi were no longer necessary given ireland and northern ireland's improved political and economic situation ( relative to what it was in the 1980s ) .

the sixth fy2011 continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-6 ) did not specify an allocation for the ifi , nor did the final fy2011 continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-10 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriation act of 2011 ) .

other members of congress continued to support u.s. funding for the ifi , noting the financial woes in ireland and northern ireland stemming from the 2008-2009 global recession and increasing concerns about the possibility of dissident violence , and ongoing sectarian tensions in the region .

they pointed out that in light of these evolved circumstances , the ifi itself reversed course , announcing it would continue functioning for the near term .

press reports indicated that the british and irish governments also supported the ifi's continuation , as did northern ireland's executive .

subsequent to the fy2011 budget deliberations , the obama administration allocated $2.5 million from fy2011 economic support fund ( esf ) resources to the ifi in the form of a grant for specific ifi activities to support peace and security in ireland and northern ireland .

for fy2012 , the obama administration requested $2.5 million in esf funding for the ifi in its annual budget request , asserting that "a permanent political settlement in northern ireland remains a priority foreign policy goal of the united states" and that "cross - community relations continue to be hampered by a lack of economic development and high unemployment. .

the fy2012 budget request also noted an increase in sectarian - driven hate crimes and paramilitary - style shootings and assaults in northern ireland , and that u.s. assistance would seek to counter these negative trends "by addressing the root causes of violence and intolerance. .

for similar reasons , in its fy2013 and fy2014 budget requests the administration proposed $2.5 million for the ifi , as part of its esf request for the europe and eurasia region aimed at promoting peace and reconciliation programs .

the obama administration did not request funding for the ifi in its subsequent annual budget requests .

according to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , u.s. funding provided between fy2011 and fy2014 enabled the united states to meet an existing $7.5 million commitment to the ifi's peace impact program , targeting those communities in ireland and northern ireland most prone to dissident recruitment and activity .

in june 2016 , the obama administration allocated $750,000 from fy2015 esf resources to the ifi in the form of a grant to support activities aimed at promoting a sustained peace in northern ireland and the border counties of ireland ; examples of programs to be supported included cross - community workshops on violence prevention and job training for unemployed youth in communities with high rates of joblessness and sectarian violence .

for similar purposes as described for fy2015 , the obama administration allocated $750,000 from fy2016 esf funds to the ifi in the form of a grant in december 2016 , and the trump administration allocated $750,000 from fy2017 esf funds to the ifi in august 2018 , also in the form of a grant .

the trump administration did not request funding for the ifi in its fy2018 or fy2019 budget requests .

