at the end of the 20 th century , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) published its list of the "ten great public health achievements" for the united states from 1900 to 1999 .

number one on the list was vaccination .

vaccination has resulted in the eradication of smallpox worldwide , and in the control of many other vaccine - preventable diseases .

mandatory vaccination programs , such as school immunization requirements , have played a major role in controlling rates of vaccine - preventable diseases in the united states .

historically , the preservation of the public health has been the primary responsibility of state and local governments , and the authority to enact laws relevant to the protection of the public health derives from the state's general police powers .

with respect to the preservation of the public health in cases of communicable disease outbreaks , these powers may include the institution of measures such as quarantine and isolation or the enactment of mandatory vaccination laws .

mandatory vaccination laws were first enacted in the early 19 th century , beginning with massachusetts' smallpox vaccination law in 1809 .

jacobson v. massachusetts is the seminal case regarding a state or municipality's authority to institute a mandatory vaccination program as an exercise of its police powers .

in jacobson , the supreme court upheld a massachusetts law that gave municipal boards of health the authority to require the vaccination of persons over the age of 21 against smallpox , and determined that the vaccination program instituted in the city of cambridge had "a real and substantial relation to the protection of the public health and safety. .

in upholding the law , the court noted that "the police power of a state must be held to embrace , at least , such reasonable regulations established directly by legislative enactment as will protect the public health and the public safety. .

the court added that such laws were within the full discretion of the state , and that federal powers with respect to such laws extended only to ensure that the state laws did not "contravene the constitution of the united states or infringe any right granted or secured by that instrument. .

the court addressed constitutional concerns raised by the petitioner in jacobson , but remained unconvinced that his rights were "contravened" by the mandatory vaccination program .

the petitioner argued that "a compulsory vaccination law is unreasonable , arbitrary and oppressive , and , therefore , hostile to the inherent right of every freeman to care for his own body and health in such way as to him seems best ; and that the execution of such a law against one who objects to vaccination , no matter for what reason , is nothing short of an assault upon his person. .

the court rejected the petitioner's constitutional challenge and noted that "the liberty secured by the constitution of the united states to every person within its jurisdiction does not import an absolute right in each person , to be , at all times and in all circumstances wholly free from restraint. .

however , the court did acknowledge limits to the state's power to protect the public health and set forth a reasonableness test for public health measures: [i]t might be that an acknowledged power of a local community to protect itself against an epidemic threatening the safety of all , might be exercised in particular circumstances and in reference to particular persons in such an arbitrary , unreasonable manner , or might go so far beyond what was reasonably required for the safety of the public , as to authorize or compel the courts to interfere for the protection of such persons .

federal jurisdiction over public health matters derives from the commerce clause , which states that congress shall have the power "[t]o regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states...." thus , under the public health service act , the secretary of the department of health and human services has authority to make and enforce regulations necessary "to prevent the introduction , transmission , or spread of communicable diseases from foreign countries into the states or possessions , or from one state or possession into any other state or possession. .

with regard to interstate commerce , the public health service act deals primarily with the use of quarantine and isolation measures to halt the spread of certain communicable diseases .

no mandatory vaccination programs are specifically authorized , nor do there appear to be any regulations regarding the implementation of a mandatory vaccination program at the federal level during a public health emergency .

with regard to foreign countries , the secretary has the power to restrict the entry of groups of aliens for public health reasons .

this power includes the authority to issue vaccination requirements for immigrants seeking entry into the united states .

currently , certain vaccines specified in statute , and other vaccines recommended by the cdc advisory committee on immunization practices for the general u.s. population , are required for immigrants who seek permanent residence in the united states , and people currently living in the united states who seek to adjust their status to become permanent residents .

cdc has determined that two diseases for which vaccines are recommended for routine use by the acip — for human papillomavirus ( hpv ) and zoster ( shingles ) — do not have the potential to cause outbreaks , and are therefore not required for admission .

vaccination requirements may be waived when the foreign national receives the vaccination , if the civil surgeon or panel physician certifies that the vaccination would not be medically appropriate , or if the vaccination would be contrary to the foreign national's religious or moral beliefs .

likewise , the military has broad authority in dealing with its personnel , both military and civilian , including the protection of their health .

military regulations require american troops to be immunized against a number of diseases , including tetanus , diphtheria , influenza , hepatitis a , measles , mumps , rubella , polio , and yellow fever .

inoculations begin upon entry into military service , and later vaccines depend upon troop specialties or assignments to different geographic areas of the world .

courts have upheld the legality of military mandatory vaccination orders .

for example , in united states v. chadwell , two u.s. marines refused to be vaccinated against smallpox , typhoid , paratyphoid , and influenza because of their religious beliefs .

in upholding the convictions , the navy board of review court ( now the navy - marine corps court of criminal appeals ) stated that religious beliefs were not above military orders and that "to permit this would be to make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to military orders , and in effect to permit every soldier to become a law unto himself. .

federal courts do not appear to contradict this reasoning .

one district court , in reviewing a denial of a discharge decision of the commandant of the marine corps under an "arbitrary and capricious standard," noted the lawfulness of the military's anthrax vaccination program , and noted military commanders' "overriding responsibility to protect the health and safety of american military personnel by administering appropriate vaccines when faced with the growing threat of biological and chemical weaponry. .

likewise , the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit upheld a department of defense policy of using unapproved , investigational drugs on military members in combat situations without their consent .

finally , in two recent cases the plaintiffs were discharged from the military for refusing to receive anthrax vaccinations .

they brought claims challenging the secretary of the air force's denial of their requests to correct the disciplinary records on the matter from their files .

in both cases , the district court for the district of columbia ruled that the decision of the board for the correction of military records was not arbitrary and capricious .

as noted above , state and local governments have primary responsibility for protecting the public health , and this has been reflected in the enactment of various state laws requiring that school children be vaccinated against certain diseases before enrolling in school and that health care workers be vaccinated as a condition of employment , as well as laws providing for mandatory vaccination procedures during a public health emergency .

any federal mandatory vaccination program applicable to the general public would likely be limited to areas of existing federal jurisdiction , i.e. , interstate and foreign commerce , similar to the federal quarantine authority .

this limitation on federal jurisdiction acknowledges that states have the primary responsibility for protecting the public health , but that under certain circumstances , federal intervention may be necessary .

