afghanistan's governing structure has historically consisted of a weak central government unwilling or unable to enforce significant financial or administrative mandates on all of afghanistan's diverse ethnic communities or on the 80% of afghans who live in rural areas .

ethnic and rural communities , many of which are divided by mountains and wide expanses , have often looked to local faction leaders for their governance .

at the same time , there has always been a struggle between urban , educated "modernizers" and the rural , lesser - educated traditionalists who adhere to a set of long - standing customs and practices .

the taliban government ( 1996-2001 ) opposed modernization , but there has been substantial modernization and urbanization since the taliban were ousted — changes that might help afghanistan remain stable after the international involvement in afghanistan ends .

at the national level , afghanistan had few , if any , western - style democratic institutions prior to the international intervention that took place after the september 11 , 2001 , attacks on the united states .

under the constitution of 1964 , king zahir shah was to be a constitutional monarch , and an elected lower house and appointed upper house were set up .

the parliament during that era never succeeded in becoming a significant check on the king's power , although the period from 1964 until the seizure of power by mohammad daoud in a 1973 military coup was considered a flowering of afghan democracy .

the last lower house elections during that period were held in 1969 .

the parliament was suspended outright following the april 1978 communist seizure of power .

the elected institutions and the 2004 adoption of a constitution were part of a post - taliban transition roadmap established by a united nations - sponsored agreement of major afghan factions signed in bonn , germany , on december 5 , 2001 ( "bonn agreement" ) , after the taliban had fallen .

hamid karzai was the first directly elected afghan president .

since the fall of the taliban , there has also been the growth of a civil society , largely made up of educated afghans , many of whom returned to afghanistan from exile when the taliban fell .

organizations and groups addressing various issues , including women's rights , law and justice , media freedoms , economics and business issues , the environment , and others , have proliferated .

u.s. and international partner policy has been to try to empower these groups to check government power and to entrench afghan democracy .

these newly emerging interest groups have still not been able to displace — or even necessarily substantially influence — the informal power structure of ethnic , regional , tribal , clan , village , and district structures that exercise authority at all levels .

these structures governed and secured afghanistan until the late 1970s but were weakened by decades of subsequent war and taliban rule .

some traditional local authority figures fled or were killed ; others were displaced by mujahedin commanders , militia leaders , taliban militants , and others .

local power brokers are widely accused of selectively applying afghan law and of using their authority to enrich themselves and their supporters .

some local leaders have chosen to accommodate local insurgents rather than help the government secure their areas .

u.s. policy has been to help expand the capacity of formal afghan governing institutions .

however , the formal governing structure continues to compete with traditional power structures .

during taliban rule ( 1996-2001 ) , afghanistan was run by a small , qandahar - based group ( "shura" ) of pashtun clerics loyal to mullah mohammad umar , who remained there .

no parliament was functioning , and government offices were minimally staffed and lacked modern equipment .

there were no formal processes to review mullah omar's decision , for example , to host osama bin laden in afghanistan .

the ouster of that government in late 2001 paved the way for the success of a long - stalled u.n. effort to form a broad - based afghan government .

in the formation of the first post - taliban transition government , all sides viewed the united nations as a credible mediator because of its role in ending the soviet occupation .

during the 1990s , a succession of u.n. mediators adopted proposals for a government to be selected by a traditional assembly , or loya jirga , even though u.n. - mediated cease - fires between warring factions did not hold .

non - u.n. initiatives made little progress , particularly the "six plus two" multilateral contact group that began meeting in 1997 ( the united states , russia , and the six states bordering afghanistan: iran , china , pakistan , turkmenistan , uzbekistan , and tajikistan ) .

immediately after the september 11 attacks , former u.n. mediator lakhdar brahimi resumed the afghan mediation efforts he had ended in frustration in october 1999 .

u.n. security council resolution 1378 ( november 14 , 2001 ) called for a "central" role for the united nations in establishing a transitional administration .

in november 2001 , after the taliban government collapsed , the united nations invited major afghan factions , most prominently the northern alliance and that of the former king — but not the taliban — to an international conference in bonn , germany .

there , on december 5 , 2001 , the factions signed the "bonn agreement. .

it was endorsed by u.n. security council resolution 1385 ( december 6 , 2001 ) .

the agreement: authorized an international peace keeping force to maintain security in kabul , and northern alliance forces were directed to withdraw from the capital .

security council resolution 1386 ( december 20 , 2001 , and renewed yearly thereafter ) gave formal security council authorization for the international peacekeeping force ( international security assistance force , isaf ) ; referred to the need to cooperate with the international community on counter narcotics , crime , and terrorism ; and applied the constitution of 1964 until a permanent constitution could be drafted .

all assessments indicate that there has been progress in the capacity of afghan institutions since 2001 , particularly in performing such duties as managing national finances and providing services , but that significant deficiencies remain .

many of the shortcomings in governance are attributed to all of the political disputes , governmental corruption , nepotism and favoritism , and the lack of trained or skilled workers .

the u.s. - afghanistan strategic partnership agreement , signed in afghanistan on may 1 , 2012 , commits the united states ( beyond 2014 ) to "support the afghan government in strengthening the capacity , self - reliance , and effectiveness of afghan institutions and their ability to deliver basic services. .

the obama administration has developed about 45 different metrics to assess progress in building afghan governance and security , as it was required to do ( by september 23 , 2009 ) under p.l .

111-32 , an fy2009 supplemental appropriation .

unama , headed in kabul by jan kubis , also evaluates afghan governance according to numerous metrics .

afghan progress according to these metrics is presented in various reports of the secretary - general to the u.n. general assembly .

in addition , the tokyo framework of mutual accountability , cited above , provides aid incentives for afghanistan ( portions of $16 billion pledged through 2015 ) if it improves on several measures including the holding of credible , inclusive , and transparent elections in 2014 and 2015 .

improved access to justice , and respect for human rights , particularly for women and children .

improved integrity of public financial management and the commercial banking sector .

improved revenue systems and budget execution , including establishment of a provincial budgeting policy .

the incentive structure of the tokyo framework is to raise the percentage of donor funds channeled through the afghanistan reconstruction trust fund ( artf ) as afghan governance improves .

that fund gives money directly to afghan ministries and thus gives the afghan government substantial discretion as compared to other donated funds .

in part to demonstrate that afghanistan would uphold those commitments , a presidential administrative reform decree issued july 26 , 2012 , required virtually every ministry and government body to develop a work plan , complete unfinished tasks , file specified reports , or carry out specified reforms .

the final communique of the july 3 , 2013 , "senior officials" meeting in kabul to review progress since the july 2012 tokyo meeting presented mixed findings: it strongly praised government progress on budget transparency , revenue growth , and achieving millenium development goals , including school enrollment and health care access .

however , the review noted varying degrees of progress on election reform , anti - corruption , and local governance .

it called for substantial improvement on other of the benchmarks , including human rights and accountability for the kabul bank scandal ( discussed below ) .

the meeting did not result in withholding of any aid .

another meeting to assess progress according to the tokyo framework criterial was held in london in december 2014 .

there appears to be a consensus that the capacity of the central government has increased dramatically since 2001 , but building capacity at provincial and district levels has proved far more difficult .

afghan ministries have greatly increased their staffs , and most ministry offices in kabul , and many ministry offices in the provinces , have modern computers and communications .

there are about 500,000 afghan government employees , although the majority of them are in the security forces .

a large proportion of the remainder work as teachers .

capacity building programs sponsored by u.s. and other donor assistance includes training additional civil servants and instituting merit - based performance and hiring criteria .

u.s. mentors and advisers have served in virtually all of the afghan ministries , including many serving under contract with usaid .

on several occasions , the u.s. funds have sponsored jobs fairs to recruit new civil servants .

still , the government has had trouble recruiting workers with sufficient skills .

and many afghan government personnel are reluctant to serve in the provincial offices of the central government ministries , particularly those provinces that are restive .

afghanistan has also wrestled with the problem of international donors luring away afghan talent with higher salaries .

the july 20 , 2010 , kabul donors conference addressed this issue by calling for a harmonized salary scale for donor - funded salaries of afghan government personnel .

discussions have been held between the afghan government and donors on this issue , with minor progress .

to increase its proficiency of government , during late 2010-early 2011 , the afghan government instituted merit - based appointments for senior positions , such as deputy provincial governors and district governors , and converted those positions to civil servants rather than political appointees .

after a halting start , this process has been accelerating .

a u.n. report of march 7 , 2014 , states that the 231 district governors ( more than half of the 407 total number of district governors ) were appointed based on merit - based recruitment , but the number of deputy governors recruited under this system has remained at 32 since january 2013 .

about half of the 34 provincial governors were appointed based on merit .

merit - based recruitment implements the july 26 , 2012 , administrative reform decree directing the independent directorate of local governance , discussed below , to open all deputy provincial governorships to competition within two months .

since taking office , president ghani has told his subordinates that he seeks to further increase the use of merit - based recruitment .

one of his first acts after taking office was to demand that each ministry submit a list of its employees as well as their qualification for holding their posts .

the key institution that is deciding on merit - based appointments and standardizing job descriptions , salaries , bonuses , and benefits is the afghan independent administrative reform and civil service commission ( iarcsc ) .

the commission redefined more than 80,000 civil servant job descriptions .

in 2011 , the national assembly ratified a revised civil service law to institute merit - based hiring and give the iarcsc a legal underpinning ; it replaced a september 2005 civil service law .

under a usaid program called the civilian technical assistance plan ( ctap ) , the united states provided technical assistance to afghan ministries and to the iarcsc .

from january 2010 until january 2011 , usaid , under a february 2010 memorandum of understanding , gave $85 million to programs run by the commission to support the training and development of afghan civil servants .

one of the commission's subordinate organizations is the civil service training institute .

in 2013 , the institute trained over 5,000 afghan civil servants in management , computer skills , english language proficiency , and finance and accounting .

usaid provided over $40 million to the ctap program .

the international community has sponsored a $350 million five - year program ( "capacity - building for results program" ) during 2012-2017 to enhance the afghan government's ability to deliver services to its population through key ministries .

usaid programs have assisted employees of the state - owned afghan power company ( dabs ) to manage afghanistan's power grid and bill its customers and trained 250 ministry of mines personnel in geology to try to help develop afghanistan's extractive industries sector .

many afghan civil service personnel undergo training in other countries .

india has trained many afghan civil servants building on the cultural ties between the two countries .

japan , singapore , germany , and others have also trained afghan civil servants on good governance , anti - corruption , and civil aviation .

some of these programs were conducted in partnership with the german federal foreign office and the asia foundation .

the international efforts to build up the central government are reflected in the afghan budget process .

at the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting in kabul , donors strongly praised the government's performance in establishing budget transparency .

u.s. official reports assess the afghan government as increasingly able to execute parts of its budget , and say that some ministries — particularly the ministry of public health and the ministry of rural rehabilitation and development — are able to deliver services relatively effectively .

the afghan government disperses its own funds as well as those directly supplied by donor countries and organizations .

as of 2013 , the afghan budget year runs from december 21 to december 20 of each year .

it now longer begins on the persian new year ( nowruz ) .

the 2014 budget was approved january 15 , 2014 , but afghan officials say it is nearly $600 million short because of the economic uncertainty caused by the election dispute .

afghan officials seek donations to fill the shortfall , and say they will adjust the 2015 budget downward to match new economic conditions .

u.s. reports continue to criticize the afghan budget process for a high degree of centralization .

once a budget is adopted by the full national assembly ( first the upper house and then the lower house , and then signed by karzai ) , the funds are allocated to central government ministries and other central government entities .

some of the elected provincial councils , appointed provincial governors , and district governors formulate local budget requirements and help shape the national budget process , but no locality controls its own budget .

these local organs do approve the disbursement of funds by the central entities ( called mustofiats , accounting offices in each of afghanistan's 34 provinces ) .

the tokyo mutual accountability framework included as one of its benchmarks the establishment of a provincial budgeting process that provides provincial input into the national budget process .

the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting statement indicated that afghanistan needed to finalize and begin implementing a provincial budgeting policy .

a draft provincial budget policy issued in october 2013 built on several pilot programs put in place , including the provincial budget pilot ( pbp ) program that seeks to improve budgetary planning integration between the national and provincial levels .

on february 11 , 2014 , the ministry of finance allocated $1 million to five provinces under the pbp program .

since taking office , president ghani has expressed his support for a decentralized budget process in which provinces will formulate and execute planned budgets .

still , the diversion of revenues received has caused financial problems for the government .

all revenue is , by law , to be remitted to the afghan central government .

however , local officials sometimes seek to retain or divert locally collected revenues .

that diversion has reportedly increased in 2013 as governors of border provinces grow nervous about an economic downturn after 2014 .

the diversion contributed to a 20% government revenue shortfall ( compared to government projections ) in 2013 and to the budget shortfall experienced in 2014 .

many international development experts concur with the afghan government that only through direct funding will the afghan government be able to develop the capacity and transparency to govern and deliver services effectively .

although still wary of misuse , the united states has been accommodating that view ; nearly 50% of u.s. aid is provided directly — the target level that was endorsed at the july 20 , 2010 , kabul conference and the tokyo mutual accountability framework .

the percentages are up from 21% in fy2009 .

u.s. direct support is based on state department and usaid assessments of the ability of individual ministries to accurately and transparently administer donated funds .

some sigar audit reports question the state and usaid assessments and assert the potential for misuse of u.s. funds .

since 2007 , u.s. and allied policy has increasingly emphasized building local or "subnational" governance .

during 2009-2012 , the administration sent about 500 additional u.s. civilian personnel from the state department , usaid , the department of agriculture , and several other agencies to advise afghan ministries , and provincial and district administrations .

that effort raised the number of u.s. civilians in afghanistan to about 1,330 by august 2011 , of which nearly 400 were serving outside kabul ( up from 67 in early 2009 ) .

however , the obama administration has reduced civilian personnel in afghanistan by about 20% from those levels as the transition to afghan security lead was completed in 2014 .

u.s. and partner country officials say that , despite a reluctance of central government personnel to serve in outlying areas , afghan local governance has expanded , particularly in areas considered secure .

afghans have formed local councils , which in turn have built ties to appointed local leaders in secure areas .

however , forming these linkages has been slowed by centralized decisionmaking processes ; localities have their own governing bodies but the central government ministries in the provincial capitals of each province actually implement national programs .

local officials often disagree with the kabul ministry representatives on priorities and implementation .

during his presidency , karzai frequently complained that donor - run provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) have preventing the afghan government from expanding its own responsibilities and capacity at the local level .

there are prts in about 80% of afghan provinces , and they have far more funding and capability than the afghan governor in those provinces .

the tokyo framework largely endorses those complaints by calling for the prts to be transferred to afghan control .

the presidential administrative decree of july 26 , 2012 , provides for afghan institutions to begin taking over the roles of the prts , and , since mid - 2012 , the united states and partner countries have been closing down prts and handing them over to afghan control .

some further enhancements to local governance await afghan parliamentary action .

the national assembly continues to deliberate several laws including a local government law , a municipality law , and a provincial councils law .

in terms of local governance institution - building , a key institution was empowered in august 2007 when the responsibility for selecting local leaders ( provincial governors and below ) was given to a new independent directorate for local governance ( idlg ) .

that function was taken out of the interior ministry .

however , some international officials say that the idlg served primarily as an instrument for karzai to mobilize voters .

it is headed by abdul khaliq farahi , a former diplomat who was kidnapped in peshawar , pakistan , and held during 2008-2011 allegedly by militants linked to al qaeda .

to address the difficulty in recruiting staff to work in outlying areas , the july 26 , 2012 , karzai administrative reform decree required the idlg to fill open positions in the provinces within six months , including in the ministry offices in each provincial capital .

it also required a review of provincial governors' performance in combating corruption and improving governance .

the idlg is an implementing partner for the district delivery program ( ddp ) , which was created to improve government presence and service delivery at the district level , and has been funded by the united states , britain , denmark , and france .

the program has been phased out in conjunction with the transition to afghan leadership at the end of 2014 .

the idlg also gets assistance from the u.n. development program's ( undp's ) afghanistan subnational governance program ii ( asgp - ii ) .

that program provided $83.6 million to the idlg from the european community , italy , switzerland , and britain .

many believe that , even more than institutional expansion , the key to effective local governance is the appointment of competent and incorruptible governors in all 34 afghan provinces .

u.n. , u.s. , and other international studies and reports all point to the beneficial effects ( reduction in narcotics trafficking , economic growth , lower violence ) of some of the strong afghan civilian appointments at the provincial level .

there were numerous successful governors , such as mangal , sherzai , noor , and others mentioned in this paper , but the successful governors were almost invariably also accused of arbitrary administration of justice and excessive independence of central government authority .

despite the international and afghan emphasis on increasing merit - based appointments , about half of the provincial governors continue to be political appointees .

in september 2012 , karzai shuffled 10 out of the 34 provincial governors ( including mangal ) , asserting that those taken out of their positions had fallen short on improving governance or combating corruption .

however , many observers suspected the reshuffle was intended to place loyalists in key local positions ahead of the 2014 election .

some of the ousted governors were assigned to different provinces .

other than helmand , the nine provinces where governors were changed include wardak , kabul , takhar , faryab , baghlan , nimruz , laghman , lowgar , and badghis .

since taking office , president ghani has told idlg officials to set clear benchmarks for provincial governor appointments as part of an effort to expand merit - based appointments and improve the efficiency of provincial governors and mayors .

one problem noted by governance experts is that the role of the elected provincial councils is unclear .

in most provinces , the provincial councils do not act as true local legislatures and are weak compared to provincial governors' offices .

legislation to expand the councils' roles has been under consideration by the national assembly , but most recent versions of a provincial councils law were stripped by the cabinet of provisions to assign to the councils supervisory duties .

perhaps the most significant role the provincial councils play is in choosing the upper house of the national assembly ( meshrano jirga ) .

in the absence of district councils ( no elections held or scheduled ) , the provincial councils elected in 2009 have chosen two - thirds ( 68 seats ) of the 102-seat body .

karzai appointed the remaining 34 seats in february 2011 .

the elections for the provincial councils in all 34 provinces were held on august 20 , 2009 , concurrent with the presidential elections .

the next provincial elections will be held concurrent with the presidential election in april 2014 .

the first provincial council elections were held concurrent with the parliamentary elections in september 2005 .

u.s. officials say there has been "measured progress" in developing effective district governance .

district governors are appointed by the president , at the recommendation of the idlg , and more than half of all district governors in place have been appointed based on merit , as noted above .

some districts had no formal governance at all until the 2009 u.s. troop surge .

some of the district governors in helmand province , including in nawa and now zad districts , returned after the u.s. - led expulsion of taliban militants .

the difficulty plaguing the expansion of district governance , in addition to security issues , is lack of resources .

many district governors have virtually no staff or vehicles .

in about 40 districts , the united states and partner countries have established district support teams ( dsts ) to assist in district - level governance and service delivery .

however , like the prts , the dsts are being turned over to afghan control as the transition to afghan control proceeds .

another problem in establishing district level governance has been the fact that no elections for district councils have been held due to boundary and logistical difficulties .

the government had planned to hold these elections along with the 2010 parliamentary elections , but that was not accomplished and no date for these elections has been set .

as a result , there is no one authoritative district - level representative body , but rather a collection of groupings established by donor programs .

the afghan government has agreed in principle to a roadmap leading to a single district level body , but implementation has been slow .

as are district governors , mayors of large municipalities are appointed .

there are about 42 mayors nationwide , many with deputy mayors .

karzai pledged in his november 2009 inaugural that "mayoral" elections would be held "for the purpose of better city management. .

however , no municipal elections have been held and none is scheduled .

it is likely that these await passage of a municipalities law , referenced above .

as noted throughout , there has traditionally been village - level governance by councils of tribal elders and other notables .

that structure remains , particularly in secure areas , while village councils have been absent or only sporadically active in areas where there is combat .

numerous councils were formed in areas where security was improved by the 2010 u.s. "troop surge. .

the idlg and the ministry of rural rehabilitation and development ( mrrd ) , with advice from india and other donors , also are empowering localities to decide on development priorities .

the mrrd has formed about 28,000 community development councils ( cdcs ) nationwide to help suggest priorities , and these bodies are eventually to all be elected .

the international community has sought not only to expand afghan governing capacity but to push for its reform , transparency , and oversight .

many afghans have come to view the central government as "predatory. .

reducing corruption in government constitutes several of the 17 benchmarks of the tokyo mutual accountability framework which requires afghanistan , in general , to "enact and enforce the legal framework for fighting corruption. .

since taking office , president ghani has sought to demonstrate a commitment to combatting corruption by reviving the largely stagnant issue of the kabul bank scandal , discussed below .

he has also demanded that ministries file with the presidential office paperwork on their procurement contracts .

afghan officials have acknowledged that corruption is a major problem in afghanistan .

however , during karzai's presidency , afghan law enforcement officials frequently refrained from — or were prevented from — prosecuting officials for corruption , particularly those related to or aligned with those in power .

some international officials also questioned karzai's attempts to blame afghan corruption on donor countries' contracting with firms linked to faction leaders .

on the other hand , some say that u.s. policy on corruption has been inconsistent .

karzai confirmed u.s. press reports in april 2013 saying that the central intelligence agency continues to provide cash payments directly to the karzai government , through the afghan national security council , for purposes such as compensating faction leaders .

karzai said the payments were relatively small , but u.s. and other experts say the payments circumvent standard controls on u.s. foreign aid and help fuel afghan corruption .

neither cia nor other u.s. officials confirmed or denied the reports , when asked by journalists .

at the upper levels of government , some observers asserted that karzai deliberately tolerated officials who are allegedly involved in illicit activity and supports their receipt of lucrative contracts from donor countries , in exchange for their political support .

karzai's brother , mahmoud , as discussed above , has apparently grown wealthy through various ventures , purportedly by fostering the impression he can influence his brother .

some observers who have served in afghanistan say that karzai appointed some provincial governors to "reward them" and that these appointments have gone on to "prey" economically on the populations of that province .

several high officials , despite very low official government salaries , have acquired ornate properties in kabul in part by appropriating private land in which the ownership was unclear .

the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) reported in may 2013 that $50 million in stolen u.s. aid funds — which u.s. investigators discovered in an afghan bank account — was missing because the afghan government did not implement u.s. requests to freeze the account .

the sigar issued an audit in january 2014 that asserted there was risk of misuse of u.s. funds because of the ministry of public health's payment of salaries in cash and the possible overpayment for commodities and services by the ministry of mines — overpayments that could possibly be used to finance bribes or kickbacks .

on the other hand , accusations of corruption are often used as a political weapon .

one former official accused national security adviser spanta of corruption after being fired from an afghan government position .

an afghan court ruled against the afghan accuser on september 25 , 2012 , and fined him $300 .

some observers say that the national assembly's accusations of corruption against finance minister zakhilwal in may 2013 were intended to prompt him to release additional funding to parliamentarians' districts .

he was not removed by the assembly .

observers who follow the issue say that most of the governmental corruption takes place in the course of performing mundane governmental functions , such as government processing of official documents ( eg , passports , drivers' licenses ) , in which processors demand bribes in exchange for action .

other forms of corruption include afghan security officials' selling u.s. / internationally provided vehicles , fuel , and equipment to supplement their salaries .

in other cases , local police or border officials may siphon off customs revenues or demand extra payments to help guard the u.s. or other militaries' equipment shipments .

other examples include security commanders placing "ghost employees" on official payrolls in order to pocket their salaries .

corruption is fed , in part , by the fact that government workers receive very low salaries ( about $200 per month , as compared to the pay of typical contractors in afghanistan that might pay as much as $6,500 per month ) .

many observers say there is a cultural dimension to the corruption — that it is commonly expected by relatives and friends that those afghans who have achieved government positions will protect those relations with appointments and contracts .

there has been a consensus within the obama administration on the wide scope of the corruption in afghan government and the deleterious effect the corruption has on government popularity and effectiveness .

in 2010 , the administration debated the degree to which to press anti - corruption issues with the afghan government .

in 2011 , the administration reportedly decided to prioritize reducing low - level corruption instead of investigations of high - level karzai allies .

high level investigations not only risked alienating karzai , but were judged to potentially complicate efforts to obtain the cooperation of afghans who can help stabilize areas of the country .

some of these afghans are said to be paid by the cia for information and other support , and the national security council reportedly issued guidance to u.s. agencies to review this issue .

yet , u.s. and international officials believe that anti - corruption efforts must be pursued because corruption is contributing to a souring of western publics on the mission as well as causing some afghans to embrace taliban insurgents .

obama administration officials have credited karzai with allowing the united states and other donors to help develop oversight bodies to curb corruption .

at the july 20 , 2010 , kabul conference — following onto the january 28 , 2010 , london conference — the afghan government finalized a national anti - corruption strategy ( "azimi report" ) and committed to enacting 37 laws to curb corruption .

very few of these laws have been enacted , although the afghan cabinet has drafted new anti - corruption and auditing laws and some regulations have been issued by presidential decree .

the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting in kabul determined that there was only minor progress on the anti - corruption benchmarks of the tokyo mutual accountability framework .

the anti - corruption institutions , and some examples of their efforts , are discussed below .

high office of oversight and anti - corruption .

in august 2008 , after reported bush administration prodding , afghanistan set up the "high office of oversight and anti - corruption" ( commonly referred to as the high office of oversight , hoo ) .

it was given the power to identify and refer corruption cases to state prosecutors , and to catalogue the overseas assets of afghan officials .

in march 2010 karzai , as promised at the january 28 , 2010 , international meeting on afghanistan in london , issued a decree giving the hoo power to investigate corruption cases rather than just refer them to other offices .

the july 26 , 2012 , presidential administrative decree , discussed above , directed the hoo to , within six months , assess "private institutions' and government officials' suspicious wealth" and report those findings to the president's office every two months .

in early 2013 , the hoo established an anti - corruption committee within each ministry to oversee implementation of anti - corruptions policies .

usaid provided the hoo $30 million total during fy2011-fy2013 to build capacity at the central and provincial level .

usaid pays for salaries of six hoo senior staff and provides some information technology systems as well .

assets declarations and verifications .

as of 2010 , afghan officials at many levels of government are required to declare their assets .

the july 20 , 2010 , kabul conference communiqué included an afghan pledge to verify and publish these declarations annually , beginning in 2010 .

a sigar report of april 30 , 2012 , said that the government's progress for verification of the declarations "fall[s] short of u.s .

expectations. .

the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting in kabul acknowledged that "progress" had been made on the declaration and publication of assets , but that movement was minimal on verifying the declarations .

a march 2014 u.n. report said that the hoo had registered the assets of nearly 3,000 government officials during the first three months of 2014 and completed asset verification for 33 of the highest ranking officials including the president , vice presidents , minister , and governors .

independent joint anti - corruption monitoring and evaluation committee ( mec ) to evaluate the government's performance in combating corruption was mandated by the kabul conference communiqué to be established within three months of the conference ( by october 2010 ) .

the mec , supported by undp , was inaugurated on may 11 , 2011 .

it was enshrined in a presidential decree and is composed of three presidential nominees and three international nominees .

it is headed by slovenian diplomat drago kos , and issues reports every six months .

major crimes task force and sensitive investigations unit .

since 2008 , several additional investigative bodies have been established under ministry of interior authority .

the most prominent is the major crimes task force ( mctf ) tasked with investigating public corruption , organized crime , and kidnapping .

a headquarters for the mctf was inaugurated on february 25 , 2010 , and it has been funded and mentored by the fbi , the dea , the u.s .

marshal service , britain's serious crimes organized crime agency , the australian federal police , eupol ( european police training unit in afghanistan ) , and the u.s. - led training mission for afghan forces .

the mctf has 169 investigators , according to u.s. officials .

a related body is the sensitive investigations unit ( siu ) , run by several dozen afghan police officers , vetted and trained by the dea .

this body led the arrest in august 2010 of a karzai nsc aide , mohammad zia salehi , on charges of soliciting a bribe from the new ansari money exchange in exchange for ending a money - laundering investigation of the firm .

karzai acknowledged on august 22 , 2010 , that he intervened to obtain salehi's release .

in november 2010 , the attorney general's office ended the prosecution .

anti - corruption unit and anti - corruption tribunal .

these investigative and prosecution bodies were established by decree in 2009 .

eleven judges have been appointed to the tribunal , which is under the jurisdiction of the supreme court .

it tries cases referred by an anti - corruption unit of the afghan attorney general's office .

however , of the approximately 2,000 cases investigated by the anti - corruption unit , only 28 officials have been convicted to date .

the department of justice suspended its training program for the anti - corruption unit in early 2012 because of the unit's "lack of seriousness," according to the sigar report of april 30 , 2012 .

one of the laws pledged during the july 20 , 2010 , kabul conference would be enacted ( by july 20 , 2011 ) included one to legally empower the anti - corruption tribunal and the major crimes task force .

that has not been enacted by the national assembly to date .

prosecutions and investigations of high - level officials .

the hoo head ludin said in july 2013 that his office had sent 190 cases of alleged high level official corruption to the attorney general's office over the past two years , but had seen few indictments follow .

the attorney general's office has investigated at least 20 senior officials , but with virtually no convictions .

those investigated — but not convicted — included commerce minister amin farhang ( for allegedly submitting inflated invoices for reimbursement ) ; former minister of mines mohammad ibrahim adel ( who reportedly accepted a $30 million bribe to award a key mining project to a chinese firm ) ; and former minister of the hajj mohammad siddiq chakari ( for allegedly accepting bribes to steer hajj - related travel business to certain foreign tourist agencies ) .

chakari fled to britain .

eiti .

relatedly , afghanistan has signed up as a candidate to the extractive industries transparency initiative ( eiti ) which is intended to ensure that contracting for afghanistan's mineral resources is free of corruption .

afghanistan hopes to become fully eiti compliant by april 2012 and the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting in kabul commended afghanistan's progress toward eiti compliance .

the world bank gave afghanistan a three - year grant of $52 million to manage its natural resources effectively .

salary levels .

the government has tried to raise salaries , particularly of security forces , in order to reduce their inclination to solicit bribes .

in november 2009 , the afghan government announced an increase in police salaries ( from $180 per month to $240 per month ) .

during his term as interior minister , bismillah khan attempted to institute transparency and accountability in promotions and assignments .

however , the results of these initiatives remain unclear .

bulk cash transfers out of afghanistan .

at the july 2010 kabul conference , the government pledged to adopt regulations and implement within one year policies to govern the bulk transfers of cash outside the country .

this was intended to grapple with issues raised by reports , discussed below , of officials taking large amounts of cash out of afghanistan ( an estimated $4.5 billion taken out in 2011 ) .

u.s. officials say that large movements of cash are inevitable in afghanistan because only about 5% of the population use banks and 90% use informal cash transfers ( "hawala" system ) .

the late ambassador holbrooke testified on july 28 , 2010 ( cited earlier ) , that the afghan central bank has tried to control hawala transfers ; 475 hawalas have been licensed , to date , whereas none were licensed as recently as 2009 .

in august 2010 , afghan and u.s. authorities began installing u.s. - made currency counters at kabul airport to track how officials had obtained their cash ( and ensure it did not come from donor aid funds ) .

on march 19 , 2012 , central bank governor noorullah delawari said the bank had imposed a $20,000 per person limit on cash transfers out of the country .

however , a report by the sigar issued december 11 , 2012 , found that the provided currency counters at kabul airport were not being used , nor were procedures to ensure that notable afghan figures were not taking large amounts of cash out of afghanistan being enforced .

other reports say that afghans are taking significant amounts of gold out of afghanistan , possibly to hedge against instability .

customs revenue diversion .

as noted above , some governors of border provinces are siphoning off customs duties that are supposed to be remitted to the central government .

in december 2012 , a commission created by karzai investigated the issue in 12 provinces and shut down some of these operations .

one scheme shut down was a surtax levied illegitimately at the torkham gate ( khyber pass ) crossing by the provincial government of ghul agha shirzai ( see above on shirzai above ) .

auditing capabilities .

in september 2013 , the afghan national assembly gave official standing to a supreme audit office , mandating it to undertake audits of government institutions .

the parliamentary empowerment met an afghan pledge , made at the 2010 kabul conference , to enact an audit law to strengthen the independence of the auditing institutions .

the supreme audit office , in conjunction with the ministries of justice and of education , and citizen's groups , is implementing a u.n. - funded anti - corruption project called the "afghanistan integrity initiative. .

the project is intended to strengthen the capacity of the government to reduce corruption .

legal review .

the kabul conference communiqué committed the government to establish a legal review committee , within six months , to review afghan laws for compliance with the u.n. convention against corruption .

afghanistan ratified the convention in august 2008 .

u.s. defense department efforts .

in 2009 , a key u.s. military official , general h.r .

mcmaster , formed several dod task forces to focus on anti - corruption ( shafafiyat , task force spotlight , and task force 2010 ) from a u.s. military / counter - insurgency perspective .

these task forces , in part , reviewed u.s. contracting strategies to enhance afghan capacity and reduce the potential for corruption .

the shafafiyat task force announced in february 2012 that it had caused the restitution of $11.1 million , $25.4 million in fines , and $3.4 million in seizures from allegedly fraudulent contractors , and led to disbarment or suspension of more than 125 american , afghan , and international workers for alleged fraud .

these task forces have wound down their work in conjunction with the u.s. military drawdown from afghanistan .

local anti - corruption bodies .

some afghans have taken it upon themselves to oppose corruption at the local level .

volunteer local inspectors , sponsored originally by integrity watch afghanistan , are reported to monitor and report on the quality of donor - funded , contractor implemented construction projects .

however , these and other "watchdog" groups do not have an official mandate , and therefore their authority and ability to rectify inadequacies are limited .

the near - collapse of kabul bank — the main banking institution that was used to pay afghan civil servants and police — has been offered as a prime example of the adverse effects of corruption in afghanistan .

the bank nearly collapsed in august 2010 after it reported large losses , primarily from shareholder investments in dubai properties , prompting a run on the bank and causing karzai to appoint a central bank official to run it .

afghan investigators confirmed that its losses due to questionable loans totaled over $925 million .

president karzai's elder brother mahmoud reportedly received large loans from the bank to buy his 7% stake in it .

another big shareholder was abdul hussain fahim , the brother of the late first vice president .

in response to the crisis , the united states and other donors refused to recapitalize the bank , but it offered to finance an audit of afghan banks , including kabul bank .

the finance ministry decided instead in november 2010 to hire its own auditor — a move that suggested to some that high afghan officials sought to hide the audit results .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) suspended its credit program for the afghan government in november 2010 , demanding that the entire afghan banking industry undergo an outside forensic audit and that those responsible be held accountable .

that held $70 million world bank / afghan reconstruction fund ( artf ) in donor funds .

other donors followed suit and suspended as much as $1.8 billion in economic aid .

the imf — as a condition of resuming its credit program — insisted the bank be sold .

the central bank instead agreed to separate the bank's performing from nonperforming assets and then dissolve or restructure the bank .

that plan was adopted in april 2011 .

the "good bank" ( part of the bank with deposits and which still functions ) was financed by a central bank loan of $825 million .

it was renamed "new kabul bank. .

the afghan finance ministry is paying back the loan — over eight years — with recovered assets and general government revenues .

since early 2013 , the finance ministry has sought to sell new kabul bank but no qualified bidders have made acceptable offers and it remains state - owned .

the afghan government , through its "financial dispute resolution commission," continues to try to recoup the lost funds .

of the estimated $925 million in losses , only about $150 million in cash and $215 million in property ( mostly luxury villas in dubai ) and other assets has been recovered .

about $300 million of the losses are judged unrecoverable because of a lack of documentation .

the mec , discussed above , said in its september 28 , 2013 , report that none of the $121 million owed to the bank by the afghan company gas group had been recovered .

the tokyo mutual accountability framework required afghanistan to continue asset recovery and to strengthen banking supervision though the central bank ( da afghanistan bank ) .

the political fallout also produced some resolution .

on january 15 , 2011 , the office of afghan attorney general ishaq aloko announced an investigation into the near - collapse of the bank .

the investigating commission briefed reporters on its findings on may 30 , 2011 , placing much of the blame on lax controls by the central bank and its governor , abdul qadir fitrat .

the government commission also largely absolved mahmoud karzai of any wrongdoing , and named other key figures , such as dostam , as taking out $100,000 in unsecured loans .

the following day , central bank governor fitrat disputed the commission's conclusions .

fitrat subsequently fled to the united states and resigned in june 2011 .

in a step toward holding principals accountable , on june 30 , 2011 , the government announced the arrest of two former kabul bank executives , sherkhan farnood and khalilullah frouzi , who allegedly allowed the concessionary loans to the high - level afghans and their relatives .

however , by late 2011 , the detentions of the two had been relaxed and they were frequently sighted at various public places in kabul .

on august 1 , 2011 , the attorney general's office sent the names of about 15 people allegedly responsible for the scandal to afghan courts for trial .

on april 3 , 2012 , karzai ordered a special prosecutor appointed and a special tribunal created to try those involved .

on june 2 , 2012 , 21 people were indicted by the special tribunal , including farnood , frouzi , fitrat , nine other government officials , and nine other bank employees who were allegedly in positions to have known of the fraud .

the trial of farnood , frouzi , and about 20 others allegedly involved began on november 10 , 2012 , under a three judge panel .

all 21 defendants were found guilty , and farnood and frouzi received five - year sentences and financial penalties .

the july 3 , 2013 , senior officials meeting in kabul stated that "participants [afghanistan participated in the meeting] agreed that continued efforts were needed" to hold parties accountable in the bank scandal .

on november 27 , 2012 , the new york times reported that the central bank's audit of kabul bank by kroll associates called kabul bank a virtual "ponzi scheme" involving numerous deliberate efforts to deceive the bank's original auditors .

two days later , the joint evaluation and monitoring committee , discussed above , released an 87-page report detailing how bank funds were smuggled out of the country surreptitiously and alleging high level afghan government input in deciding whom to hold accountable .

the investigations , the recovery of some lost funds , and the forensic audits of the bank suggested afghanistan was moving to meet the imf conditions for the restart of its credit program .

in november 2011 , the imf resumed its program by approving a $133 million loan to afghanistan .

that move restored the flow of some previously blocked donor funds , including u.s. contributions to the world bank - run afghanistan reconstruction trust fund ( artf ) .

the imf also has sought a timetable for another bank found by the central bank to be vulnerable to collapse , azizi bank , to shore up its finances .

another afghan entity suspected of corruption is the new ansari money exchange , a large money - trading operation .

on february 18 , 2011 , the treasury department designated new ansari , and persons affiliated with it , as major money laundering entities under the "kingpin act," banning u.s. transactions with the designees .

on october 1 , president ghani ordered a review of the kabul bank scandal on the grounds that those responsible had not been held accountable .

several of the required u.s. "metrics" of progress , cited above , involve afghan progress against corruption .

in part because of reports that as much as $3 billion in funds had been allegedly embezzled by afghan officials over the past several years , an administration certification of progress against corruption was included as a condition of providing aid to afghanistan in the fy2011 continuing appropriations ( p.l .

112-10 ) .

aid conditionality based on afghan performance against corruption , on incorporation of women in the reconciliation process , and on reports on progress on the kabul bank scandal was included in the fy2012 consolidated appropriation ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

no u.s. funding for afghanistan has been permanently withheld because of this or any other legislative certification requirement .

since 2001 , u.s. policy has been to build capacity in human rights institutions in afghanistan and to promote civil society and political participation .

as do previous years' state department human rights reports , the report on afghanistan for 2013 analyzed numerous human rights deficiencies , attributing most of them to overall lack of security , loose control over the actions of afghan security forces , corruption , and cultural attitudes including discrimination against women .

one of the institutional human rights developments since the fall of the taliban has been the establishment of the afghanistan independent human rights commission ( aihrc ) .

it is headed by a woman , sima simar , a hazara shiite from ghazni province .

it is an oversight body on human rights practices but its members are appointed by the government and some believe it is not independent .

as an indication of government interference , in december 2011 , karzai dismissed its deputy chairman ahmad nader nadery for alleging abuses by karzai allies .

nadery later became head of another civil society watchdog organization , the free and fair election foundation of afghanistan , which was highly critical of karzai and his allies for the 2009 and 2010 election fraud served as a watchdog group for the 2014 elections .

in recent years , most of the aihrc budget of $7.5 million has been provided by european donors , canada , australia , and the united nations .

in the course of the senior officials meeting in kabul on july 3 , 2013 , donors criticized several of karzai's 2013 appointments to the aihrc .

some of the five appointees were reportedly linked to afghan faction leaders or had not demonstrated a commitment to upholding or enforcing international standards of human rights .

on a visit to afghanistan in september 2013 , u.n. high commissioner for human rights navinathem pillay failed to persuade karzai to replace the controversial aihrc appointees .

since 2002 , there has been a proliferation of afghan organizations that demand transparency about human rights deficiencies .

prominent examples of afghan ngo's that monitor and agitate for improved human rights practices include the afghanistan human rights and democracy organization , and the equality for peace and democracy organization .

it is in part the work of these groups that has produced responses by the government .

afghanistan's national directorate of security ( intelligence directorate but with arrest powers ) , which has widely been accused of detainee abuse and torture , established in late 2011 a "human rights unit" to investigate abuse allegations and train nds staff not to conduct such abuses .

in 2012 , the human rights support unit of the ministry of justice conducted 12 human rights training sessions for nds and afghan national policy officers .

in june 2012 , the interior ministry was tasked by the presidential office to report on prison conditions .

on june 2 , 2012 , karzai ordered disarmed a local security unit whose members were accused of raping an 18-year old woman in konduz province .

on july 9 , 2012 , afghan forces were sent to track down taliban militants who had executed a woman for adultery in parwan province .

counterbalancing the influence of post - taliban modern institutions such as the aihrc are traditional bodies such as the national ulema council .

the council consists of the 150 most respected and widely followed clerics throughout afghanistan , and represents a network of about 3,000 clerics nationwide .

it has taken conservative positions on free expression and social freedoms , such as the type of television and other media programs available on private media outlets .

clerics sometimes ban performances by afghan singers and other performers whose acts the clerics consider inconsistent with conservative islamic values .

on the other hand , some rock bands have been allowed to perform high profile shows since 2011 .

because of the power of islamist conservatives , alcohol is increasingly difficult to obtain in restaurants and stores , although it is not banned for sale to non - muslims .

in august 2010 , 350 clerics linked to the council voted to demand that islamic law ( sharia ) be implemented ( including such punishments as stoning , amputations , and lashings ) in order to better prevent crime .

the government did not implement the recommendation , which would require amending the afghan constitution that does not implement sharia .

the council's march 2 , 2012 , backing of sharia interpretations of the rights of women is discussed below in the section on women's rights .

the government ( ministry of hajj and religious affairs ) is also involved in regulating religious practices .

of afghanistan's approximately 125,000 mosques , 6,000 are registered and funded by the government .

clerics in these mosques are paid about $100 per month and , in return , are expected to promote the government line .

in april 2012 , the ministry decreed that it would fire government - funded clerics who refuse to heed warnings and preach violence or incitement .

as an illustration of afghanistan's inherent islamic conservatism , riots broke out in two successive years over what some afghans perceived as u.s. disrespect of islam .

on april 2 , 2011 , hundreds of afghans rioted in the normally quiet ( and non - pashtun ) city of mazar - e - sharif to protest the burning of a quran by a florida pastor a few weeks earlier .

the rioters stormed the u.n. compound in the city and killed at least 12 people , including 7 u.n workers .

a more serious eruption occurred in late february 2012 over the mistaken u.s. discarding of qurans used by detainees at bagram airfield .

riots and protests occurred in several cities , including the normally peaceful and pro - u.s. north .

the public reaction to the quran burning was more intense than it was following the march 11 , 2012 , killing of 16 afghans allegedly by a u.s. soldier , robert bales , who is in u.s. military custody .

on september 17 , 2012 , several hundred afghans rioted outside a u.s. training facility east of kabul city to protest a video produced in the united states ( "innocence of muslims" ) that mocks the prophet muhammad .

afghan police protected the facility from assault from the crowd .

these perceived u.s. slights may account for some of the killings of u.s. military personnel by afghan security forces over the past few years .

the so - called "green on blue" attacks have caused tensions between afghan forces and their u.s. mentors , and prompted u.s. commanders to impose counter - measures that potentially complicate the u.s. effort to accelerate the transition to afghan security before the end of 2014 .

the international religious freedom report for 2013 did not alter u.s. assessments of religious freedom in afghanistan from that in previous years' reports .

the constitution and government do , to some extent , restrict religious freedom .

members of minority religions , including christians , sikhs , hindus , and baha'i's , often face discrimination , but members of these communities sometimes serve at high levels .

karzai has had a hindu as an economic advisor and one member of the sikh community serves in the meshrano jirga .

in september 2013 , karzai , by decree , created a special parliamentary seat allocation for a sikh and a hindu .

there are four isma'ilis in the national assembly , elected without a quota .

baha'is fare worse than members of some of the other minorities because the afghan supreme court declared the baha'i faith to be a form of blasphemy in may 2007 .

there are no public christian churches and four synagogues , although the synagogues are not used because there is only one afghan national who is jewish .

there are three active gurdwaras ( sikh places of worship ) and five hindu mandirs ( temples ) .

buddhist foreigners are free to worship in hindu temples .

one major case that drew international criticism was a january 2008 death sentence , imposed in a quick trial , against young journalist sayed kambaksh for allegedly distributing material criticizing islam .

on october 21 , 2008 , a kabul appeals court changed his sentence to 20 years in prison , a judgment upheld by another court in march 2009 .

he was pardoned by karzai and released in september 2009 .

the hazaras and other afghan shiites tend to be less religious and more socially open than their co - religionists in iran .

afghan shiite leaders appreciated the july 2009 enactment and "gazetting" of a "shiite personal status law" that gave afghan shiites the same degree of recognition as the sunni majority , and provided a legal framework for shiite family law issues .

afghan shiites are able to celebrate their holidays openly and some have held high positions , but some pashtuns have become resentful of the open celebrations and some clashes have resulted .

the former minister of justice , sarwar danesh , was the first hazara shiite to hold that post .

in june 2012 , karzai denounced a book published by the afghanistan academy of science that portrayed hazaras as un - islamic .

in november 2012 , pashtun students at four universities in kabul attacked hazara students who were trying to commemorate the shiite day of mourning ( ashura ) , prompting the temporary closing of the universities .

the clashes occurred even though shiite public observance of the holy month of muharram has progressively expanded .

afghan christians can worship in small congregations in private homes , but several conversion cases have earned international attention .

an afghan man , abd al - rahman , who had converted to christianity 16 years ago while working for a christian aid group in pakistan , was imprisoned and faced a potential death penalty trial for apostasy — his refusal to convert back to islam .

facing international pressure , karzai prevailed on kabul court authorities to release him ( march 29 , 2006 ) .

his release came the same day the house passed a bill ( h.res .

736 ) calling on protections for afghan converts .

in may 2010 , the afghan government suspended the operations of two christian - affiliated international relief groups claiming the groups were attempting to promote christianity among afghans , an assertion denied by the groups ( church world service and norwegian church aid ) .

in may 2010 , amputee said musa was imprisoned for converting to christianity from islam , an offense under afghan law that leaves it open for afghan courts to apply a death sentence under islamic law ( shariah ) .

the arrest came days after the local noorin tv station broadcast a show on afghan christians engaging in their rituals .

following diplomatic engagement by governments and human rights groups , musa was released on february 24 , 2011 , and he obtained asylum in italy .

afghanistan's conservative traditions have caused some backsliding in recent years on media freedoms .

since 2001 , numerous television channels , newspapers , and other media forms have been established , giving afghanistan one of the freest presses in the region .

media has expanded to the point where the government , in 2012 , began a process of launching a communications satellite to help with broadcast speed and breadth of dissemination .

however , a mass media law adopted in 2009 gave independence to the official media outlets but also contained a number of content restrictions and required that new newspapers and electronic media be licensed by the government .

the ministry of information and culture is drafting a new media law to replace it , although its drafts contained provisions that drew opposition from human rights groups in and outside afghanistan .

according to the state department reports on human rights , there continue to be intimidation and sometimes violence against journalists who criticize the central government or powerful local leaders , and some news organizations and newspapers have occasionally been closed for incorrect or derogatory reporting on high officials .

in october 2012 , the afghan government threatened to expel the staff of the international crisis group because of a report it issued that warned that afghanistan might slide into civil war if the 2014 presidential elections are not free and fair .

in august 2014 , karzai expelled new york times journalist matthew rosenberg for reporting on alternative scenarios should the presidential election dispute not be resolved .

about one week after taking office , president ghani revoked rosenberg's exclusion from the country .

usaid programs have trained investigative journalists to do more reporting on official corruption and other issues .

the united states has provided funding and advice to an afghan government media information center that the afghan government uses to communicate with the public .

u.s. advisers ended their work there in december 2011 .

separately , islamic conservatives on the ulema council and in the national assembly , as well as prominent clerics such as shiite ayatollah asif mohseni , have sometimes asserted control over media content .

this has been an attempt to curb the popularity of such networks as tolo television .

with the ulema council's backing , in april 2008 the ministry of information and culture banned five indian - produced soap operas on tolo on the grounds that they are too risqué , although the programs were restored in august 2008 under a compromise that brought in islamic - oriented programs from turkey .

in june 2011 , pressure from the ulema council caused tolo to remove a soap opera called "forbidden love. .

tolo has also aired programs about official corruption .

in april 2013 , karzai reportedly agreed with a call by the ulema council to ban programs considered "vulgar , obscene , or un - islamic. .

radio free europe / radio liberty's "radio azadi" service for afghanistan has distributed 20,000 solar powered radios to poor ( and usually illiterate ) afghans to improve their access to information .

in general , the government does not restrict access to the internet , but it does ban access to pornographic websites .

the state department and unama reports cite widespread examples of torture , rape , and other abuses by officials , security forces , detention center authorities , and police .

in september 2011 , u.s. and partner transfers of prisoners to some afghan facilities were suspended because of alleged torture by afghan prison authorities .

unama visits afghan - run detention facilities to monitor implementation of presidential decree no .

129 preventing torture and ill - treatment of detainees .

unama provided assistance for the redrafting of 173 prison - related operational directives .

as of the end of 2013 , 114 such revised directives were issued , although there continue to be concerns about new incidents of alleged torture and ill - treatment .

in 2007 , afghanistan resumed enforcing the death penalty after a four - year moratorium .

it executed 15 criminals that year .

in august 2010 , the issue of stoning to death as a punishment arose when taliban insurgents ordered a young couple who had eloped stoned to death in a taliban - controlled area of konduz province .

although the punishment was not meted out by the government , it was reported that many residents of the couple's village supported the punishment .

on september 27 , 2014 , two days before leaving office , president karzai signed an execution order for five men convicted of gang rape , ignoring calls to stay the execution because of concerns over whether they got a fair trial .

president ghani went forward with the execution on october 8 , to the condemnation of the united nations and some european officials .

the ministry of women's affairs applauded the execution as "a historic lesson to those who might resort to such crimes. .

afghanistan was placed in tier 2 in the state department trafficking in persons report for 2014 , issued in june 2014 that is an improvement from its "tier 2: watch list" rating of the four prior years .

in 2013 , afghanistan was given a waiver for an automatic downgrade to tier 3 ( the downgrade is automatic after a country is "watch - listed" for three consecutive years ) .

the waiver was based on the government's writing of a plan that , if implemented , would qualify as a significant effort to comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking .

the afghan government is assessed in the 2014 report as not complying with minimum standards for eliminating trafficking .

however , in contrast to prior years , it is assessed as making significant efforts to comply .

the state department report says that women from china , some countries in africa , iran , and some countries in central asia are being trafficked into afghanistan for sexual exploitation , although , according to the report , trafficking within afghanistan is more prevalent than trafficking across its borders .

the report asserts that some families knowingly sell their children for forced prostitution , including for bacha baazi , a practice in which wealthy men use groups of young boys for social and sexual entertainment .

the report added that some members of the afghan national security forces have sexually abused boys as part of the bacha baazi practice .

other reports say that many women have resorted to prostitution , despite the risk of social and religious ostracism or punishment , to cope with economic hardship .

women and women's groups are a large component of the burgeoning of civil society in post - taliban afghanistan .

freedoms for women have greatly expanded since the fall of the taliban with their elections to the parliament and their service at many levels of government .

the afghan government pursues a policy of promoting equality for women under its national action plan for women of afghanistan ( napwa ) .

the tokyo mutual accountability framework requires afghanistan to implement the napwa and all of its past commitments and laws to strengthen the rights of women and provide services to them .

president ghani has signaled his strong support for women's rights by highlighting in his inaugural speech the support he has received from his wife , rula ghani .

some in the audience reportedly gasped at the reference , because afghan culture considers it taboo to mention wives and female family members in public .

some afghan conservatives have criticized ghani because mrs. ghani was a christian whom he met while studying at university in beirut in the 1970s , and some afghan clerics allege that there is no public record of her converting to islam .

the major institutional development since 2001 was the formation in 2002 of a ministry of women's affairs dedicated to improving women's rights .

its primary function is to promote public awareness of relevant laws and regulations concerning women's rights .

it plays a key role in trying to protect women from domestic abuse by overseeing the running of as many as 29 women's shelters across afghanistan .

women's rights groups in afghanistan expressed outrage over a june 2012 statement by afghanistan's justice minister that the shelters encourage "immorality and prostitution. .

the afghanistan freedom support act of 2002 ( afsa , p.l .

107-327 ) authorized $15 million per year ( fy2003-fy2006 ) for the ministry of women's affairs .

those monies were donated to the ministry from economic support funds ( esf ) accounts controlled by usaid .

the united states has continued to fund the ministry since afsa expired , although with less than $15 million per year .

one of the most prominent civil society groups operating in post - taliban afghanistan is the afghanistan women's network .

it has at least 3,000 members and its leaders say that 75 nongovernmental organizations work under its auspices .

in addition , the aihrc and outside afghan human rights groups focus extensively on rights for afghan women .

among the most notable accomplishments since 2001 , women are performing jobs that were rarely held by women even before the taliban came to power in 1996 .

the civil service is 19% female , although that is down from 24% in 2004 and below the 30% target level set in the tokyo mutual accountability framework .

women serve in the police force and military , and the first afghan female pilots arrived for training in the united states in july 2011 .

there are over 150 female judges , up from 50 in 2003 , and nearly 500 female journalists working nationwide .

women constitute over one - third of the seats of the nationwide community development councils ( cdcs , discussed above ) , and each cdc is required to have two women in its executive bodies .

women are legally permitted to drive , and press reports say an increasing number of afghan women , although mainly in kabul and other main cities , are learning how to drive and exercising that privilege .

the wearing of the full body covering called the burqa is no longer obligatory , and fewer women are wearing it than was the case a few years ago .

in november 2010 , the government opened a usaid - funded women - only park in kabul called "women's garden" where women can go , without male escort , and undertake fitness and job training activities .

some groups , such as human rights watch , report backsliding on women's rights since 2008 , although the state department human rights report for 2012 says that the situation of women in afghanistan improved "marginally" during 2012 .

numerous abuses , such as denial of educational and employment opportunities , continue primarily because of afghanistan's conservative traditions .

this is particularly prevalent in rural areas , and less so in larger urban areas .

along with the assertion of authority of conservative islamic institutions , on march 2 , 2012 , the ulema council issued a pronouncement saying women should be forced to wear the veil and be forbidden from traveling without a male chaperone .

the pronouncement did reiterate support for the rights of women to inherit and own property , and to choose their marital partners .

on march 6 , 2012 , karzai endorsed the ulema council statement .

among the most widespread abuses reported: more than 70% of marriages in afghanistan are forced , despite laws banning the practice , and a majority of brides are younger than the legal marriage age of 16 .

the practice of baad , in which women are given away to marry someone from another clan to settle a dispute , remains prevalent .

there is no law specifically banning sexual harassment , and women are routinely jailed for zina — a term meaning adultery , and a crime under the penal code , and that includes running away from home , defying family choice of a spouse , eloping , or fleeing domestic violence .

these incarcerations are despite the fact that running away from home is not a crime under the penal code .

that code is often relatively lenient towards males — a man convicted of "honor killing" ( of a wife who commits adultery ) cannot be sentenced to more than two years in prison .

one case that received substantial attention in december 2011 involved a woman who was jailed for having a child outside wedlock even though the child was a product of rape .

women's rights activists have been assassinated on several occasions .

on december 10 , 2012 , the head of the women's affairs ministry department in laghman province was gunned down .

her predecessor in that post was killed by a bomb planted in her car four months earlier .

a prominent women's rights activist and author , sushmita banerjee , a citizen of india , was abducted by taliban militants from her home in paktika province and found killed .

two taliban suspects were subsequently arrested .

in an effort to prevent these abuses , on august 6 , 2009 , karzai issued , as a decree , the "elimination of violence against women" ( evaw ) law that makes many of the practices above unlawful .

partly as a result of the decree , prosecutions of abuses against women are increasingly obtaining convictions .

a "high commission for the elimination of violence against women" has been established to oversee implementation of the evaw , and provincial offices of the commission have been established in all but two provinces , according to the march 7 , 2014 , u.n. report .

the ministry of women's affairs is working with local authorities in 11 provinces to improve implementation of the decree .

on the other hand , despite the evaw decree , only a small percentage of reports of violence against women are registered with the judicial system , and about one - third of those proceed to trial .

the number of women jailed for "moral crimes" has increased by 50% since 2011 .

efforts by the national assembly to enact the evaw in december 2010 and in may 2013 failed due to opposition from islamic conservatives who do not want to limit the ability of male elders to decide family issues .

on may 22 , 2013 , about 200 male islamist students demonstrated in kabul demanding repeal of the evaw decree outright .

despite conservative attitudes , women have moved into prominent positions in all areas of afghan governance , although with periodic setbacks .

as noted above , three women were nominated to cabinet posts in january 2015 .

this is the same number of women that have served in ministerial posts since 2004 .

in march 2005 , karzai appointed a former minister of women's affairs , habiba sohrabi , as governor of bamiyan province , inhabited mostly by hazaras .

one woman ( masooda jalal ) ran in the 2004 presidential election , and two ran for president in the august 20 , 2009 , election .

in the latter , each received less than one - half of 1% .

as noted above , one woman filed to run for president in 2014 , but her candidacy was disqualified by the iec apparently for an insufficient number of nominating signatures .

three women , including sohrabi , are vice presidential candidates in the april 2014 election .

in the national assembly , the constitution reserves for women at least 17 of the 102 seats in the upper house and 68 of the 249 seats in the lower house of parliament .

there were 69 women elected in the 2010 parliamentary elections , one more than the quota .

 ( 400 women ran for those seats — about 16% of all candidates. ) .

the target ratio is ensured by reserving an average of two seats per province ( 34 provinces ) for women — the top two female vote getters per province .

 ( kabul province reserves 9 female seats. ) .

there are 28 women in the upper house , substantially more than the minimum number .

however , some ngos and other groups believe that the women elected by the quota system are not viewed as equally legitimate parliamentarians .

about 300 women were delegates to the 1,600-person " peace jirga " that was held during june 2-4 , 2010 , which endorsed an afghan plan to reintegrate insurgents who want to end their fight .

the high peace council to oversee the reconciliation process , which met for the first time on october 10 , 2010 , has 9 women out of 70 members , although these women report that their views are not taken into account to any significant extent in the council .

at u.s. and other country urging , a woman was part of the official afghan delegation to the major international conference on afghanistan in bonn on december 5 , 2011 ; she was selected at a meeting of civil society activists in bonn , a day before the major conference began .

u.s. officials say that its policy is to promote women's rights in afghanistan rigorously .

the administration has and is following its "strategy for assistance to women in afghanistan , 2010-2013. .

u.s. officials said aid allocations are geared toward that strategy .

specific earmarks for use of u.s. funds for women's and girls' programs in afghanistan are contained in recent annual appropriations , and these earmarks have grown steadily .

the united states provided $159 million to programs for afghan women in fy2009 , slightly more than the $150 million earmarked , and about $225 million for fy2010 , more than the $175 earmarked .

for fy2010 , assistance for women was provided in the following "pillars" of the u.s. strategy: health ( $87 million ) ; education ( $31 million ) ; economy , work , and poverty ( $54.6 million ) ; legal protection and human rights ( $12 million ) ; and leadership and political participation ( $43 million ) .

total u.s. funding for women's programs for afghanistan were similar for fy2011 , fy2012 , and fy2013 .

among the funding streams has been u.s .

ambassador small grants to support gender equality ( fy2009-fy2012 ) , which was used to help finance over 830,000 microloans to women during 2004-2011 for the establishment of 175,000 small businesses , according to an srap report released november 2011 .

these strategy pillars , and specific programs funded by them , are discussed in annual state department reports on u.s. aid to women and girls .

u.s. funding for democracy , governance , and rule of law programs has grown , in line with the obama administration strategy for afghanistan .

during fy2002-fy2012 , usaid spent about $1.5 billion on democracy , governance , rule of law and human rights , and elections support .

for fy2013 , the esf amounts provided for democracy and governance are $578.2 million , including $447.2 million for good governance , $31.5 million for rule of law and human rights ( not including incle ) , $64.3 million for political competition and consensus - building , and $35.2 million for civil society .

for fy2014 , the administration has requested $1.665 billion in esf and $475 in incle funding for afghanistan — the broad accounts from which democracy , governance , and rule of law funding — as well as funding for a wide range of other functions — are drawn .

for tables on u.s. aid to afghanistan , see crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

a major u.s. and afghan initiative — to reach a conflict - ending settlement with the taliban — is likely to affect all of the issues discussed in this paper were it to be realized .

afghan politics , elections , the performance of the government , and the human rights situation could all be affected significantly by a deal with the taliban .

many in the international community , including within the obama administration , initially withheld endorsement of the concept , asserting reconciliation might result in the incorporation into the afghan political system of insurgent leaders who retain ties to al qaeda and will roll back freedoms .

the minority communities in the north , women , intellectuals , and others remain skeptical of reconciliation on similar grounds .

most taliban insurgents are highly conservative islamists who oppose the advancement of women and women have been a target of attacks by taliban supporters , including attacks on girls' schools and athletic facilities .

if the taliban is given major ministry positions , seats in parliament , or even tacit control over territory as part of any deal , the movement would be in position to assert its ideology .

to respond to those fears , afghan and u.s. officials say that the outcome of a settlement would require the taliban to drop at least some of its demands that ( 1 ) foreign troops leave afghanistan ; ( 2 ) a new "islamic" constitution be adopted ; and ( 3 ) islamic law be imposed .

this issue is covered in greater depth in crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

