in his state of the union address on january 28 , 2003 , president george w. bush announced a new $720 million research and development ( r&d ) initiative to promote hydrogen as a transportation fuel .

the hydrogen fuel initiative is intended to complement the freedomcar initiative , which focuses on cooperative vehicle research between the federal government , universities , and private industry .

the freedomcar initiative replaced a related clinton administration initiative , the partnership for a new generation of vehicles ( pngv ) , announced in 1993 .

while both initiatives aimed to increase fuel efficiency of the automotive fleet , freedomcar extended the time frame by another 10 to 15 years and focused research on hydrogen fuel cell vehicles ; pngv focused mainly on diesel - fueled hybrid vehicles .

through fy2003 , the overall level of funding for pngv - and freedomcar - related research at the department of energy ( doe ) remained relatively constant , with some of the funds for hybrid vehicles transferred to fuel cell research .

for fy2004 , however , overall funding for research ( within the office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ) into hydrogen fuel , fuel cells , and vehicle technologies increased by about 30% .

some of this increase was offset by funding reductions in other programs , but the major portion of the increase was new funding .

for fy2005 through fy2008 , funding for hydrogen and fuel cell r&d steadily increased .

however , for fy2009 , the bush administration has requested 30% below the fy2008 appropriation for hydrogen , fuel cell , and vehicle technologies programs .

much of that decrease would be offset by an almost doubling of related basic science research .

overall , the request is roughly 4% below fy2008 levels for all related research .

most federal research on hydrogen fuel and fuel cell vehicles is overseen by two offices within the doe office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) .

the office of freedomcar and vehicle technologies ( fcvt ) coordinates research on automotive fuel cells and other advanced vehicle technologies , including electric propulsion systems , vehicle systems , materials technology , and other areas .

the office of hydrogen , fuel cells and infrastructure technologies ( hfcit ) coordinates research on fuel cell technologies ( for all applications , not solely transportation ) , as well as research on hydrogen fuel production , delivery and storage systems .

as part of its fy2006 budget request for the hydrogen fuel initiative , doe added ongoing research funded through three additional doe offices , as well as a small amount of research funding at the department of transportation .

the three doe offices are the office of fossil energy ( fe ) , the office of nuclear energy ( ne ) , and the office of science ( sc ) .

members of the partnerships include the federal government and the national laboratories , as well as universities , state governments , vehicle manufacturers , energy companies , equipment manufacturers , and industry groups .

funding for freedomcar and hydrogen fuel initiative research ( including hydrogen - related research fossil energy research , nuclear hydrogen research and basic scientific research ) is included in the energy and water development appropriations bill .

funding for these areas is shown in table 1 .

the mission of the hydrogen fuel initiative is to "research , develop , and validate fuel cells and hydrogen production , delivery , and storage technologies for transportation and stationary applications. .

fuel cell r&d areas include transportation systems , stationary systems , fuel processing , fuel cell components , and technology validation .

the focus of hydrogen fuel r&d includes hydrogen production and delivery , fuel storage , hydrogen infrastructure , safety , codes and standards , and training and education .

the freedomcar and the hydrogen fuel initiatives have each set four goals for 2015 , and share one additional goal between them .

the shared goal is to produce hydrogen - fueled engine systems that achieve double to triple the efficiency of today's conventional engines at a cost competitive with conventional engines .

freedomcar's individual goals mainly focus on reducing system costs for various technologies .

the freedomcar goals are to develop electric drive systems with a 15-year life and significantly reduced hardware costs ; advanced internal combustion engine systems with double to triple the efficiency of current systems at no greater cost and no higher emissions than conventional engine systems ; electrical energy storage with improved life and lower cost than current systems ; and materials and manufacturing technologies that achieve a 50% weight reduction in vehicle structure , while maintaining affordability and increasing the use of recyclable / recycled materials .

the four goals for the hydrogen fuel initiative focus on improvements in fuel cell technology and improvements in the storage and delivery of hydrogen fuel .

the initiative's goals are to develop hydrogen fuel cell power systems that are durable , and deliver higher efficiency at lower cost than today's systems ; transportation fuel cell systems that deliver greater efficiency and lower cost , and meet or exceed emissions standards ; hydrogen refueling systems that are highly efficient and deliver fuel at the market price of gasoline ; and on - board hydrogen storage systems with improved energy density and cost over existing systems .

the creation of freedomcar and the president's hydrogen fuel initiatives have raised debate over several issues .

these issues include the proper role of the government in r&d , as well as the proper level of funding , and concerns over energy efficiency and fuel consumption .

some environmental groups , including the sierra club , have criticized the initiatives .

they argue that while funding has increased for efficient technologies , the initiatives do not require auto manufacturers to make fuel cell vehicles available to customers by any specific time .

also , groups such as the natural resources defense council argued that the initiatives were put in place to forestall significant increases in national fuel economy standards .

however , in 2007 congress enacted more stringent fuel economy standards for passenger cars and light trucks as part of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) .

the administration argues that the higher r&d funding will provide significant impetus for advancements in hydrogen and fuel cell technologies , and that without those advancements , the technology would be unaffordable for consumers .

further , some engineers argue that freedomcar's efficiency and cost goals may be difficult to attain in the time frame of the program , and that any sort of sales goal would be unrealistic .

moreover , industry groups argue that an explicit sales goal could force manufacturers to abandon r&d on other promising technologies like gasoline - electric hybrids .

even among supporters of the program , there is criticism that freedomcar and the president's hydrogen fuel initiative are under - funded and that additional government commitments to hydrogen and fuel cells must be made .

according to some proponents , these commitments could take the form of increased r&d funding , expanded demonstration programs , vehicle and fuel sales or production incentives , and other incentives to make these vehicles attractive to customers .

finally , some critics argue there are too many technical and economic hurdles to the development of affordable , practical hydrogen and fuel cell technology , especially for automobiles , and that federal research should focus on more realistic goals .

in addition to doe , other government agencies are also involved in fuel cell vehicle r&d , although this funding is considerably lower .

for example , the national automotive center ( nac ) , part of the army's tank - automotive research , development , and engineering center ( tardec ) , coordinates fuel cell vehicle research between the department of defense ( dod ) and private contractors , and partners with doe , the department of transportation ( dot ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , academia , and industry .

the appropriations processes over the next few years will directly affect the future of freedomcar and the president's hydrogen fuel initiative .

between fy2004 and fy2008 , the administration's stated goal was a funding increase for both initiatives of $720 million above fy2003 levels for fy2004 through fy2008 .

in total , congress appropriated an additional $450 million in total between fy2004 and fy2008 for hydrogen , fuel cell , and advanced vehicle programs .

congress appropriated an additional $145 million for other programs , mainly basic sciences , for a total increase of roughly $600 million over that five - year period .

in addition to appropriations legislation , hydrogen and fuel cell vehicles are addressed by other recent legislation .

on august 8 , 2005 , president bush signed the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

among other provisions , p.l .

109-58 authorizes appropriations for hydrogen and fuel cell research at higher levels than requested by the president — $3.3 billion over five years .

in addition to r&d funding , the bill provides tax incentives for the purchase of new fuel cell vehicles .

freedomcar and the president's hydrogen fuel initiative raise several key issues for congressional consideration .

some of these issues are: given rising federal deficits and the potential for increased defense costs , can the federal government afford the recent increase for hydrogen and fuel cell r&d ? .

should the federal government be picking hydrogen and fuel cell vehicle technologies over other technologies , such as hybrid vehicles and lean - burn engines ? .

would the designation of a target deadline for commercialization of fuel cell vehicles help focus the program and make better use of funding resources ? .

alternately , would such a deadline force manufacturers to abandon other promising technologies or create an unfair burden on the industry ? .

should the government focus on long - term research or should it focus on technologies closer to commercialization , or both ? .

is the widespread use of hydrogen and fuel cells technically and economically feasible , or is the government taking too large a risk on unproven technology ? .

