amber alerts ( also referred to as amber ) use technology to disseminate information about child abductions in a timely manner .

typically an amber alert is triggered for children under 18 who are believed by law enforcement officers to have been abducted ( except in cases of parental abduction ) .

research has found that most abducted children murdered by their kidnappers are killed within three hours of the abduction .

prompt response to child abductions is therefore deemed critical by many .

law enforcement officers are encouraged to send out an alert if circumstances indicate that the child is in harm's way , if they have sufficient descriptive information about the child and / or the abductor for an alert , and if they believe that the immediate broadcast of an alert will help .

when there is information about a vehicle used in an abduction , this information will usually be transmitted to highway message boards , if that technology is in place .

while each plan sets its own parameters , most follow guidelines set by the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) .

a typical amber alert would include an emergency alert system ( eas ) broadcast , alerts on highway message boards , and notifications to public service partners such as police , highway patrols and the field crews of public utilities .

a number of counties and cities have amber alert programs that notify local residents using e - mail or telephone alert systems to aid in the recovery of abducted children .

alerts can also be sent by text messages to cell phones and other wireless devices .

at&t mobility , sprint nextel , verizon wireless and t - mobile are among the wireless service providers that participate in the amber alert network ; subscribers can sign up for free text messages .

these systems have the advantage of targeting selected audiences by function or geographical location but may not be received in a timely manner ; telephone alert systems , for example , can be blocked by call - screening technologies .

amber alert technology and alerting techniques are also used for other missing person notifications .

a number of local or faith - based organizations maintain services to assist in locating missing adults .

some states participate in a consortium that operates an amber alert web portal using internet technology .

information about an amber alert is sent to a web portal and reconfigured for different types of broadcasting , including cell phones , pagers , e - mail , highway signs , tv news websites , and emergency communications centers .

the technology allows police officers to transmit details and photos through encrypted computer systems in patrol cars .

information , therefore , is disseminated both more quickly and more widely , maximizing the opportunity to find a missing child in the critical first three hours .

the alert system is managed from a dedicated web portal that can be accessed by statewide or local systems .

the software recognizes the reported locations of abductions and sends emergency messages to targeted areas .

the emergency alert system ( eas ) is jointly administered by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , in cooperation with the national weather service ( nws ) , an organization within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .the eas sends emergency messages with the cooperation of broadcast radio and television and most cable television stations .

its most common use is for weather alerts .

eas technology is also used in the amber alert programs administered in some states and communities .

to facilitate transmittal , eas messages are classified by types of events , which are coded .

these event codes speed the recognition and retransmittal process at broadcast stations .

for example , a tornado warning is tor , evacuation immediate is evi , a civil emergency message is cem .

when a message is received at the broadcast station , it can be relayed to the public either as a program interruption or , for television , a "crawl" at the bottom of the tv screen .

in the early stages of amber alert program development the cem ( civil emergency ) event code was used for eas messages .

in february 2002 , the fcc added several new event and location codes for broadcast and cable stations to use ; included was a child abduction emergency ( cae ) event code .

although broadcaster participation is mandatory for national alerts , the participation of broadcast and cable stations in state and local emergency announcements is voluntary .

the protect act ( p.l .

108-21 ) formally established the federal government's role in the amber alert system in 2003 .

congress has encouraged federal support for other alert programs as well .

the office of justice programs , at the department of justice , includes an amber alert division , the national amber alert initiative .

the department of justice , the department of transportation , ncmec , broadcasters , and law enforcement officers collaborate on national strategies for the amber alert program .

one collaborative initiative was to develop standard procedures for emergency call takers responding to a report of a missing or abused child .

members of the joint committee that developed the standard included the association of public - safety communications officials ( apco ) , the national academies of emergency dispatch ( naed ) , the national emergency number association ( nena ) , ncmec , and the department of justice .

the american national standards institute ( ansi ) board of standards review approved the standard in december 2007 [apco american national standard ( ans ) 1.101.1-2007] .

all 50 states operate amber alert programs for missing children .

many states have extended their amber alert programs to include missing adults or participate in other alert programs .

silver alert programs , for example , are operated for the benefit of those with alzheimer's disease and other cognitive impairments .

silver alerts are modeled on amber alerts and use many of the same technologies and information channels for disseminating information .

crs has prepared an analysis of 11 states with active alert programs , evaluating program features such as legal authority , administrative responsibility , training , and interstate coordination .

the states are: colorado , delaware , florida , georgia , kentucky , north carolina , ohio , oklahoma , rhode island , texas , and virginia .

the emergency alert system is being upgraded to digital technology and in time will be connected to a gateway that will be able to receive and direct alerts of all types , to any designated location , using any digital media .

the gateway , the integrated public alert and warning system ( ipaws ) , is being developed through fema's national continuity program directorate .

one of the new alert technologies that will use the gateway is the commercial mobile alert system ( cmas ) .

the regulations for cmas were established by the fcc through its rule - making process .

in addition to message formats and other standards , regulations require three alert categories that must be carried by participating carriers: presidential , imminent threat , and amber alerts .

another investment in emergency communications infrastructure that will likely benefit amber alerts and similar programs is for the transition to internet protocols in 911 call centers and networks .

unlike most existing 911 systems , which use analog technology , ip - enabled networks can transmit information digitally .

the networks , which operate like the internet but do not necessarily connect to the internet , can support any type of broadband communication and therefore can be used for a variety of communications purposes .

in compliance with requirements of the homeland security appropriations act , 2007 , the department of homeland security issued the national emergency communications plan ( necp ) in july 2008 .

the plan focused on the communications needs of first responders at the site of disasters .

the next version of the plan , due in 2010 , is expected to expand the planning process to include 911 systems , alert programs , and other communications tools that are needed in responding to large - scale emergencies .

the necp is widely viewed as the capstone of coordinated planning for emergency communications between and among agencies at all levels of government .

the scope of the plan , however , may not be wide enough to include the type of technology - policy decisions that would ensure that all facets of emergency communications are developed in concert .

such a step is widely considered to be essential to an effective response capacity for crises big or small , personal or global , that would endeavor to protect everyone with equal zeal and efficiency .

