non - elderly , non - disabled , non - working residents of public housing are subject to a community service and self - sufficiency requirement ( referred to as the cssr or community service requirement ) .

specifically , all adult residents of a household who are not otherwise exempted are required to participate in eight hours per month of either community service or economic self - sufficiency activities in order to maintain their eligibility for public housing .

exempted residents include those who are 62 years or older ; blind or disabled and can certify that they cannot comply with the community service requirement ; caretakers of a person with a disability ; engaged in work activities ; exempt from work activities under the temporary assistance for needy families program ( tanf ) or a state welfare program ; and / or members of a family in compliance with tanf or a state welfare program's requirements .

according to data released by hud , of the 1.86 million individuals living in public housing , approximately 812,000 , or ( 44% ) are potentially subject to the community service requirement .

it requires that residents of public housing , unless exempted , participate in eight hours of community service and / or economic self - sufficiency activities per month .

phas have broad discretion in defining what counts as community service or economic self - sufficiency activities .

allowable activities may include , among others , volunteer work at a local public or nonprofit institution ; caring for the children of other residents fulfilling the community service requirements ; participation in a job readiness or training program ; or attending a two - or four - year college .

however , public housing tenants required to fulfill the community service requirements cannot supplant otherwise paid employees of the pha or other community service organizations .

phas must review and verify each member of a household's compliance 30 days prior to the end of the household's annual lease .

each nonexempt family member is required to present a signed certification on a form provided by the pha of cssr activities performed over the previous 12 months .

this form is developed and standardized by the pha and the submitted form is verified by a third party .

in 2016 , as a part of a broader set of administrative streamlining actions , hud began to permit phas to adopt policies to allow families to self - certify their compliance with the cssr , subject to validity testing .

if any member of the household fails to comply with the community service requirement , the entire household is considered out of compliance .

the tenant must agree to make up the community - service deficit in the following year in order to renew the household's lease through a signed "work - out agreement" with the pha .

if the tenant does not come into compliance , the pha may not renew the household's lease .

however , phas may not terminate a household's lease for noncompliance before the lease has expired .

noncompliant tenants may file a grievance to dispute the pha's decision to terminate tenancy .

each pha must develop a local policy for administering the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirements and include the policy in its agency plan .

phas may administer community service activities directly , partner with an outside organization or institution , or provide referrals to tenants for volunteer work or self - sufficiency programs .

the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement applicable to public housing residents originated with the housing reform debates of the 1990s and parallel debates at the time about the role of work and welfare reform .

following several years of legislative effort , in 1997 , h.r .

2 , the housing opportunity and responsibility act of 1997 , and s. 462 , the public housing reform and responsibility act of 1997 , were introduced .

they sought to reform hud's low - income housing programs by consolidating the public housing program into a two - part block grant program ; denying occupancy to applicants with a history of drug - related activity ; and requiring residents of public housing to meet a community service requirement .

the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement was among the most controversial elements of the sweeping bills .

while neither h.r .

2 nor s. 462 became law , a compromise version was enacted as the quality housing and work responsibility act of 1998 ( qhwra ) , title v of the fy1999 departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development ( va - hud ) appropriations bill ( h.r .

4194 ) , signed into law by then - president bill clinton ( p.l .

105-276 ) .

qhwra contained many provisions from h.r .

2 and s. 462 , including a version of the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement .

hud did not issue regulations to implement the community service provisions of qhwra until march 29 , 2000 .

the regulations took effect beginning on october 1 , 2000 , and were in effect for just over one year .

language added to the fy2002 va - hud appropriations bill ( p.l .

107-73 ) , which was enacted in november 2001 , prohibited hud from using any fy2002 funds to enforce the community service and self - sufficiency requirements .

the suspension of the provision ended when the fy2003 appropriations bill ( p.l .

108-7 ) was signed into law on february 21 , 2003 .

hud issued new guidance to the local public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer public housing on june 20 , 2003 , instructing them to reinstate the community service requirement for public housing residents beginning on august 1 , 2003 .

following full implementation of the community service requirement , legislation was introduced in several congresses to repeal the community service requirement , although it was not enacted .

as is evident in its legislative and regulatory history , the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement for residents of public housing has been controversial since its inception .

it is consistent with the movement toward required work and self - sufficiency activities that characterized the welfare reform debates of the same era , which culminated in the creation of the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program .

supporters of mandatory work policies have argued that low - income families should earn the benefits or subsidies they are receiving .

they have also argued that by compelling families into self - sufficiency activities , such policies can improve the lives of poor families and their children by potentially increasing their incomes .

those who have argued against mandatory work requirements contend that such requirements are paternalistic and do not promote real self - sufficiency , but rather , low - wage work that may not be sustainable .

all of these disagreements manifested during debate over the provision , and additional arguments were made specifically for and against the public housing requirement .

proponents of the community service requirement cited concerns about a perceived negative culture at public housing developments and the possibility for the community service requirement to help change that culture .

opponents of the provision argued specifically against the idea of a community service "requirement" for public housing residents , arguing it is akin to the forced community work mandated of criminals .

additionally , critics raised questions about the fairness of applying this requirement only to residents of public housing and not to recipients of section 8 housing choice vouchers or section 8 project - based rental assistance , since the programs serve similar populations .

during debate over the provision , concerns were repeatedly raised that the community service requirement would be administratively burdensome or an unfunded mandate .

although only a small number of tenants may actually be subject to the community service requirement at a given pha , the pha must certify either the participation or exemption status of every resident of public housing .

furthermore , the grievance and / or eviction process for tenants who are found to be noncompliant with the community service requirement may be costly .

industry groups contended that this requirement is an unreasonable burden for phas , that , they argue , are chronically under - funded .

some of the opponents of the policy speculated that phas would not aggressively implement the provision ; rather , they would try to exempt as many families as possible and set a very broad definition of eligible activities in order to avoid costly grievances and evictions and keep administrative burdens low .

differences of opinion were also expressed regarding whether the community service requirement would be complementary to , or duplicative of , the work requirements that had recently been adopted for cash assistance recipients under the temporary assistance for needy families program .

there has also been some controversy surrounding hud's implementation of the community service requirement .

the statute states that in order to meet one of the exemption criteria , tenants must be engaged in work activities , as defined in the social security act .

the social security act definition of work activities does not include a minimum number of hours a person must perform the listed activities in order to be considered engaged in work activities .

hud's 2003 notice to phas encouraged them to consider a tenant engaged in work activities , and therefore exempt from the community service requirement , only if they were working at least 30 hours per week .

this guidance initially prompted confusion as to whether phas were required to set a 30-hour standard .

while the guidance states that phas are encouraged to set a 30-hour standard , they are not required to set such a standard .

in march 2008 , hud's inspector general released an audit of hud's implementation and enforcement of the community service requirement .

the audit was performed in response to media reports that the community service requirement was rarely enforced .

the audit found that hud did not have adequate controls to ensure that phas properly administered the community service requirement , and the audit estimated that at least 85,000 households living in public housing were ineligible as a result of noncompliance with the community service requirement .

in response to these findings , in november 2009 , hud published additional guidance to phas regarding the administration of the community service requirements .

the guidance largely restated existing requirements , although it did provide enhanced guidance on reporting .

it also reiterated steps phas may take to enforce the community service requirement , as well as steps hud may take to sanction phas for failing to enforce the community service requirement .

in february 2015 , hud's inspector general released a new audit of hud's implementation and enforcement of the community service requirement .

the audit found that hud subsidized housing for 106,000 units occupied by noncompliant tenants out of nearly 550,000 units potentially subject to the community service requirement nationwide .

as a result , the oig contended that the agency paid more than $37 million in monthly subsidies for public housing units occupied by noncompliant tenants .

the audit recommended that the agency develop and implement a written policy for the community service requirement to ensure adequate compliance and create training and further clarified reporting mechanisms .

in response to the audit , hud issued a notice to phas on august 13 , 2015 , with further guidance related to the statutory / regulatory requirements for administering the community service requirement ; data collection and reporting requirements ; action to take against noncompliant tenants ; and penalties against phas that do not comply .

the notice also provided clarification that hud has interpreted the statutory exemptions for compliance with the community service requirement to include the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

therefore , if a tenant is a member of a family that receives snap , and has been found to be in compliance with snap program requirements , then the tenant is exempt from the community service requirement .

this clarification is particularly notable because the 2015 oig report contended that phas were incorrectly classifying families as exempt from the community service requirement because of their snap participation .

since hud has now clarified that snap families are exempt , the oig's estimate of the number of noncompliant families is likely overstated to some degree .

in august of 2016 , hud published on its website summary data reflecting compliance with the css requirement .

those data report that of the 1.86 million people living in public housing , the community service requirement is applicable to 44% , or 812,000 residents .

of those residents to whom the community service requirement applies , approximately 68% are exempt ( i.e. , are already working , have a disability , etc. ) .

of the remaining 32% who are not exempt ( 257,000 residents , or 13% of all people living in public housing ) , 48% were reported to be in compliance ( 124,000 individuals , or 7% of all public housing residents ) , 32% were reported as pending verification by the pha ( 83,000 individuals or 4% of all public housing residents ) , and 19% were reported as being out of compliance ( 48,000 individuals , or 3% of all public housing residents ) .

