prior to 1975 , the internal revenue code ( irc ) was silent as to the tax treatment of organizations whose primary purpose is influencing elections .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) treated contributions to political organizations as gifts , which meant that the organizations did not have taxable income and were not required to file tax returns .

by the early 1970s , it was apparent that these organizations had sources of income besides contributions , and the irs indicated it would require those with investment and other types of income to file tax returns and pay tax at the corporate rate .

p.l .

93-635 , enacted in 1975 , added section 527 to the irc to address the tax treatment of political organizations .

the section grants tax - exempt status to qualifying political organizations .

this treatment is the focus of this report , but it should be noted that section 527 has two other purposes: it imposes a tax on 501 ( c ) organizations that make political expenditures and it clarifies that expenditures by political organizations on behalf of an individual are generally not income to the individual .

political organizations that qualify under section 527 are taxed only on certain income .

a political organization is any organization , including a party , committee , association , or fund , that is organized and operated primarily to directly or indirectly accept contributions and / or make expenditures for an exempt function .

an exempt function is the influencing or attempting to influence the selection , nomination , election , or appointment of an individual to a federal , state , or local public office , to an office in a political organization , or as a presidential or vice - presidential elector .

an exempt function does not necessarily involve explicitly advocating for or against the individual .

for example , when determining whether an issue advocacy communication is for an exempt function , the irs looks at such things as whether it identifies a candidate , identifies his or her position on the issue and this has been raised to distinguish the candidate from others , is timed to coincide with an election , targets voters in a particular election , and is not part of an ongoing series of similar communications by the organization on the same issue .

527 organizations are subject to tax only on political organization taxable income .

this is the organization's gross income , excluding exempt function income , less $100 and any allowable deductions .

exempt function income is any amount received , to the extent that it is segregated to use for an exempt function , as: contributions of money or other property , membership dues , fees , or assessments , proceeds , which are not received in the ordinary course of business , from political fundraising and entertainment events or from the sale of campaign materials , and proceeds from conducting a bingo game .

the tax rate is generally the highest corporate income tax rate .

however , under irc ยง 527 ( h ) , income of the principal campaign committee of a congressional candidate is taxed using the graduated corporate tax rate schedule .

this is not true for campaign committees of candidates for state or local office .

527 organizations include the entities regulated by the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , as amended by the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) .

for example , political parties and candidate committees are 527 organizations .

however , because some 527 organizations are unrelated to federal elections , not all 527 organizations are regulated by feca .

in recent years , there has been considerable debate about the extent to which feca regulates certain types of 527 organizations and the constitutional limitations on such regulation .

for more information , see crs report rl33888 , section 527 political organizations: background and issues for federal election and tax laws , by [author name scrubbed] , erika lunder , and [author name scrubbed] .

prior to 2000 , certain political organizations received the tax benefits of section 527 without reporting their existence to the fec or the irs .

this was because not all 527 organizations reported to the fec under feca and organizations only filed a return to the irs if they had taxable income .

the fact that organizations could qualify under section 527 without reporting to the fec was largely unnoticed until 1996 , when the irs began issuing guidance on the types of activities that qualify as exempt functions .

this awareness helped lead to an increase in the number of 527 organizations , called "stealth pacs," that were designed to avoid reporting to the fec .

in 2000 and 2002 , congress amended section 527 to require that organizations report to the irs , the fec , or a state .

the 527 transparency act of 2007 would no longer allow 527 organizations to file the periodic expenditure and contribution reports with the irs on a semi - annual basis .

instead , all 527 organizations that report to the irs would be required to file monthly reports , in addition to pre - election , post - election , and year - end reports .

an organization that failed to do so would face a penalty equal to 30% of the expenditures and contributions that were not adequately reported , with the organization's managers jointly and severally liable for the penalty .

additionally , contributions to that organization would be subject to the gift tax .

the organizations would be required to notify their contributors about the failure within 90 days of the irs's final determination that the failure had occurred .

finally , the bill would require that the reports be simultaneously filed with the fec .

the state and local candidate fairness act of 2007 would change the tax rate at which state and local candidates' principal campaign committees are taxed .

as mentioned , 527 organizations are generally taxed at the highest corporate income tax rate on their political organization taxable income , but the principal campaign committees of congressional candidates are taxed according to the graduated corporate income rate schedule .

h.r .

3771 would extend that special rule to the principal campaign committees of state and local candidates so that these committees would also be taxed using the graduated rates .

