parents are obliged to pay child support whether or not they were ever married .

parents also have an obligation to support all of their children , not just the children who reside with them .

thus , although the noncustodial parent is married to someone else or supporting other children , he or she has a continuing obligation to support the children of a previous marriage or relationship .

yes .

as of january 1 , 1994 , the family support act of 1988 requires that all new child support orders provide for automatically withholding child support payments from the obligated parent's paycheck , regardless of whether or not support payments are late .

federal law permits an exception to immediate withholding if the court finds good cause or if the parents both agree to another arrangement .

however , a parent who falls at least one month behind in support payments is subject to withholding even in these cases .

withholding may be used to collect current support payments as well as arrearages .

states have the option , under federal law , to apply withholding to income other than wages and to order withholding from bonuses , commissions , retirement benefits , rental or interest income , or unemployment compensation benefits .

yes .

states permit a child support order to be modified upward or downward based on proof of a substantial change in the parents' financial circumstances or the child's needs .

in addition , federal law requires that child support orders be reviewed every three years unless neither parent requests a review or , in temporary assistance for needy families [tanf] cases , if the review would not be in the child's best interest .

however , child support orders may only be modified prospectively .

the 1986 bradley amendment to the federal child support laws effectively bars retroactive modification that would wipe out past - due support obligations .

yes .

a parent who willfully refuses to comply with a lawful order of child support , though able to do so , may be held in contempt of court and jailed or fined for a fixed period of time as punishment or for an indefinite period until the child support is paid .

as of october 1992 , failure to pay child support in the interstate context has become a federal crime .

an out - of - state parent who has willfully failed to pay court - ordered child support for at least one year or who is at least $5,000 in arrears may be criminally prosecuted by the local united states attorney .

for a first offense , the penalties include a fine and / or a prison sentence of up to six months in prison ; for a second offense , the punishment is a fine and / or up to two years in jail .

a custodial parent who needs to obtain or enforce a child support order but who cannot find the noncustodial parent may enlist the assistance of a child support enforcement agency run by the state or local government , known as a iv - d agency .

this assistance is available to all custodial parents , regardless of whether or not they receive public assistance .

