the north korean taepo dong program traces its origins to the no dong medium - range ballistic missile program of the late 1980s .

in the early 1990s , north korea initiated the development of two ballistic missile programs known to the west as taepo dong 1 and taepo dong 2 .

the reported design objectives for the taepo dong 1 system were to deliver a 1,000 to 1,500 kg warhead to a range of 1,500 to 2,500 km and for the taepo dong 2 to deliver the same warhead to a 4,000 to 8,000 km range .

initial prototypes for both systems were probably manufactured in 1995 or 1996 with a possible initial production run for the taepo dong 1 initiated in early 1997 or 1998 .

some analysts estimated that north korea may have produced from one to ten taepo dong 1 and one or two taepo dong 2 prototypes by the end of 1999 .

these missiles are not believed to be deployed .

north korea is believed to have had extensive foreign assistance from china , russia , pakistan , and iran throughout the program .

very little was known about the actual program until the august 31 , 1998 launch of a taepo dong 1 ( or paektusan - 1 ) from the musudan - ri launch facility in north hamgyong province , northeast coast of north korea .

the stated objective of this launch was to place north korea's first satellite into orbit .

initial u.s. intelligence reports postulated that the taepo dong 1 slv was only a two - stage rocket .

the first stage fell into international waters 300 km east of musudan - ri and the second stage flew over the japanese island of honshu and fell into the water 330 km away from the japanese port of hachinohe for a total distance of approximately 1,646 km .

further analysis of radar tapes reportedly revealed that the taepo dong 1 had a small third solid propellant stage ( presumably designed to place the satellite into orbit ) .

some debris from this third stage was believed to have impacted as far as 4,000 km from the launch point .

some analysts believe that if the missile had functioned properly , the taepo dong 1 space launch vehicle ( slv ) could have achieved a 3,800 to 5,900 km range .

north korean media claimed the satellite entered earth orbit .

in order to strike targets from north korea , a north korean missile would need to achieve the following ranges: within possible range of the taepo dongs are u.s. military facilities in guam ( 3,500 km ) , okinawa , and japan .

the taepo dong 1 missile ( as opposed to the slv ) is believed to be a two - stage missile that uses a no dong missile derivative as its first stage and scud c derivative ( called the hwasong 6 ) as its second stage .

in this configuration , it is estimated that it could deliver a 700 - 1,000 kg warhead to a range of 2,500 km , which could put japan and okinawa within range .

for the taepo dong 1 to achieve greater range its payload would have to be decreased .

some analysts speculated that a reduced - payload configuration could deliver a 200 kg warhead into the u.s. center and a 100 kg warhead to washington d.c. , albeit with poor accuracy .

until a few years ago , the taepo dong 2 had not yet been flight tested .

 ( it has also been called the moksong 2 and the pekdosan 2. ) .

the taepo dong 2 is believed to be a two - stage missile about 35 meters long .

the first stage has been said to bear close resemblance to the chinese css - 2 and css - 3 first stage .

the second stage is believed to be based on the no dong missile .

the two - stage variant is assessed by some to have a range potential of as much as 3,750 km with a 700 to 1,000 kg payload and , if a third stage were added , some believe that range could be extended to 4,000 to 4,300 km with a full payload .

some analysts further believe that the taepo dong 2 could deliver a 700 to 1,000 kg payload as far as 6,700 km .

pyongyang has yet to test the guidance system , and so the missile is believed to be inaccurate .

how it might be deployed ( i.e. , silo or transportable ) also remains undetermined , although some have suggested it is a road mobile system .

in order to achieve ranges capable of striking hawaii and targets on the u.s. mainland , some analysts believe that the taepo dong 2's payload would need to be reduced to 200 - 300 kg .

some believe the taepo dong 2 may be exported to other countries in the future .

in june 2006 the taepo dong 2 ( or paektusan - 2 ) was observed being assembled and fueled at the musudan - ri test site along the northeast coast of north korea .

at that time , some observers believed a test was imminent while others expressed caution because considerable technical uncertainty remained .

on july 4 , 2006 , north korea launched the taepo dong 2 .

the launch was preceded by three shorter - range ballistic missile launches , and then followed by three more .

about 40 seconds into the flight , the taepo dong 2 failed on its own during the first stage and fell into the sea of japan , according to usnorthcom ( u.s. northern command ) .

causes for the failure were studied , but details were not made public .

japanese sources reported some details of the missile launches , suggesting greater accuracy in their impact areas than other analyses .

others have suggested structural failure of the airframe , or failure of the propulsion or guidance system as the causes .

the report also suggested greater russian engineering support than indicated elsewhere .

some believe initial production of the taepo dong 2 may have started in 2005 , and that perhaps 20 missiles were built in 2006 .

in early february 2009 , various reports indicated that north korea was making test preparations for a taepodong - 2 launch by setting up radar and other monitoring equipment around a missile test site along its northeast coast .

secretary of state clinton said any such test would "be very unhelpful in moving our relationship forward" and that it would violate a 2006 un security council resolution ( resolution 1718 ) demanding that north korea "not conduct any further nuclear test or launch of a ballistic missile. .

similarly , the south korean government warned any missile test would "be a serious threat. .

in late february 2009 , north korea announced that it was preparing to launch a communications satellite , similarly to what it said about the 1998 test .

some experts continue to register some concern over north korea's level of military spending in relation to its missile program .

north korea may spend as much as 40 percent of its gross domestic product ( gdp ) on the military .

in 2004 , u.s .

forces korea commander , general leon j. laporte , reportedly stated that north korea's military investments are primarily in their nuclear , biological , chemical and missile programs in order to gain an "asymmetrical" advantage over u.s and south korean forces .

general laporte reportedly emphasized his concern over missile development and north korea's continued development of its nuclear weapons program that could eventually lead to "weaponizing their weapons - grade materials on missiles. .

north korea's apparent willingness to devote such a large portion of its gdp to missiles and weapons of mass destruction could be cause for additional concern when viewed in the light of their alleged cooperation with other countries .

evidence suggests that north korea has had extensive dealings with iran , pakistan , russia , syria , yemen , and libya on ballistic missiles and possibly even nuclear warheads .

one particular concern is that chinese warhead designs , sold to libya by pakistani nuclear scientist dr. a.q .

khan , might also be in the hands of north korea , which could help accelerate its efforts to develop long - ranged nuclear ballistic missiles .

some suggest that north korea's access to these countries' missile and wmd technologies might enable north korea to advance its long - range nuclear ballistic missile program at a more accelerated rate without having to conduct extensive testing , particularly if they use proven missile designs from other countries .

various reports indicate that north korea may be developing and deploying at least two new medium to intermediate - range ballistic missile systems .

the japanese defense ministry reportedly believes north korea has about 200 nodong medium - range missiles .

it is not publicly known if north korea is continuing development of a reported new version of its taepo dong ballistic missile , the so - called taepo dong x , which might achieve intercontinental ranges .

the two new medium to intermediate - range missiles are believed to be based on the decommissioned soviet r - 27 submarine launched ballistic missile .

the r - 27 , which was allegedly acquired from russia in the 1990s and possibly enhanced with the help of russian missile specialists , has been called an "excellent choice" on which to base a new missile system .

its 40 year - old , liquid - fueled technology is considered within the technological and industrial capabilities of north korea and versions of its engines are already used in north korean scuds and no dongs .

perhaps the greatest advantage of this system , according to some observers , is that the r - 27 is a proven design meaning that north korea may be able to develop and deploy these missiles without having to conduct extensive ground and flight tests .

in february 2009 , south korea's defense ministry reported that north korea had deployed a new type of medium - range ballistic with a range estimated at 1,800 miles .

this missile is believed to be the same type seen at a military parade in north korea in 2007 .

additional details , such as the name of this missile and how many are deployed have not yet been made public .

dprk systems potentially increase the missile threat to the united states .

if the new missiles are indeed closely modified versions of the r - 27 , they are likely more accurate in relative terms and have greater range than other dprk missiles .

some analysts believe that the sea - launched version could pose the greatest threat by threatening the continental united states .

these experts suggest that a north korean sea - launched missile capability could complicate intelligence collection efforts as well as present challenges for south korean , japanese , and u.s. ballistic missile defense systems .

others , however , are skeptical that north korea can reach the continental united states with the new sea - based version .

anonymous u.s. government officials reportedly stated that north korea does not presently have a submarine that is capable of transporting a missile within striking distance of the continental united states .

these officials also expressed doubt that north korea had intentions of developing a missile to hide inside a freighter to be used against targets in the united states .

