the european union ( eu ) is an economic and political partnership that represents a unique form of cooperation among 28 member states today .

the eu has long viewed the enlargement process as an historic opportunity to further the integration of the continent by peaceful means .

analysts contend that the carefully managed process of enlargement is one of the eu's most powerful policy tools and has helped transform former dictatorships such as spain and many of the former communist states of central and eastern europe into stable democracies and free market economies .

the eu maintains that the enlargement door remains open to any european country , including turkey and those of the western balkans , able to fulfill the eu's political and economic criteria for membership .

croatia is the newest member state , joining the eu on july 1 , 2013 .

at the same time , many observers assess that eu enlargement may soon be reaching its limits , both geographically and in terms of public enthusiasm for further expansion .

some suggest that the eu's financial troubles could impede the eu's remaining enlargement agenda if eu leaders remain preoccupied with internal eu issues .

others point out that the eu's economic woes and increased uncertainty about the future direction of the eu itself might make joining the union less attractive for some current and potential eu candidates .

the eu is the latest stage in a process of european integration aimed at promoting political reconciliation and economic prosperity throughout the european continent .

it has been built over several decades through a series of binding treaties .

according to the maastricht treaty , any european country may apply for eu membership if it meets a set of core political and economic criteria , known as the "copenhagen criteria. .

these criteria for eu membership require candidates to achieve "stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy , the rule of law , human rights and respect for and protection of minorities ; a functioning market economy , as well as the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the union ; the ability to take on the obligations of membership , including adherence to the aims of political , economic , and monetary union. .

in addition , the eu must be able to absorb new members , so the eu can decide when it is ready to accept a new member .

when a country submits an application to join the eu , it triggers a complex technical process and a sequence of evaluation procedures .

at the same time , eu enlargement is very much a political process ; most all steps on the path to accession require the unanimous agreement of the existing member states .

as such , a prospective eu candidate's relationship or conflicts with individual member states may significantly influence a country's eu accession prospects and timeline .

following the submission of a given country's application , the european commission first issues a formal opinion on the aspirant country , after which the council of ministers decides whether to accept the application .

following a positive unanimous decision by all 28 member states in the council of ministers to accept a given country's application , that country becomes an official eu candidate .

accession negotiations , a long and complex process in which the candidate country must adopt and implement a massive body of eu treaties , laws , and regulations , may then begin .

the commission and the council of ministers ( acting unanimously ) must also approve the actual opening of accession negotiations and a negotiating framework , which establishes the general guidelines for the enlargement talks .

the eu's nearly 144,000 pages of rules and regulations are known as the acquis communautaire .

the acquis is divided into 35 subject - related "chapters" that range from free movement of goods to agriculture to competition .

accession negotiations on each chapter begin with a screening process to see to what extent the applicant meets the requirements of each chapter ; detailed negotiations take place at the ministerial level to establish the terms under which applicants will adopt and implement the rules in each chapter .

the european commission proposes common negotiating positions for the eu on each chapter , and conducts the negotiations on behalf of the eu .

enlargement policy and accession negotiations are directed and led by the eu commissioner for enlargement and european neighborhood policy , currently stefan füle .

in all areas of the acquis , the candidate country must bring its institutions , management capacity , and administrative and judicial systems up to eu standards , both at national and regional levels .

during negotiations , applicants may request transition periods for complying with certain eu rules .

all candidate countries receive financial assistance from the eu , mainly to aid in the accession process .

chapters of the acquis can only be opened and closed with the unanimous approval of all 28 existing eu member states acting in the council of ministers .

periodically , the commission issues "progress" reports to the council of ministers and the european parliament assessing the achievements in the candidate countries .

once the commission concludes negotiations on all 35 chapters with an applicant state , the agreements reached are incorporated into a draft accession treaty , which must be approved by the council of ministers and the european parliament .

after the accession treaty is signed by the eu and the candidate country , it must then be ratified by each eu member state and the candidate country ; this process can take up to two years .

currently , five countries are considered by the eu as official candidates for membership: iceland , macedonia , montenegro , serbia , and turkey .

all are at different stages of the accession process , and face various issues and challenges on the road to eu membership .

as noted previously , the eu asserts that the enlargement door remains open to any european country that is able to meet and implement the political and economic criteria for membership .

the remaining western balkan states of albania , bosnia - herzegovina , and kosovo are all officially recognized by the eu as potential candidates , but their accession prospects and timetables vary ( see the text box on the next page for more information ) ; most analysts believe that it will likely be many more years before any of these countries are ready to join the eu .

nevertheless , the eu hopes that the possibility of membership will help accelerate reforms and promote greater stability in these and other states interested in eventual eu accession .

some countries of "wider europe," usually considered to include ukraine , moldova , and the southern caucasus ( georgia , armenia , and azerbaijan ) , have also expressed long - term eu aspirations .

in contrast to the western balkans , the eu has not formally recognized a membership perspective for any of the countries of "wider europe," but georgia and moldova , in particular , harbor hopes of joining the eu one day , and successive ukrainian governments have supported eu membership to varying degrees .

in november 2013 , georgia and moldova initialed respective association agreements ( aa ) with the eu ; an aa sets out the broad framework for cooperation between the eu and a partner country , and seeks to promote european political values and deeper economic ties .

many view the conclusion of an aa as a necessary first step on the path to eventual eu accession ( however , aas do not represent an eu membership commitment ) .

although the current ukrainian government of viktor yanukovych has formally supported eu integration for ukraine and had been expected to sign its aa in november 2013 , yanukovych declined to do so because of intense russian opposition .

this decision sparked massive pro - eu and anti - government protests in ukraine , some of which have since turned violent , and led to a serious political crisis .

on the other hand , "enlargement fatigue" has become a serious issue in europe .

despite croatia's recent accession and the eu's membership commitment to the other western balkan countries , experts assert that a number of european leaders and many eu citizens remain cautious about further eu enlargement .

this is especially true with respect to turkey or the countries of "wider europe. .

eu officials increasingly stress that the process of enlargement must take into account the union's "integration capacity. .

in other words , acceding countries must be ready and able to fully assume the obligations of eu membership , and additional eu enlargement must not endanger the ability of the eu's institutions to function effectively or render eu financing arrangements unsustainable .

apprehensions about continued eu enlargement seem to be driven by several issues .

some eu policy makers and european publics have long worried that the addition of nations with weak economies and low incomes could lead to an influx of low - cost or unwanted migrant labor .

such fears prompted the eu to allow the "old" member states to institute some temporary restrictions ( of up to seven years ) on labor migration from those countries that joined the eu in 2004 and 2007 .

although eu members that chose not to impose any transitional restrictions ( such as the uk and ireland ) did see an increase in workers from central and eastern europe , most studies since 2004 suggest that the proportion of eu citizens moving from east to west following enlargement has been relatively small and that such migrants have not displaced local workers or significantly driven down local wages .

nevertheless , such concerns persist , especially when considering the accession of big , relatively less affluent countries such as turkey or possibly ukraine in the longer term .

similar to those allowed following the 2004 and 2007 enlargement rounds , eu member states may impose temporary labor migration restrictions on croatian nationals following croatia's 2013 accession .

the addition of large countries like turkey or ukraine could also have substantial financial consequences for the union's budget and regional assistance programs , as well as implications for the functioning of certain eu institutions .

some key eu member states may fear that an ever - expanding union could ultimately weaken their ability to set the tone and agenda in eu institutions and to drive eu policies .

moreover , doubts persist about the ability of some potential eu aspirants to implement eu standards , especially in areas related to the rule of law , fundamental rights , and anti - corruption measures .

another broad european concern with respect to ongoing enlargement is with the overall identity of europe , what the union stands for , and where "europe" ends .

the union's struggle with these issues has been highlighted by the possible admission of turkey with an islamic culture perceived by many europeans to be vastly different and not compatible with europe .

similarly , some in the eu question whether countries like ukraine or those of the southern caucasus should be considered as part of "europe," or whether their geography , history , and culture make them distinct .

many experts believe that enlargement may soon be reaching its limits and that the eu is unlikely to include the countries of "wider europe" for the foreseeable future .

moreover , commentators suggest that the eu's recent economic problems and sovereign debt crisis — which have hit the countries of the eurozone particularly hard — could potentially slow future rounds of eu enlargement .

they note that eu leaders are grappling not only with trying to remedy the eurozone's financial troubles , but also with uncertainty about the future direction of the eu itself .

as a result , they may be less inclined to robustly push forward the enlargement agenda .

conversely , the eu's economic difficulties might make joining the union — and ultimately the common currency — less attractive for some current and potential eu candidates .

for decades , many countries aspired to join the eu largely for the economic benefits that membership would bring .

now , aspirants such as turkey — with a dynamic economy — may not view the benefits of membership as outweighing the potential constraints on its sovereignty and national fiscal and monetary policies .

the united states has strongly supported the european integration project since its inception in the 1950s .

successive u.s .

administrations and many members of congress have long backed eu enlargement , believing that it serves u.s. interests by advancing democracy and economic prosperity , and thereby creating strong european political allies and trading partners .

following the collapse of communism in 1989 , u.s. and eu officials worked in close cooperation to promote democratic transitions and market - oriented reforms , with both sides of the atlantic routinely asserting that the countries of central and eastern europe would be warmly welcomed into euro - atlantic institutions such as the eu , as well as nato , but only if they met the necessary political and economic criteria .

some analysts suggest that u.s. policy makers have also been keen to promote eu enlargement because they have viewed it as a way to decrease u.s. - eu tensions given that many of the newer members are often regarded as more pro - american .

moreover , many u.s. officials hoped that with the eu's enlargement to the east and the transformation of the continent nearly complete , the eu would turn its attention outward and be a more capable partner for the united states in tackling a range of global challenges .

u.s. business and commercial interests have also generally favored eu enlargement , believing that it would provide access to a larger , more integrated european market , and that it would help further reforms of the eu's regulatory regime and common agricultural policy , frequent sources of u.s. - eu trade conflicts .

over the years , the only significant u.s. criticism of the eu's enlargement process has been that the union was moving too slowly , especially with respect to turkey .

successive u.s .

administrations and many members of congress have long advocated eu membership for turkey , viewing it as a vital , strategic ally that should be anchored firmly to europe .

at times , washington has played an active , albeit small , role in turkey's eu accession path ; in 1999 , for example , the clinton administration reportedly lobbied ankara to accept the eu's offer to recognize turkey as an official eu candidate , despite ankara's unhappiness that the eu had not set out a timetable for accession talks .

periodically , however , u.s. pressure to promote turkey's eu accession prospects has generated tensions with the eu .

the united states continues to support turkey's eu membership bid , as well as the eu aspirations of the western balkans .

in the midst of the recent protests and violence in ukraine , u.s. officials and some members of congress have stressed u.s. backing for those in ukraine who see the country's future as being aligned with europe .

at the same time , u.s. policy makers realize that eu enlargement moves at its own pace , and that eu accession for turkey and other countries is still many years away .

some u.s. officials remain concerned that "enlargement fatigue," as well as the eu's financial crisis , could hinder additional eu expansion .

other commentators argue that eu enlargement could have some negative implications for u.s. interests .

even with eu institutional reforms , some assert that eu decision - making remains cumbersome and that enlargement has done little to make the eu a more coherent actor on the world stage .

for example , they contend that the addition of the central and eastern european countries has created more divisions on certain issues , such as eu policy toward russia , and that the eu is largely still preoccupied with its own internal problems .

on the other hand , some pundits worry that despite the eu's current financial difficulties , a larger eu — with an economic output roughly equivalent to that of the united states and growing political clout — could ultimately rival u.s. power and prestige in the longer term .

