international child abduction is not new .

however , one can argue that incidents of child abduction continue to increase due to the ease of international travel as well as an increase in bicultural marriages .

parental child abduction across international boundaries often garners global attention and demands for international solutions .

since 1988 , the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction ( "hague convention" or "convention" ) has been the principal mechanism for enforcing the return of abducted children to the united states .

while the convention promotes the prompt return of an abducted child , it does not impose criminal sanctions on the abducting parent .

moreover , the convention's available remedies do not apply to nations that fail to participate .

the convention's procedures are inapplicable and unenforceable in nonsignatory nations .

as such , parents and governments must often embark on the difficult and sometimes impossible task of seeking other means of resolving international child custody disputes with such nations .

the hague convention protects children from wrongful removal across international borders and provides procedures to aid in their safe return .

the convention's platform is intended to guarantee that one signatory nation will respect and follow the custody rights and laws of all other signatory nations .

the signatory nations are anguilla , argentina , australia , austria , the bahamas , belgium , belize , bermuda , bosnia - herzegovina , brazil , bulgaria , burkina faso , canada , the cayman islands , chile , colombia , costa rica , croatia , czech republic , cyprus , denmark , dominican republic , ecuador , el salvador , estonia , the falkland islands , finland , france , germany , greece , guatemala , honduras , the hong kong special administrative region , hungary , iceland , ireland , the isle of man , israel , italy , latvia , lithuania , luxembourg , macau , former yugoslav republic of macedonia , malta , mauritius , mexico , monaco , montenegro , montserrat , morocco , the netherlands , new zealand , norway , panama , paraguay , peru , poland , portugal , romania , san marino , serbia , singapore , slovakia , slovenia , south africa , spain , st. kitts and nevis , sri lanka , sweden , switzerland , trinidad and tobago , turkey , ukraine , the united kingdom , uruguay , the united states , venezuela , and zimbabwe .

the hague convention does not act as an extradition treaty , nor does it purport to adjudicate the merits of a custody dispute .

it merely provides a civil remedy designed to preserve the status quo by returning an abducted child to the country of his or her "habitual residence" and allowing the judicial authorities in that country to adjudicate the merits of a custody dispute .

as such , the proceeding is brought in the country to which the child was abducted or in which the child is retained .

although domestic relations involve issues typically governed by state law , the federal statute implementing the hague convention explicitly confers jurisdiction on the federal courts .

law enforcement in the united states historically viewed parental kidnapping as a private family matter that did not require outside involvement .

this belief has changed , resulting in the enactment of several laws that recognize the seriousness and criminality of parental kidnappings .

presently , law enforcement agents with arrest warrants seek out parents who have violated a custody decree by taking a child out of the state or country .

difficulties arise when parents take children out of the country because foreign courts have no obligation to enforce american custody decrees or abide by american laws .

even though the united states has difficulty enforcing parental kidnapping laws abroad , these laws can act as useful mechanisms to facilitate solutions to international child abductions .

on april 29 , 1988 , the same day the united states became a signatory to the hague convention , congress enacted the international child abduction remedies act ( icara ) .

icara empowers state and federal courts to hear cases under the convention and allows the central authority access to information in certain american records regarding the location of a child and abducting parent .

in the united states , the office of children's issues ( oci ) in the department of state serves as the central authority in instances where children are wrongly removed from the united states .

a parent seeking the return of a child who the parent claims has been wrongly abducted may apply to the "central authority" of the child's habitual residence or of any other signatory nation to the hague convention .

unfortunately , the hague convention and icara cannot function as remedies in a situation that involves a nonsignatory nation of the hague convention , and u.s. courts have dismissed complaints made under icara for failure to state a claim because of the involvement of a nonsignatory nation .

the international parental kidnapping crime act ( ipkca ) criminalizes the removal of a child from the united states with "the intent to obstruct the lawful exercise of parental rights. .

the term "parental rights" refers to the right to joint or sole physical custody of a child obtained through a court order , a legally binding agreement between the involved parties , or by operation of law .

a parent can use ipkca as an affirmative defense , and it will not detract from the provisions of the hague convention .

defendants have challenged the constitutionality of ipkca , questioning the vagueness of the act and claiming that it violates the free exercise of religion , but u.s. courts have upheld it .

ipkca may provide the potential to prosecute wrongful acts of parents , but it cannot guarantee the return of children from foreign countries where their parents wrongfully removed them .

for example , in united states v. amer , ahmed amer abducted his two children to egypt and was given custody in an egyptian court .

his wife , who previously had been given custody in a u.s. court , filed a complaint with the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

upon ahmed's return to the united states , he was arrested on charges of international parental kidnapping in violation of ipkca .

ahmed was sentenced to 24 months' imprisonment and a one - year term of supervised release under the special condition that he return the abducted children to the united states .

when ahmed began his supervised release term , he expressed an unwillingness to return his children to the united states .

the fugitive felon act enhances states' abilities to pursue abductors beyond state and national borders by permitting the fbi to investigate cases that would otherwise fall under state jurisdiction .

the act also authorizes the use of unlawful flight to avoid prosecution ( ufap ) warrants in parental kidnapping cases .

the extradition treaties interpretation act of 1988 authorizes the united states to interpret extradition treaties listing "kidnapping" as encompassing the offense of parental kidnapping .

section 236 of the admiral james w. nance and meg donovan foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2000 and 2001 , requires both parents or legal guardians to execute a passport application for a minor under age 14 .

in addition , the individual executing the application must provide documentary evidence demonstrating that the individual has either ( 1 ) sole custody of the child or ( 2 ) the other parent's consent to the passport's issuance .

however , it should be noted that passport controls may be ineffective under some circumstances , as some abductors are dual nationals or citizens of the country to which they are returning .

therefore , the child may also be a citizen of the other country .

if a dual national , the child is eligible for passports from both the united states and the other country of nationality .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides that any alien who , in violation of a custody order issued by a u.s. court , takes or retains a child out of the united states , may be excluded from the united states .

the exclusion applies only to aliens , not to u.s. citizens , and does not apply if the child is taken to or kept in a county that has ratified the hague convention .

the exclusion ceases to apply when the child is surrendered .

this exclusion can also be applied to relatives or friends who assist in keeping the child abroad .

this act may give the u.s. - based parent leverage in negotiating for the child's return if the alien parent needs to reenter the united states for any reason .

