from ussocom's 2019 factbook: the joint special operations command , located at fort bragg , north carolina , is a sub - unified command of the u.s. special operations command .

it is charged to study special operations requirements and techniques , ensure interoperability and equipment standardization , plan and conduct special operations exercises and training , and develop joint special operations tactics .

ussocom's fy2020 budget request of $13.8 billion represents an increase of $381 million ( 2.8% ) from the fy2019-enacted position .

ussocom's fy2020 base budget request totals $9.6 billion , a $435 million ( 5% ) increase from the fy2019-enacted position of $9.2 billion , while overall fy2020 personnel increases by 1,358 ( increases military personnel by 1,407 and reduces civilian personnel by 49 ) .

the fy2020 overseas contingency operations ( oco ) request totals $4.2 billion , a $54 million decrease ( - 1% ) from the fy2019-enacted position .

after 17 years at the forefront of the global military campaign against terrorism , policymakers , defense officials , and academics are questioning the future role of ussocom and u.s. sof .

three legislative provisions in the fy2019 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

115-232 ) suggest growing congressional concern with misconduct , ethics , and professionalism ; roles and responsibilities for asd solic ; and sof's ability to counter future threats across the spectrum of conflict .

sec .

1066 .

comprehensive review of professionalism and eth ics program s for special operations forces ( a ) review required. — the secretary of defense shall conduct a comprehensive review of the ethics programs and professionalism programs of the united states special operations command and of the military departments for officers and other military personnel serving in special operations forces .

 ( b ) elements of the review. — the review conducted under subsection ( a ) shall specifically include a description and assessment of each of the following: ( 1 ) the professionalism and ethics standards of the united states special operations command and affiliated component commands .

 ( 2 ) the ethics programs and professionalism programs of the military departments available for special operations forces .

 ( 3 ) the ethics programs and professionalism programs of the united states special operations command and affiliated component commands .

 ( 4 ) the roles and responsibilities of the military departments and the united states special operations command and affiliated component commands in administering , overseeing , managing , and ensuring compliance and participation of special operations forces in ethics programs and professionalism programs , including an identification of — ( a ) any gaps in the administration , oversight , and management of such programs and in ensuring the compliance and participation in such programs ; and ( b ) any additional guidance that may be required for a systematic , integrated approach in administering , over - seeing , and managing such programs and in ensuring compliance with and participation in such programs in order to address issues and improve adherence to professionalism and ethics standards .

 ( 5 ) the adequacy of the existing management and oversight framework for ensuring that all ethics programs and professionalism programs available to special operations forces meet department standards .

 ( 6 ) tools and metrics for identifying and assessing individual and organizational ethics and professionalism issues with respect to special operations forces .

 ( 7 ) tools and metrics for assessing the effectiveness of existing ethics programs and professionalism programs in improving or addressing individual and organizational ethics - related and professionalism issues with respect to special operations forces .

 ( 8 ) any additional actions that may be required to address or improve individual and organizational ethics and professionalism issues with respect to special operations forces .

 ( 9 ) any additional actions that may be required to improve the oversight and accountability by senior leaders of ethics and professionalism - related issues with respect to special operations forces .

 ( c ) limitation on delegation. — the secretary of defense may only delegate responsibility for any element of the review required by subsection ( a ) to the assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low intensity conflict , in coordination with other appropriate offices of the secretary of defense and the secretaries of the military departments .

 ( d ) deadline for submittal of review. — the secretary of defense shall submit the review required by subsection ( a ) to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives by not later than march 1 , 2019 .

 ( e ) definitions. — in this section: ( 1 ) the term ''ethics program'' means a program that includes — ( a ) compliance - based ethics training , education , initiative , or other activity that focuses on adherence to rules and regulations ; and ( b ) values - based ethics training , education , initiative , or other activity that focuses on upholding a set of ethical principles in order to achieve high standards of conduct and incorporate guiding principles to help foster an ethical culture and inform decision - making where rules are not clear .

 ( 2 ) the term ''professionalism program'' means a program that includes training education , initiative , or other activity that focuses on values , ethics , standards , code of conduct , and skills as related to the military profession .

sec .

917 .

deadline for completion of full implementation of requirements in connection with organization of the department of defense for management of special operations forces and special operations the secretary of defense shall ensure that the implementation of section 922 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( p.l .

114-114 – 328 ; 130 stat .

2354 ) and the amendments made by that section is fully complete by not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act .

sec .

914 .

assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low intensity conflict review of united states special operations command ( a ) review required. — the assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low intensity conflict shall , in coordination with the commander of the united states special operations command , conduct a comprehensive review of the united states special operations command for purposes of ensuring that the institutional and operational capabilities of special operations forces are appropriate to counter anticipated future threats across the spectrum of conflict .

 ( b ) scope of review. — the review required by subsection ( a ) shall include , at a minimum , the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the adequacy of special operations forces doctrine , organization , training , materiel , education , personnel , and facilities to implement the 2018 national defense strategy , and recommendations , if any , for modifications for that purpose .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of the roles and responsibilities of special operations forces as assigned by law , department of defense guidance , or other formal designation , and recommendations , if any , for additions to or divestitures of such roles or responsibilities .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the adequacy of the processes through which the united states special operations command evaluates and prioritizes the requirements at the geographic combatant commands for special operations forces and special operations - unique capabilities and makes recommendations on the allocation of special operations forces and special operations unique capabilities to meet such requirements , and recommendations , if any , for modifications of such processes .

 ( 4 ) any other matters the assistant secretary considers appropriate .

 ( c ) deadlines. — ( 1 ) completion of review. — the review required by subsection ( a ) shall be completed by not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of this act .

 ( 2 ) report. — not later than 30 days after completion of the review , the assistant secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the review , including the findings and any recommendations of the assistant secretary as a result of the review .

these three legislative provisions , in addition to directing the secretary of defense to fully implement directed changes in asd solic , call for asd solic and ussocom to take an introspective look at u.s. sof's culture , roles and responsibilities , adequacy of resources , organizational structure , and the adequacy of train ing , education , and personnel .

some have suggested these provisions are a precursor for congressional and dod actions to "rein in and reorient" u.s. sof from fighting terrorists to taking on nation - states instead .

others , citing reportedly nonsanctioned military combat operations in africa , where u.s. sof are said to have strayed from their train and assist mandate , have questioned whether or not u.s. sof was involved in direct combat in niger .

some believe this situation calls into question the adequacy of civilian oversight and control of u.s. sof .

others assert that the size of u.s. sof and the scope of their missions have expanded beyond the ability of ussocom to handle them and that congressional actions to increase asd solic oversight and control of u.s. sof are necessary to improve the current state of affairs .

aware that u.s. sof are overburdened and that there is a need to find the right balance between continuing to challenge terrorist organizations while simultaneously addressing growing irregular warfare threats posed by nation - states , policymakers will likely make good use of the two forthcoming congressionally mandated reviews .

it is possible that over the next few years , significant public policy debates on the future of ussocom and u.s. sof will be undertaken , potentially resulting in a number of changes for asd solic , ussocom , and u.s. sof .

