t he u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) offers several programs designed to help farmers and ranchers recover from the financial effects of natural disasters , including ( 1 ) federal crop insurance , ( 2 ) the noninsured crop disaster assistance program ( nap ) , ( 3 ) livestock and fruit tree disaster programs , and ( 4 ) emergency disaster loans for both crop and livestock producers .

all have permanent authorization , while the emergency loan program is the only one requiring a federal disaster designation ( see table 1 ) .

most programs receive mandatory funding amounts of "such sums as necessary" and are not subject to annual discretionary appropriations .

the agricultural improvement act of 2018 ( 2018 farm bill , p.l .

115-334 ) made a number of amendments to these programs , generally to expand availability and support .

prior to the creation of many of the permanently authorized programs at usda , congress had historically provided farmers and ranchers with ad hoc disaster assistance payments authorized through supplemental appropriations .

subsequently , policies shifted away from the temporary forms of assistance in favor of enacting more permanent forms of support .

more recently , policies have shifted to supplement permanent programs with ad hoc assistance for select agriculture losses .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) amended existing disaster assistance programs and authorized $2.36 billion for production losses from hurricanes and wildfires in 2017 that were not covered by existing programs .

this report provides an overview of permanently authorized federal disaster assistance programs for agricultural losses as well as discretionary authority that usda may use to provide assistance .

recent amendments in the 2018 farm bill and ad hoc assistance authorized by congress in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 are also discussed .

the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized by the federal crop insurance act , as amended ( 7 u.s.c .

1501 et seq .

 ) , and is administered by usda's risk management agency ( rma ) .

the program is designed to protect crop producers from risks associated with adverse weather , as well as weather - related plant diseases and insect infestations and declines in commodity prices .

crop insurance is available for most major crops and many specialty crops ( including fruit , tree nut , vegetable , and nursery crops ) , as well as forage and pastureland for livestock producers .

a producer who chooses to purchase an insurance policy must do so by an administratively determined deadline date , which varies by crop and usually coincides with the planting season .

insurance products that protect against loss in revenue and profit margins are also available .

policies are typically available in major growing regions .

the federal crop insurance program was instituted in the 1930s and was subject to major legislative reforms in 1980 and again in 1994 and 2000 .

the agriculture risk protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-224 ) authorized new federal spending for the program primarily through more generous premium subsidies to help make the program more affordable to farmers and enhance farmer participation levels in an effort to preclude the need for ad hoc emergency disaster payments .

under the current crop insurance program , a producer who grows an insurable crop selects a level of crop yield and price coverage and pays a premium that increases as the levels of yield and price coverage rise .

however , all eligible producers can receive catastrophic ( cat ) coverage without paying a premium .

the premium for this portion of coverage is completely subsidized by the federal government .

under cat coverage , participating producers can receive a payment equal to 55% of the estimated market price of the commodity on crop losses in excess of 50% of normal yield — referred to as 50 / 55 coverage .

although eligible producers do not have to pay a premium for cat coverage , they are required to pay upon enrollment a $655 administrative fee per covered crop for each county where they grow the crop .

usda can waive the fee for financial hardship cases .

in addition to the administrative fee , producers can elect to pay a premium , which is partially subsidized by the government , to increase the 50 / 55 cat coverage to any equivalent level of coverage between 50 / 100 and 85 / 100 ( i.e. , 85% of yield and 100% of the estimated market price ) in increments of 5% .

these higher levels of coverage are known as "buy up" coverage .

for many insurable commodities , an eligible producer can purchase revenue insurance .

under such a policy , a farmer could receive an indemnity payment when actual farm revenue for a crop falls below the target level of revenue , regardless of whether the shortfall in revenue was caused by poor production or low farm commodity prices .

insured producers are also eligible for reduced coverage if they are late or prevented from planting because of flooding .

the annual agriculture appropriations bill traditionally makes two separate appropriations for the federal crop insurance program .

it provides discretionary funding for the salaries and expenses of the rma .

it also provides "such sums as are necessary" for the federal crop insurance corporation , which finances all other expenses of the program , including premium subsidies , indemnity payments , and reimbursements to the private insurance companies .

the total cost of the program varies by year , primarily due to fluctuating levels of indemnity payments from changes in commodity prices , planting decisions , and weather conditions .

across all policies , the average premium subsidy was about 63% of total premiums in 2017 .

the federal government also subsidizes the costs of selling and servicing the policies ( as delivery subsidies to approved insurance providers ) and absorbs underwriting losses ( indemnities in excess of premiums received ) in years when indemnities are high .

for a more detailed analysis of the federal crop insurance program , see crs report r45193 , federal crop insurance: program overview for the 115th congress .

producers who grow a crop that is currently ineligible for crop insurance may apply for nap .

nap has permanent authority under section 196 of the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 ( 7 u.s.c .

7333 ) and is administered by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) .

it was first authorized under the federal crop insurance reform act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-354 ) .

nap is not subject to annual appropriations .

instead , it receives such sums as are necessary through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) , which has a line of credit with the u.s. treasury to fund an array of farm programs .

eligible crops under nap include any commercial crops grown for food , fiber , or livestock consumption for which there is no cat coverage available under the federal crop insurance program , with limited exceptions .

these crops include mushrooms , floriculture , ornamental nursery , christmas trees , turfgrass sod , aquaculture , honey , maple sap , ginseng , and industrial crops used in manufacturing or grown as a feedstock for energy production , among others .

trees grown for wood , paper , or pulp products are not eligible .

to be eligible for a nap payment , a producer first must apply for coverage by the application closing date , which varies by crop but is generally about 30 days prior to the final planting date for an annual crop .

like cat coverage under crop insurance , nap applicants must also pay an administrative fee at the time of application .

the nap service fee is the lesser of $325 per crop or $825 per producer per administrative county , not to exceed a total of $1,950 for farms in multiple counties .

in order to receive a nap payment , a producer must experience at least a 50% crop loss caused by a natural disaster or be prevented from planting more than 35% of intended crop acreage .

for any losses in excess of the minimum loss threshold , a producer can receive 55% of the average market price for the covered commodity .

hence , nap is similar to cat coverage in that it pays 55% of the market price for losses in excess of 50% of normal historical production .

additional coverage ( referred to as buy - up coverage ) may be purchased at 50% to 65% ( in 5% increments ) of established yield and 100% of average market price , contract price , or other premium price .

the farmer - paid fee for additional coverage is 5.25% times the product of the selected coverage level and value of production ( acreage times yield times average market price times the producer's share of the crop ) .

grazing land is not eligible for buy - up coverage .

a producer of a noninsured crop is subject to an annual payment limit of $125,000 per person for catastrophic coverage and $300,000 for buy - up coverage .

a producer is ineligible under nap if the producer's total adjusted gross income ( agi ) exceeds $900,000 .

the total federal cost of nap was $165 million in fy2014 , $125 million in fy2015 , $137 million in fy2016 , $157 million in fy2017 , and $164.3 million in fy2018 .

four agricultural disaster assistance programs are permanently authorized for livestock and fruit trees: ( 1 ) the livestock indemnity program ( lip ) ; ( 2 ) the livestock forage disaster program ( lfp ) ; ( 3 ) the emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) ; and ( 4 ) the tree assistance program ( tap ) .

they operate nationwide and are administered by fsa .

producers do not pay fees to participate and can apply at their local fsa offices .

all programs receive "such sums as necessary" in mandatory funding via the ccc to reimburse eligible producers for their losses .

total payments vary each year based on eligible loss conditions .

for fy2018 , lfp payments totaled $487.5 million , lip payments totaled $36.6 million , tap payments totaled $11.3 million , and elap payments totaled $47 million .

all payments are reduced by sequestration .

for individual producers , payments under lfp may not exceed $125,000 per year .

there are no limits on the amount of payments received under lip , elap , and tap .

to be eligible for a payment under any of these programs , a producer's total agi cannot exceed $900,000 .

when either the president or the secretary of agriculture declares a county a disaster area or quarantine area , agricultural producers in that county may become eligible for low - interest emergency disaster ( em ) loans available through fsa .

producers in counties that are contiguous to a county with a disaster designation also become eligible for em loans .

em loan funds may be used to help eligible farmers , ranchers , and aquaculture producers recover from production losses ( when the producer suffers a significant loss of an annual crop ) or from physical losses ( such as repairing or replacing damaged or destroyed structures or equipment or for the replanting of permanent crops such as orchards ) .

a qualified applicant can then borrow up to 100% of actual production or physical losses ( not to exceed $500,000 ) .

once a county is declared eligible , an individual producer within the county ( or a contiguous county ) must also meet the following requirements for an em loan: a producer must ( 1 ) be an established family farmer and a citizen or permanent resident of the united states ; ( 2 ) experience a crop loss of more than 30% or a physical loss of livestock , livestock products , real estate , or property ; and ( 3 ) be unable to obtain credit from a commercial lender but still show the potential to repay the loan , including having acceptable credit history and collateral to secure the loan .

applications must be received within eight months of the county's disaster designation date .

loans for nonreal - estate purposes must generally be repaid within seven years .

loans for physical losses to real estate have terms up to 20 years .

depending on the repayment ability of the producer and other circumstances , these terms can be extended to 20 years for nonreal - estate losses and up to 40 years for real estate losses .

the em loan program is permanently authorized by title iii of the consolidated farm and rural development act ( p.l .

87-128 ) , as amended , and is subject to annual appropriations .

in fy2018 , the program received $25.6 million of new loan authority .

unused funds are carried over and available in the next fiscal year .

therefore , the total loan authority can vary greatly depending on appropriated levels , annual use , and total carryover .

in fy2019 , the total loan authority is $99.5 million .

also in counties with disaster designations , producers who have existing direct loans with fsa may be eligible for disaster set - aside .

if , as a result of disaster , a borrower is unable to pay all expenses and make loan payments that are coming due , up to one full year's payment can be moved to the end of the loan .

usda also has several permanent disaster assistance programs that help producers repair damaged land following natural disasters .

it also has authority to issue disaster payments to farmers with "section 32" or "ccc" funds and can use a variety of existing programs to address disaster issues as they arise .

the 2018 farm bill amended the supplemental disaster assistance programs as well as nap , crop insurance , and emergency loans .

the following provides a summary of changes to select programs included in this report .

for a more comprehensive review of amendments under the 2018 farm bill , see crs report r45525 , the 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) : summary and side - by - side comparison .

the u.s. farm policy mix that provides assistance to agricultural producers for damage and loss following a natural disaster continues to shift between permanent and temporary authorized support .

the authorization of permanent disaster assistance programs in the 2008 and 2014 farm bills , as well as expanded crop insurance and nap policies , were designed to reduce the need for ad hoc disaster assistance .

following enactment of the 2008 farm bill , congress appropriated little in the way of supplemental disaster assistance for agriculture , most of which was for land rehabilitation efforts under ewp and ecp .

this changed in 2018 , when an active hurricane and wildfire season in 2017 resulted in the authorization of supplemental assistance in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 .

in addition to the programmatic changes discussed in the " supplemental agricultural disaster assistance programs " section of this report , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 also authorized $2.36 billion for production losses not covered under nap or crop insurance .

on july 16 , 2018 , usda announced the availability of the bulk of the 2018 bipartisan budget act funding through the wildfires and hurricanes indemnity program ( whip ) .

only crop , tree , bush , and vine losses from a wildfire or hurricane in 2017 are eligible for assistance under whip .

payments to producers who purchased crop insurance or nap coverage range from 70% to 95% of the expected value of the crop , depending on the level of coverage purchased .

for producers who did not purchase crop insurance or nap in advance of the natural disaster , payments under whip are limited to 65% of expected value of the crop .

all payments are reduced by the value of the crop harvested , if any , and any insurance indemnity paid through crop insurance or nap .

all participants are required to purchase crop insurance or nap for the next two years .

payments are limited to $125,000 if less than 75% of the participant's agi is from farming .

if more than 75% of the participant's agi is from farming , then payments are limited to a maximum of $900,000 .

usda's initial announcement stated that only 50% of the participant's payment rate will be made up front , with additional payments possible depending on fund availability .

usda used a portion of the 2018 bipartisan budget act funding for a $340 million block grant to the state of florida .

under the grant , the state is expected to assist the citrus industry with the cost of buying and planting replacement trees — including resetting and grove rehabilitation — and for repairing damage to irrigation systems , among other activities .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , also provided supplemental assistance but through an existing program — tap .

the act authorized $15 million for payments to eligible pecan orchardists or pecan nursery tree growers for mortality losses incurred during calendar year 2017 .

the act lowers the mortality loss threshold under tap to cover losses in excess of 7.5% but not more than 15% , adjusted for normal mortality .

if losses exceeded 15% , then the loss is already eligible for tap .

if applications for these losses ( i.e. , between 7.5% and 15% ) exceed the available $15 million , then payments would be proportionally reduced .

