in order to "improve portability and continuity of health insurance coverage in the group and individual markets," congress enacted the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) on august 21 , 1996 , p.l .

104-191 , 110 stat .

1936 , 42 u.s.c .

§§ 1320d et seq .

subtitle f of title ii of hipaa is entitled "administrative simplification," and states that the purpose of the subtitle is to improve health care by "encouraging the development of a health information system through the establishment of standards and requirements for the electronic transmission of certain health information. .

sections 261 through 264 of hipaa contain the administrative simplification provisions .

hipaa requires health care payers and providers who transmit transactions electronically to use standardized data elements to conduct financial and administrative transactions .

section 262 directs hhs to issue standards to facilitate the electronic exchange of information .

section 263 of hipaa delineates the duties of the national committee on vital and health statistics .

section 264 of hipaa requires hhs to submit to the congress detailed recommendations on standards with respect to privacy rights for individually identifiable health information .

in the absence of the enactment of federal legislation , hipaa required hhs to issue privacy regulations .

the final privacy rule was issued by hhs and published in the federal register on december 28 , 2000 at 65 fed .

reg .

82462 , shortly before the clinton administration left office .

the privacy rule went into effect on april 14 , 2001 .

on august 14 , 2002 , hhs published in the federal register a modified privacy rule , 67 fed .

reg .

53181 .

enforcement of the privacy rule began on april 14 , 2003 , except for small health plans ( those with annual receipts of $5 million or less ) who have until april 2004 to comply .

the hipaa privacy rule covers health plans , health care clearinghouses , and those health care providers who conduct certain financial and administrative transactions electronically .

covered entities are bound by the new privacy standards even if they contract with others ( called "business associates" ) to perform essential functions .

hipaa does not give hhs authority to regulate other private businesses or public agencies .

covered entities that fail to comply with the rule are subject to civil and criminal penalties , but individuals do not have the right to sue for violations of the rule .

instead , the law provides that individuals must direct their complaints to hhs' office for civil rights ( ocr ) .

ocr maintains a web site with information on the new regulation , including guidance at http: / / www.hhs.gov / ocr / hipaa / .

hhs also recently issued a 20 page "summary of the hipaa privacy rule. .

hhs will enforce the civil money penalties , and the department of justice will enforce the criminal penalties .

criminal penalties may be imposed if the offense is committed under false pretenses , with intent to sell the information or reap other personal gain .

hipaa authorizes the hhs secretary to impose civil money penalties of up to $25,000 for each year for those entities failing to comply with the privacy rule .

several statutory limitations are imposed on the secretary's authority to impose civil money penalties ( cmp ) .

a penalty may not be imposed: with respect to an act that constitutes an offense punishable under the criminal penalty provision ; "if it is established to the satisfaction of the secretary that the person liable for the penalty did not know , and by exercising reasonable diligence would not have known , that such person violated the provisions ; " if "the failure to comply was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect" and is corrected within a certain time period .

a cmp may be reduced or waived "to the extent that the payment of such penalty would be excessive relative to the compliance failure involved. .

in addition , a number of procedural requirements are incorporated by reference in hipaa that are relevant to the imposition of cmp's .

the secretary may not initiate a cmp action "later than six months after the date" of the occurrence that forms the basis for the cmp action .

the secretary may initiate a cmp by serving notice in a manner authorized by rule 4 of the federal rules of civil procedure .

the secretary must give written notice to the person to whom he wishes to impose a cmp and an opportunity for a determination to made "on the record after a hearing at which the person is entitled to be represented by counsel , to present witnesses , and to cross - examine witnesses against the person. .

judicial review of the secretary's determination and the issuance and enforcement of subpoenas is available in the united states court of appeals .

with respect to ascertaining compliance with and enforcement of the privacy rule , the secretary of hhs is to seek the voluntary cooperation of covered entities .

the secretary is authorized to provide technical assistance to covered entities in order to facilitate their voluntary compliance .

enforcement and other activities to facilitate compliance include the provision of technical assistance ; responding to questions ; providing interpretations and guidance ; responding to state requests for preemption determinations ; investigating complaints and conducting compliance reviews ; and seeking civil monetary penalties and making referrals for criminal prosecution .

an individual may file a compliant with the secretary if the individual believes that the covered entity is not complying with the rule .

complaints must be filed in writing , either on paper or electronically ; name the entity that is the subject of the complaint and describe the acts or omissions believed to be in violation of the applicable requirements of the privacy rule ; and be filed within 180 days of when the complainant knew or should have known that the act or omission complained of occurred , unless the time limit is waived by the secretary for good cause shown .

complaints to the secretary may be filed only with respect to alleged violations occurring on or after april 14 , 2003 .

the secretary has delegated to the office for civil rights ( ocr ) the authority to receive and investigate complaints as they may relate to the privacy rule .

individuals may file written complaints with ocr by mail , fax or e - mail .

for information about the privacy rule or the process for filing a complaint with ocr , they may contact any ocr office or go to http: / / www.hhs.gov / ocr / howtofileprivacy.htm .

after april 14 , 2003 , individuals have a right to file a complaint directly with the covered entity , and are directed to refer to the covered entity's notice of privacy practices for information about how to file a complaint .

the secretary's investigation may include a review of the policies , procedures , or practices of the covered entity , and of the circumstances regarding the alleged acts or omissions .

the secretary is also authorized to conduct compliance reviews .

covered entities are required to provide records and compliance reports to the secretary to determine compliance ; and to cooperate with complaint investigations and compliance reviews .

in cases where an investigation or compliance review has indicated noncompliance , the secretary is to inform the covered entity and the complainant in writing , and attempt to resolve the matter informally .

if the secretary determines that the matter cannot be resolved informally , the secretary may issue written findings documenting the noncompliance .

in cases where no violation is found , the secretary is to inform the covered entity and the complainant in writing .

on april 17 , 2003 hhs published an interim final "enforcement rule" that applies to standards , including the privacy rule , adopted under the administrative simplification provisions of hipaa , 68 fed .

reg .

18895 .

the interim final rule establishes procedures for investigations , imposition of penalties , and hearings for civil money penalties ; and is effective may 19 , 2003 thru september 16 , 2003 .

it is to be revised when hhs issues a complete enforcement rule that will include procedural and substantive requirements for the imposition of civil money penalties , such as hhs' policies for determining violations and calculating cmp's .

although hhs recognized that the administrative procedure act ( apa ) requires that most of the provisions of the complete enforcement rule be promulgated through notice - and - comment rulemaking , it concluded that the interim final rule's procedural provisions are exempted from the requirement for notice and comment rulemaking under the "rules of agency .

 .

 .

procedure , or practice" exemption of the apa , 5 u.s.c .

§ 553 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( a ) .

as a result , hhs published the procedural rules in final form without notice - and - comment to inform covered entities and the public of the procedural requirements for compliance .

in addition , hhs requests public comment thru june 16 , 2003 on the interim final rule .

the national committee on vital and health statistics ( ncvhs ) serves as the statutory public advisory body to the secretary of health and human services in the area of health data and statistics .

as part of its responsibilities under the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , the national committee on vital and health statistics ( ncvhs ) monitors the implementation of the administrative simplification provisions of hipaa , including the standards for privacy of individually identifiable health information ( privacy rule ) .

last fall , the ncvhs held three hearings to learn about the implementation activities of covered entities .

in its november 2002 letter to secretary thompson summarizing its findings the committee stated that "there is an extremely high level of confusion , misunderstanding , frustration , anxiety , fear , and anger as the april 14 , 2003 compliance date nears. .

reportedly the privacy rule has "touched off a quiet revolution in the health care industry. .

according to ncvhs , the ocr is widely viewed as not providing adequate guidance and technical assistance as evidenced by the lack of model notices of privacy practices , acknowledgments , authorizations , and other forms .

the general guidance was judged to be of limited value because of special industry or professional circumstances , and ncvhs reported that witnesses conveyed a great sense of frustration that they could not obtain clarification from ocr or answers to the questions they submitted .

covered entities report the undertaking of substantial compliance measures ranging from the adoption of new policies , the training of employees , and the development of privacy notices .

another area of widespread concern at the ncvhs hearings was hipaa preemption .

according to ncvhs , witnesses said that issues of preemption made compliance much more difficult , costly , and complicated .

the term "preemption" is a judicial doctrine that originated through interpretation of the supremacy clause of the united states constitution .

in effect , the supremacy clause stands for the proposition that the constitution and the laws of the federal government rise above the laws of the states .

as a result , federal law will always override state law in cases of conflict .

absent a direct conflict , however , preemption depends on the intent of congress .

such intent may be express or implied .

express preemption exists when congress explicitly commands that a state law be displaced .

where congress has not expressly preempted state and local laws , two types of implied federal preemption may be found: field preemption , in which federal regulation is so pervasive that one can reasonably infer that states or localities have no role to play , and conflict preemption , in which "compliance with both federal and state regulations is a physical impossibility , or where the state law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress. .

hipaa sets forth a general rule , based on the principles of conflict preemption .

basically , this rule establishes that any federal regulation resulting from implementation of the act preempts any contrary state law .

"contrary" is defined as situations where: ( 1 ) a covered entity would find it impossible to comply with both the state and the federal requirements , or ( 2 ) when the state law stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress .

congress established three exceptions to this general rule .

first , there is an exception for state laws that the secretary determines are necessary to prevent fraud and abuse , to ensure appropriate state regulation of insurance and health plans , for state reporting on health care delivery , or for other purposes .

the second exception provides that state laws will not be superseded if the secretary determines that the law addresses controlled substances .

both of these exceptions require an affirmative "exception determination" from the secretary of hhs for the state law not to be preempted .

the third exception provides that state laws will not be preempted if they relate to the privacy of individually identifiable health information and are "more stringent" than the federal requirements .

a state law is "more stringent" if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 1 ) the state law prohibits or further limits the use or disclosure of protected health information , except if the disclosure is required by hhs to determine a covered entity's compliance or is to the individual who is the subject of the individually identifiable information ; 2 ) the state law permits individuals with greater rights of access to or amendment of their individually identifiable health information ; provided , however , hipaa will not preempt a state law to the extent that it authorizes or prohibits disclosure of protected health information about a minor to a parent , guardian or person acting in loco parentis of such minor ; 3 ) the state law provides for more information to be disseminated to the individual regarding use and disclosure of their protected health information and rights and remedies ; 4 ) the state law narrows the scope or duration of authorization or consent , increases the privacy protections surrounding authorization and consent , or reduces the coercive effect of the surrounding circumstances ; 5 ) the state law imposes stricter standards for record keeping or accounting of disclosures ; 6 ) the state law strengthens privacy protections for individuals with respect to any other matter .

in addition to the general rule and exceptions , congress "carved out" two provisions whereby certain areas of state authority will not be limited or invalidated by hipaa rules .

first , the public health "carve out" saves any law providing for the reporting of disease or injury , child abuse , birth , or death for the conduct of public surveillance , investigation or intervention .

the second "carve out" allows states to regulate health plans by requiring the plans to report , or provide access to , information for the purpose of audits , program monitoring and evaluation , or the licensure or certification .

s. 16 , the equal rights and equal dignity for americans act of 2003 , would , in section 903 , reverse the august 2002 modifications to the privacy rule .

