ammonium perchlorate is the key ingredient in solid fuel for rockets and missiles ; other perchlorate salts are used to manufacture products such as fireworks , air bags , and road flares .

uncertainty about the health effects of perchlorate exposure has slowed efforts to establish drinking water and environmental cleanup standards .

however , because of perchlorate's persistence in water and ability to affect thyroid function , concern has escalated with the detection of perchlorate in water in at least 33 states .

in the absence of a federal standard , states have begun to adopt their own measures .

massachusetts set a drinking water standard of 2 parts per billion ( ppb , or micrograms per liter [μg / l] ) in 2006 , and california adopted a 6 ppb standard in 2007 .

several states have issued health goals or advisory levels ranging from 1 ppb in maryland ( advisory level ) and new mexico ( drinking water screening level ) to 17 ppb in texas ( residential protective cleanup level ) and , also in texas , 51 ppb ( industrial cleanup level ) .

over the past decade , epa has evaluated perchlorate to determine whether a federal drinking water standard is needed .

under the safe drinking water act ( sdwa , §1412 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) , epa must regulate a contaminant if the administrator determines that the contaminant ( 1 ) may have an adverse health effect , ( 2 ) occurs in public water systems at a frequency and level of public health concern , and ( 3 ) , in the sole judgment of the administrator , regulation of the contaminant presents a meaningful opportunity for reducing health risks .

in 1997 , when a sensitive detection method became available for perchlorate and detections increased , scientific information was limited .

in 1998 , epa placed perchlorate on the list of contaminants that were candidates for regulation , but concluded that information was insufficient to determine whether perchlorate should be regulated under the sdwa .

epa listed perchlorate as a priority for further research on health effects and treatment technologies and for collecting occurrence data .

in 1999 , epa required water systems to monitor for perchlorate under the unregulated contaminant monitoring rule to determine the frequency and levels at which it is present in public water supplies nationwide .

in january 2007 , epa reported that it had collected sufficient occurrence data , and that further monitoring was not needed for the agency to make a regulatory determination ( 72 fed .

reg .

367 , january 4 , 2007 ) .

dod is responsible for some large releases of perchlorate into the environment and has allotted significant resources to address this problem .

dod has spent more than $114 million on research activities regarding perchlorate treatment technologies , detection methods , toxicity studies , and substitutes .

additional funds have been spent on cleanup .

although remediation has proceeded at some sites , cleanups typically are driven by drinking water standards or other established cleanup standards .

with no federal standard , cleanup goals and responsibilities have been ambiguous outside of california and massachusetts where standards have been set .

in 2006 , after epa established a dwel for perchlorate and issued cleanup guidance based on the dwel , dod adopted a policy setting 24 ppb as the level of concern to be used in managing perchlorate releases ( unless a more stringent federal or state standard exists .

the policy applies broadly to dod installations and former military lands , and directs the services to test for perchlorate when it is reasonably expected that a release has occurred .

under the policy , if perchlorate levels exceed 24 ppb , a site - specific risk assessment must be conducted ; if the assessment indicates that the perchlorate could result in adverse health effects , then the site must be prioritized for risk management .

dod uses a relative risk site evaluation framework to help prioritize environmental restoration work and to allocate resources among sites .

epa has withdrawn the 2006 perchlorate remediation guidance and recommends that its regional offices now consider using the interim health advisory level of 15 ppb for cleanup .

dod may follow suit and adopt the new level for managing perchlorate releases .

in the 111 th congress , as in the past several congresses , legislation has been introduced concerning the regulation of perchlorate under the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) .

h.r .

3206 would require epa to propose a drinking water regulation for perchlorate within 12 months of enactment of the legislation , and to promulgate a final regulation no later than 18 months after epa published a proposed rule .

additionally , congress has provided some funding for the remediation of perchlorate contamination of ground water and public drinking water supplies .

the explanatory statement for the department of defense appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-118 , h.r .

3326 ) , specifies that $1.6 million is intended for the cleanup of perchlorate contaminated drinking water wells , and another $3.5 million is intended for inland empire ( ca ) perchlorate remediation .

two similar bills , h.r .

2316 and h.r .

4252 , each entitled the inland empire perchlorate ground water plume assessment act of 2009 , would direct the secretary of the interior , acting through the director of the united states geological survey , to ( 1 ) complete a study of water resources in california , including the rialto - colton basin ( h.r .

2316 ) , or ( 2 ) complete a study of water resources , specifically the rialto - colton basin ( h.r .

4252 ) .

under both bills , the required studies would include a survey of ground water resources ( including the identification of a recent surge in perchlorate concentrations in ground water ) .

 ( h.r .

4252 , h.rept .

111-433 ) was passed by the house in march 2010 , and ordered reported , without amendment , by the senate committee on energy and natural resources in july .

relatedly , h.r .

102 would authorize additional appropriations for the san gabriel basin restoration fund , and would establish a 35% non - federal matching requirement for the recipient water districts after a specified amount of federal funds had been appropriated during the 110 th congress , several perchlorate bills were considered , but none were enacted .

responding to epa's 2007 decision not to require further monitoring for perchlorate as an unregulated contaminant , s. 24 was introduced to require community water systems to test for perchlorate and disclose its presence in annual consumer reports .

s. 150 and h.r .

1747 would have required epa to set a standard for perchlorate .

the senate environment and public works committee reported s. 24 ( s.rept .

110-483 ) and s. 150 ( s.rept .

110-484 ) .

additionally , h.con.res .

347 expressed the sense of congress that the cdc and fda should take action to educate the public on the importance of adequate iodine intake , as iodine is protective against perchlorate exposure .

