tunisia's 2011 popular uprising , known as the "jasmine revolution," ended the 23-year authoritarian rule of then - president zine el abidine ben ali and sparked a wave of unrest in much of the arab world .

since then , tunisia has taken key steps toward democracy .

civil and political liberties have expanded dramatically , and tunisia has experienced far less violence than some other transitional countries .

an elected national constituent assembly adopted a new constitution in 2014 , and presidential and parliamentary elections were held the same year , formally ending a series of transitional governments .

during the transitional period , islamist and secularist political factions overcame repeated political crises through consensual negotiations , a feat for which a mediator quartet of tunisian civil society groups subsequently won the nobel peace prize .

president béji caïd essebsi , who founded the secularist ruling party nidaa tounes ( "tunisia's call" ) , is a 92-year - old political veteran .

prime minister youssef chahed ( 41 ) , in office since 2016 , leads a broad coalition government that includes tunisia's main islamist party , al nahda ( alt: ennahda , "renaissance" ) , the country's other leading political force .

 ( al nahda leaders do not refer to themselves as islamist , preferring the term "muslim democrats." ) .

the coalition has advanced some economic reforms , political decentralization , and efforts to improve gender equality , including a gender - based violence law enacted in 2017 .

fiscal austerity efforts and a stalled transitional justice process remain divisive , however .

prime minister chahed has struggled to retain political support within the coalition in the face of a public backlash against austerity measures , as well as a power struggle within nidaa tounes ahead of elections due in 2019 .

leaders in nidaa tounes and al nahda have referred to their pragmatic partnership as necessary for stability in a fragile new democracy , and the alliance has arguably quieted the overt islamist - secularist polarization that characterized the transitional period .

some critics view the two parties' entente as "grounded in mutual self - preservation," however , and assert that it is alienating party leaders from their respective bases .

some observers have expressed concern at the slow pace of constitutional implementation , the appointment of former - regime figures to top posts , the government's sometimes antagonistic relationship with critical civil society groups , and a years - long state of emergency that suspends some civil liberties .

as one journalist wrote in 2016 , "to many tunisians , nidaa tounes feels like the return of the old regime: some of the same politicians , the same business cronies , the same police practices. .

although many tunisians are proud of their country's progress , opinion polls have repeatedly revealed anxiety over the future .

the country suffered several large terrorist attacks in 2015-2016 , and continues to confront threats along its borders with libya and algeria .

per - capita gdp has fallen every year since 2014 , leading tunisia to lose its "upper middle income" status in 2015 .

efforts to address the socioeconomic grievances that fueled the 2011 uprising have not made significant progress , and corruption is perceived to have expanded .

the 2014 constitution , adopted by an overwhelming margin by a transitional parliamentary body , lays out a semi - presidential political system with a directly elected president and relatively strong legislature .

dozens of parties contested elections held later that year , but the top two — al nahda and nidaa tounes — have come to dominate tunisia's post - 2011 politics .

nidaa tounes , a big - tent secularist party , was formed in 2012 in opposition to a transitional government led by al nahda , an islamist party that reentered national politics in 2011 after being banned under ben ali .

nidaa tounes won a plurality of seats in the 2014 elections but defections have drained its ranks , leaving al nahda with the largest bloc of seats , 69 out of 217 .

the secularist leftist popular front ( fp after its french acronym ) is the largest opposition party in parliament with 15 seats .

the fp includes prominent activists from parties banned under ben ali , and two of its members were assassinated in 2013 , reportedly by islamist militants .

today , al nahda and nida tounes remain wary rivals but have agreed to share power in an arrangement referred to as "consensus politics. .

al nahda has simultaneously sought to separate its political party activities from religious proselytization , embracing the label of "muslim democrats. .

leaders in both parties have asserted that a government of "national unity" regrouping parties across the political spectrum is necessary to ensure stability and push through difficult economic reforms .

in practice , both institutional and economic reforms have been slow to advance .

the alliance appears to have been motivated , in part , by nidaa tounes's need to cultivate allies given its internal divisions , and by fears on each side that further islamist - secularist polarization could fuel political exclusion of , respectively , former - regime figures or islamists .

for some observers and tunisian civil society activists , developments in 2017 sparked concerns about tunisia's democratic trajectory .

in september 2017 , parliament voted narrowly to adopt an extremely controversial "administrative reconciliation law" drafted by president caïd essebsi , which grants amnesty for state employees implicated in corruption .

a local protest movement and international human rights groups had characterized the bill as a threat to democratic accountability and a blow to tunisia's transitional justice mechanism .

a cabinet reshuffle the same month saw the appointment of new ministers with ties to the ben ali regime .

president caïd essebsi later suggested on national television that he was considering changing the constitution , deepening some observers' concerns that his apparent efforts to strengthen the presidency could undermine democratic consolidation .

in may 2018 , tunisia held landmark local elections to fill posts created under a new political decentralization law .

the accomplishment of holding elections , which had been repeatedly delayed , arguably restored a sense of momentum on political reforms .

the elections are viewed by many observers as a key step toward more accountable governance as well as a means to address "long - standing issues of dramatic regional disparity" in health care , education , poverty , and infrastructure — although the concrete devolution of policymaking and fiscal authority is likely to be a long - term process at best .

turnout was low at 34% , which some attributed to political apathy among young people .

al nahda won 29% of votes , followed by nidaa tounes at 21% , but independent lists collectively outpolled both leading parties , garnering 32% nationally .

the contours of future political competition are uncertain ahead of national elections due in 2019 .

nidaa tounes , whose base includes business leaders , trade unionists , arab nationalists , and former - regime figures , has struggled to contain its ideological and individual fractures .

the president , 92 , has not stated whether he will run for another five - year term in 2019 .

the decision to ally with al nahda was controversial within the party , leading several senior figures to leave and form a breakaway parliamentary group .

prime minister youssef chahed , who has sought to impose fiscal austerity measures , has come under pressure from trade unions to resign , and as of mid - 2018 he appeared to be in a power struggle with president caïd essebsi .

perceptions that the president is positioning his son , hafedh , currently head of nidaa tounes , to succeed him have also sparked public backlash and splits within the ruling party .

not all tunisian islamists back al nahda , and the party's willingness to compromise may have cost it some support among some of its supporters as well as more radical factions of public opinion .

some religiously conservative salafists , who became more visible in the wake of the 2011 uprising , openly support the creation of an islamic state , and some have challenged government authorities — as well as artists , labor union activists , journalists , academics , and women deemed insufficiently modest — through protests , threats , and / or violence .

a handful of salafist groups have registered as political parties , but many operate outside the political system .

since 2011 , armed islamist extremist groups across north and west africa have exploited porous borders , security sector weaknesses , and access to libyan weapons stockpiles to expand their activities .

these groups have also capitalized on divisive identity issues as well as popular frustrations with poor governance .

some have sought affiliation with al qaeda or the islamic state ( is , alt .

isis / isil ) , including the algerian - led regional network al qaeda in the islamic maghreb ( aqim ) and its various offshoots , as well as several is - linked cells operating along tunisia's borders with algeria and libya .

many , however , appear primarily focused on local or regional objectives .

the degree of competition or coordination between al qaeda - and is - linked factions in north africa is debated .

tunisia has seen the rise of local violent extremist organizations since 2011 , and has also faced threats from groups and individuals based in libya .

u.s. and tunisian officials notably blamed a tunisian - led group known as ansar al sharia ( ast ) for an attack against the u.s. embassy and american school in tunis in 2012 .

tunisia declared ast a terrorist group in 2013 , and the u.s. state department designated it a foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) in 2014 .

the group's leader , known as abou iyadh , relocated to libya , where he was reportedly killed in a u.s. airstrike in june 2015 .

in 2015 , deadly terrorist attacks in tunis and the coastal city of sousse rattled tunisians and dealt a blow to the tourism sector .

in early 2016 , an is - linked assault on the border town of ben guerdane prompted fears of a nascent domestic insurgency .

tunisian officials affirmed that these attacks were planned at least partly from libya ; a 2016 u.s. military strike in the libyan town of sabratha reportedly killed a number of tunisian fighters .

internal security conditions have since improved , seemingly due to changes within the security apparatus as well as donor assistance .

tunisia has been a top source of islamist foreign fighters in syria and libya , and several terrorist attacks in europe have been carried out by individuals of tunisian origin .

in april 2017 , then - interior minister hadi majdoub stated that some 3,000 tunisian militants remained active abroad and 760 had been killed , adding that the authorities had prevented over 27,000 tunisian youths from joining their ranks since 2012 .

majdoub added that some 800 fighters had returned to tunisia at that point .

youth marginalization and the mass release of terrorism suspects in 2011 may partly explain tunisia's high number of foreign fighters , as well as perceptions that state institutions remain corrupt , unresponsive , and / or abusive .

tunisia has a diverse economy and large middle class .

textile exports , tourism , agriculture , and phosphate mining are key sectors .

tunisia also produces some petroleum , but is a net energy - importer .

until recently , tunisia was an upper - middle - income country .

strong annual growth prior to 2011 , however , masked corruption and inequalities that fed discontent .

notably , after president ben ali was pushed out of office in 2011 , the world bank documented that government regulations had been manipulated to favor firms closely tied to the ben ali family .

more broadly , wealth is concentrated along the urban and tourist - friendly coast , while the interior suffers from relative poverty and a lack of investment .

many tunisians are highly educated , but the economy has generally created low - skilled and low - paid jobs , fueling unemployment .

efforts since 2011 to promote private sector - led growth and create jobs have faced challenges , including investor perceptions of political risk , terrorist attacks on tourist sites , partisan disputes , and labor unrest that has periodically shut down mining operations .

per - capita gdp has fallen every year since 2014 , dipping below the upper middle - income threshold of $4,036 in 2015 and remaining below it since .

youth unemployment , estimated at 38% in 2012 , reportedly remains high .

corruption has apparently flourished since the political transition , undermining public faith in institutions and further entrenching regional divisions .

economic growth is projected to reach 2.4% in 2018 , the highest rate since 2014 , due to strong agricultural production and exports .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) has expressed concerns , however , about tunisia's rising inflation ( 7.7% in april 2018 , the highest rate since 1991 ) , declining foreign exchange reserves , and vulnerability to rising global energy prices .

the imf has urged tunisian policymakers to cut costs stemming from energy subsidies , which "disproportionately benefit the better - off" ; public sector wages , described as "among the highest in the world as a share of gdp" ; and pensions .

such austerity measures , which have been embraced by prime minister chahed , sparked large protests in early 2018 .

tunisia's powerful national trade union federation , the ugtt , has since decried efforts to end state subsidies for fuel and other consumer commodities , asserting that "rising prices will only accentuate the social and economic crisis. .

domestic constituencies are also likely to oppose other economic structural reforms advocated by donors , including protectionist trade policies and the liberalization of labor laws .

tunisian transparency advocates , meanwhile , have called for economic reforms to focus more on changing laws and state practices that they view as enabling high - level corruption .

u.s. high - level contacts and aid have expanded significantly since 2011 , as u.s. officials have hailed the country's peaceful political transition and as congress has appropriated increased bilateral assistance funding .

president trump and president caïd essebsi spoke over the phone in february 2017 and discussed tunisia's democratic transition and continued security threats .

the two presidents "reaffirmed the historic united states - tunisia relationship and agreed to maintain close cooperation...and seek additional ways to expand cooperation between the two countries. .

deputy secretary of state john sullivan visited tunisia in 2017 , and in early 2018 he affirmed that the united states "will continue to support tunisia's efforts to improve security and modernize its economy , amid formidable challenges. .

the u.s. military conducts intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) activities at a tunisian facility and u.s. special operations forces have reportedly played an advisory role in tunisian counterterrorism operations .

president obama designated tunisia a major non - north atlantic treaty organization ally in 2015 , after meeting with president caïd essebsi at the white house .

tunisia cooperates with nato's operation active endeavor , which provides counterterrorism surveillance in the mediterranean ; participates in nato's mediterranean dialogue ; and allows nato ships to make port calls .

united states agency for international development opened an office in tunis in 2014 , reflecting increased bilateral economic aid allocations .

the u.s. embassy in tunis also hosts the u.s. libya external office , through which u.s. diplomats engage with libyans and monitor u.s. programs in libya .

 ( the state department suspended operations at the u.s. embassy in tripoli in 2014. ) .

u.s. bilateral aid — totaling $205.4 million in fy2017 — has provided support for fiscal stabilization , economic growth initiatives , good governance , civil society capacity - building , and assistance to the police and military .

a u.s. - endowed tunisian - american enterprise fund invests in small - and medium - sized enterprises , and three u.s. loan guarantees for which congress directed funds have allowed tunisia to access up to $1.5 billion in affordable financing from international capital markets .

u.s. economic assistance has also supported the political decentralization process , as well as efforts to address youth marginalization and counter violent extremist ideology .

state department - administered military and police assistance has supported tactical capabilities as well as institutional reforms .

the department of defense ( dod ) has provided substantial additional military aid , focused on counterterrorism and border security ( table 2 , below ) .

tunisia is one of 12 countries participating in the state department - led trans - sahara counter - terrorism partnership ( tsctp ) and is one of six focus countries of the u.s. interagency security governance initiative ( sgi ) , initiated in 2014 .

the trump administration proposed $54.6 million in bilateral aid for tunisia in its fy2018 budget request , proposing to eliminate bilateral foreign military financing ( fmf ) and to cut bilateral economic aid by more than half .

the fy2018 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2018 ( division k of p.l .

115-141 ) , however , provided "not less than" $165.4 million in aid for tunisia .

the act also made available dod funds from the counter - isis train and equip fund to support border security programs for tunisia .

the administration's fy2019 aid budget request for tunisia totals $94.5 million .

in addition , the u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) fy2019 budget proposal includes $292 million for an anticipated multi - year development compact with tunisia that would aim to reduce water scarcity and address regulations seen as constraining job creation .

tunisia has expanded its acquisitions of u.s. defense materiel in order to maintain its u.s. - origin stocks and expand its counterterrorism capacity .

the state department licensed the sale of 12 black hawk helicopters in 2014 , and tunisia has also received significant equipment through the excess defense articles ( eda ) program , including 24 kiowa helicopters .

u.s. - tunisian relations date back over 200 years .

tunisia was also the site of significant world war ii battles , and a u.s. cemetery and memorial in carthage ( outside tunis ) holds nearly 3,000 u.s. military dead .

during the cold war , tunisia pursued a pro - western foreign policy , despite an experiment with leftist economic policy in the 1960s .

still , u.s. - tunisian ties were strained by the 1985 israeli bombing of the palestine liberation organization headquarters in tunis , which some tunisians viewed as having been carried out with u.s. approval .

more recently , the 2012 attack on the u.s. embassy and american school , days after the benghazi attacks in libya , temporarily cooled relations as u.s. officials criticized the interim government's handling of the investigation and prosecution of suspects .

tunisia has peacefully achieved many political milestones since 2011 , prompting observers to portray it as the lone success story of the "arab spring. .

internal political tensions , socioeconomic pressures , security threats , and regional dynamics nonetheless pose ongoing challenges .

despite a relative lack of conflict , tunisia remains a potential locus of regional struggles among rival political ideologies , and among violent extremist groups vying for prominence and recruits .

key questions include whether tunisia's broad - based coalition government is likely to remain cohesive , and how it will respond to terrorist threats , advance political and economic reforms , foster civil liberties , and satisfy popular demands for quality - of - life improvements .

tunisian leaders have welcomed u.s. assistance since 2011 , but the local appetite for outside policy influence has also been shown to be limited in cases where donors have advocated economic reforms that domestic constituencies view as harmful .

