although a small country with a population of just over 3.6 million people , moldova has been of interest to u.s. policy makers due to its position between nato and eu member romania and strategic ukraine .

some experts have expressed concern about russian efforts to extend its hegemony over moldova through various methods , including a troop presence , manipulation of moldova's relationship with its breakaway transnistria region , and energy supplies and other trading links .

moldova's political and economic weakness has made it a source of organized criminal activity of concern to u.s. policy makers , including trafficking in persons .

the party of communists of the republic of moldova ( pcrm ) held power in moldova for most of the 2000s after winning parliamentary elections in 2001 , 2005 , and april 2009 .

the pcrm's leader is vladimir voronin , who was elected by the parliament as president of moldova during the period of the pcrm's rule .

after july 2009 parliamentary elections , a group of opposition parties formed a new governing coalition , the alliance for european integration .

as its name suggests , the aei was pledged to carry out reforms with the goal of closer integration into europe .

in march 2012 , the parliament elected nicolae timofti as president of moldova .

timofti was a judge with long experience in the moldovan judicial system dating back to the soviet era .

he had a very low political profile , which may have been a major consideration in his selection .

there are few ideological differences among the governing parties , which are mainly vehicles for key political leaders and politically - connected big businessmen .

a scandal over an apparently accidental death in a hunting accident involving high - ranking judiciary officials in december 2012 caused unseemly , public infighting among party leaders , ending in the government's collapse in march 2013 .

the coalition was reconstituted in may 2013 , in part because the european union urged moldovan leaders to reassemble the coalition in order to keep the country's european integration prospects on track .

it controls 53 of the 101 seats in the parliament .

it is composed of the liberal democrats , the democratic party , and the liberal reformist party .

iurie leanca of the liberal democrats is prime minister .

igor corman of the democratic party is chairman of the parliament .

the largest opposition party , the pcrm , holds 34 seats .

new parliamentary elections are expected in november 2014 .

according to the world bank , moldova's per capita gross national income of $1,980 in 2011 makes it the poorest country in europe .

more than one - fifth of the country's population lives in poverty .

more than one - quarter of moldova's economically active population works abroad .

remittances from those working abroad amounted to 20% of the country's gross domestic product in 2011 , according to the economist intelligence unit .

moldova's main natural resource is its rich soil .

agriculture , especially fruit , wine , and tobacco , plays an important role in moldova's economy .

in 2011 , agriculture accounted for 12% of gdp , 41% of exports , and 28% of employment in moldova .

most of moldova's industry is located in the breakaway transnistria region .

transnistria's economy has also suffered as a result of the global economic crisis , resulting in large - scale emigration .

transnistria's economy is dependent on remittances from transnistrians working abroad and on aid from russia , including direct aid and indirect subsidies in the form of unpaid debts for energy supplies .

the global financial crisis had a negative impact on moldova .

the leu , moldova's currency , weakened and remains under pressure .

remittances dropped , as moldovan emigrants lost jobs in other hard - hit countries .

foreign direct investment also dropped sharply .

moldova's gdp dropped by 6% in 2009 , but rebounded to grow by 6.9% in 2010 and 6.5% in 2011 .

however , gdp contracted by 0.8% in 2012 , due to the slowdown in the eurozone .

in 2013 , moldova's gdp grew by a rapid 8.9% , spurred by strong consumer spending and a good agricultural harvest , as compared to a drought the previous year .

the weakening moldovan currency has also boosted exports .

growth in 2014 may be affected somewhat by the unstable situation in neighboring ukraine and a possible slowdown in russia due to the threat of sanctions against that country .

despite a russian ban on moldovan wine imports , russia still accounts for a quarter of moldova's exports .

in 2010 , the moldovan government unveiled a medium - term economic reform plan , dubbed "rethink moldova. .

the plan is aimed at improving the business climate in the country ; increasing exports , including agricultural exports ; and upgrading the country's infrastructure .

international donors , including the international monetary fund , the world bank , the european union , and the united states , pledged $2.6 billion for the period 2010-2013 to implement the plan .

the country's prospects for increased foreign investment remain hindered by serious problems with corruption and shortcomings in the rule of law .

however , moldova ranked 81 st out of 183 countries in a 2012 world bank ranking on ease of doing business , a significant improvement over its past rankings .

the united states and moldova have enjoyed good relations since the country's independence in 1991 .

u.s. officials have repeatedly expressed support for moldova's sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders .

in a signal of u.s. support , secretary of state john kerry visited moldova on december 4 , 2013 , to congratulate the country on initialing its association agreement with the eu .

kerry said the united states would sponsor a trip by moldovan winemakers to research opportunities in the u.s. market and that the united states would partner with sweden on energy efficiency projects in moldova .

the united states and the eu are working to enhance market opportunities for wine and other moldovan products in part in order to reduce the impact of possible future russian embargoes .

on march 3 , prime minister leanca met with president obama , vice president biden , and secretary kerry in washington .

during a visit to moldova on march 30 , assistant secretary of state victoria nuland confirmed u.s. support for moldova's path toward european integration and for continued u.s. aid for anti - corruption efforts , strengthening border security ( for which ms. nuland announced an additional $10 million in u.s. aid ) , boosting moldovan exports ( including moldovan wines ) , energy security , and other areas .

according to state department figures , the united states provided $21.855 million in foreign aid to moldova in fy2013 and an estimated $20.66 million for fy2014 .

before ms. nuland's visit in late march , the administration requested $20.23 million in assistance for moldova for fy2015 .

u.s. aid is aimed at helping moldova fight corruption and transnational crime , including trafficking in persons .

u.s. assistance also supports independent media and non - governmental organizations in moldova , as well as rule of law programs .

other u.s. aid is aimed at improving the business climate in moldova , and helping the country diversify its exports .

moldova receives very modest u.s. security assistance: an estimated $1.25 million in foreign military financing in fy2014 , as well as $750,000 in imet military training funds .

u.s. security assistance is used to develop moldova's peacekeeping capacity and interoperability with nato .

this aid does not include assistance moldova has been receiving since 2010 under a five - year , $262 million grant from the millennium challenge corporation .

this assistance is being used to improve moldova's road network and its irrigation systems in order to boost the country's agricultural exports .

in testimony before the europe subcommittee of the senate foreign relations committee on april 10 , assistant secretary nuland said the moldovan government needs to strengthen its efforts to educate the moldovan public on the benefits of association with the eu .

experts have noted that moldova has not done enough to expand communications in the russian language , to supplement current efforts heavily weighted toward romanian / moldovan .

nuland also stressed that moldova needs to continue its fight against corruption .

some observers are concerned that moldovan leaders could incorrectly believe that , for geopolitical reasons , the united states and the eu would tacitly excuse corruption and other reform shortcomings in order to support a "pro - europe" government against their "pro - russia" opponents .

in june 2012 , the congressional moldova caucus was formed , in order to promote u.s. - moldova cooperation on a wide range of issues , including euro - atlantic integration and granting of normal trade relations status for moldova ( which was achieved in 2012 ) .

since 1999 , moldova and the state of north carolina have worked together in such areas as civil emergency , expansion of markets , and cultural , scientific , and academic exchanges .

the united states has called on russia to withdraw troops from transnistria deployed there without the consent of the moldovan government .

the united states refused to ratify the adapted conventional forces in europe ( cfe ) treaty until several conditions were met , including the withdrawal of russian troops from moldova .

in 2007 , russia suspended its observance of the cfe treaty , attributing the move to the failure of the united states and other countries to ratify the adapted treaty .

the united states has called for continued cooperation on weapons proliferation and trafficking in persons .

in 2003 , the united states imposed missile proliferation sanctions on two moldovan firms for transferring equipment and technology to iran .

the 2013 state department trafficking in persons report notes that moldova is a source of women and girls trafficked for commercial sexual exploitation , as well as men and women for forced labor .

moldova is a "tier 2" country .

tier 2 denotes a country that "does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking," but is "making significant efforts to do so. .

u.s. aid has helped moldova interdict attempted sales of highly - enriched uranium ( heu ) .

in an incident in june 2011 , moldovan police , including some officers who had received u.s. counter - proliferation training , conducted a "sting" operation against persons offering heu for sale .

the material , which probably came from russia , transited transnistria .

moldova has long sought permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) from the united states by terminating the application of the jackson - vanik amendment to moldova .

on november 16 , 2012 , the house approved h.r .

6156 , which extends pntr to russia and moldova .

the senate passed the bill on december 6 .

it was signed by the president on december 14 ( p.l .

112-208 ) .

the crisis in ukraine has caused members of congress to call for greater u.s. efforts to bolster moldova's sovereignty and territorial integrity against possible russian threats , including during visits to those countries .

p.l .

113-96 , passed by the senate on march 27 , 2014 , and the house on april 1 , was signed by the president on april 3 .

the bill requires radio free europe / radio liberty to conduct a "programming surge" in ukraine and moldova in order to counter "inaccurate and inflammatory" broadcasts by russia .

on march 5 , representative ted poe introduced h.r .

4155 , the fight russian energy exploitation act ( free ) .

the bill would amend section 3 ( c ) of the natural gas act ( 15 u.s.c .

717b ( c ) ) in order to make moldova eligible to import u.s. natural gas .

on april 3 , senator inhofe introduced s.res .

411 , which sharply criticizes russian policy toward ukraine as violating the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity .

the resolution notes that russia has used energy resources , its military presence in transnistria , and other means to intimidate moldova .

the resolution affirms u.s. policy to support moldova's sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity ; calls on russia to remove its military forces from moldova ; and urges the president to consider increasing security and intelligence cooperation with the government of moldova , among other provisions .

