rs21360 - - department of homeland security: options for house and senate committee organization updated august 13 , 200 .

since the terrorist attacks of 2001 and the creation of the new department of homeland security , there has been widespread interest in reorganizing the houseand senate committee systems to handle homeland security issues more effectively .

some changes to the committeesystems have already been made , but thereare calls for still more comprehensive action .

recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission .

among the many issues discussed in the report of thecommission were a group of recommendations intended to "strengthen congressional oversight of intelligence andhomeland security. .

concerning homelandsecurity , the commission recommended establishment of a standing committee in each chamber to assumeresponsibility over the topic .

congress should create a single , principal point of oversight and review for homeland security .

congressionalleaders are best able to judge what committee should have jurisdiction over this department and its duties .

but webelieve that congress does have theobligation to choose one in the house and one in the senate , and that this committee should be a permanent standingcommittee with a nonpartisanstaff .

 ( 1 ) two house homeland security committees .

the house created a temporary select committee onhomeland security that was directed to coordinate recommendations on the bill made by a half dozen differenthouse standing committees .

the homelandsecurity committee compiled a comprehensive proposal , led house floor debate on the bill , and served as thecentral negotiating team in resolving differencesbetween the house and senate versions of the bill .

when p.l .

107-296 was signed into law , the select committeeon homeland security was abolished , butnot before the new law included language in section 1503 stating , "it is the sense of congress that each house ofcongress should review its committeestructure in light of the reorganization of responsibilities within the executive branch by the establishment of thedepartment. .

the house deferred immediate action , creating in january 2003 , a new select committee on homeland security .

this new committee was to serve during the108th congress as the house focus for legislative and oversight coordination for homeland securityissues , while other house committees retained their morelimited legislative and oversight authority over homeland security .

most significantly , the select committee wasdirected to report by september 30 , 2004 , itsrecommendations for changes in the house committee system .

by comparison , the senate , in the 108thcongress , has continued to consider homeland securityissues within its existing committee structure .

appropriations subcommittee for homeland security .

the structure of the house and senateappropriations committees have been changed to account for the creation of the new department .

in early february2003 , the house appropriationscommittee approved an internal reorganization plan which abolished the former subcommittee on treasury andpostal service appropriations and transferredits responsibilities to a renamed subcommittee on transportation , treasury , and independent agenciesappropriations .

with this consolidation , a newthirteenth subcommittee on homeland security was established and it was assigned jurisdiction over appropriationsfor the new department and for bureaus inother departments transferred to it .

the senate appropriations committee shortly thereafter followed suit , to ensurethat the subcommittee structures of the twocommittees were parallel .

calls for further change .

many members have already endorsed further changes to the committee system .

a number of proposals have been offered in the house and senate to establish a new temporary select , permanentselect , or standing committee on homelandsecurity , to alter the appropriations process , or to make other changes in congressional structures dealing withhomeland security issues .

a senior house leaderobserved in 2002 that creation of the new department "probably will require at least a reorganization of the currentcommittees. .

a senator active in crafting thefinal version of the homeland security department bill stated "it is hard to see how congress could do a decent jobof authorizing and overseeing what the newdepartment does without a new committee of homeland security. .

on the other hand , a number of members havepublicly opposed any alteration of house orsenate committee structures , while others have endorsed or opposed such action at different times .

 ( 2 ) from the perspective of the executive branch , areductionin committee jurisdiction fragmentation limits the number of panels to which officials of the new agency will beanswerable .

although the house and senate have undertaken some initial steps to revise their committee structures , the report of the 9 / 11 commission may add additionalpressure for congressional action .

this report examines various options for the house and senate individually orjointly to consider in reorganizing itsstructures dealing with homeland security and discusses possible advantages and disadvantages of each .

timetable for reform .

not only is there discussion about what changes should be made in congressionalstructures , but there is also discussion about when such changes should be made .

with the 9 / 11 commission'srecent recommendations and the september 30,2004 , deadline for committee system reform proposals from the house homeland security committee , some sayreforms are so vital that they should beadopted before congress adjourns for the election .

these advocates can point to the 1974 house committee reformswhich were passed just before the electionsthat year .

other say it would be best to defer such action until the beginning of the new congress in january .

after the election , the voters will have supplied freshmandates and the house and senate will have time in january before the inauguration to consider morecomprehensive reform options thoroughly .

the houseadopts its rules for the new congress on the first session day , and these reforms could include substantial changesto its committee structure .

the senate's rulesare deemed to be in place automatically at the beginning of a new congress .

however , some believe there will beattempts on the first day of the new congressto change the senate's cloture rule and other rules relating to the consideration of executive nominations .

theseefforts could open the door to considerationof committee system changes as well .

retain current structure .

congress could decide that the current system is sufficient to monitor the work ofthe new department .

no changes would be made in either jurisdiction or referral procedures .

some may argue thatit is too soon to know how much legislativeworkload the new department will cause house and senate committees .

in the immediate aftermath of the 2001terrorist attacks , all congressional committeessought involvement in terrorism matters .

more recently , the involvement of committees with only minor claimsto jurisdiction seems to have tapered off .

historically , there has been no necessary connection between an executive reorganization and congressional committee reorganization .

several house andsenate committees were combined to create the new armed services committees in 1947 , at about the same timethat the department of defense was created .

the armed services committees promptly created subcommittees that closely matched the former standingcommittees that had been merged in the committeereorganization .

on the other hand , the department of energy was created after the senate had consolidated energyjurisdiction in its committees , but before thehouse completed a realignment of its energy jurisdictions in 1980 .

the creation of the department of health,education , and welfare ( now health and humanservices ) was not accompanied by any change in house or senate committee jurisdictions .

reorganize entire system .

either chamber or both chambers , acting separately or jointly , could undertake anextensive reorganization of the committee system .

a substantial house committee reorganization took place in1995 , but it has been a quarter century since thesenate comprehensively reorganized its committees .

the joint committee on the organization of congress in the103rd congress considered numerous optionsfor such reorganization , but did not directly address the issue of terrorism or anti - terrorism jurisdiction .

 ( 4 ) a comprehensive reorganization could allow bothchambers to address other jurisdiction issues which have emerged in recent years .

 ( 5 ) nevertheless , a comprehensive reorganization is normally controversialand rarely contemplated under very short deadlines .

realign committee jurisdiction .

within the existing system , either or both chambers could choose to realigntheir committee jurisdictions within the existing structure .

that would entail changing chamber rules .

pastexperience indicates that members generally havebeen loathe to overhaul the committee system , especially during a congress .

rules changes are traditionally adoptedat the beginning of a new congress .

in thesenate , because there is no need to readopt senate rules at the beginning of a new congress , a committeereorganization would have to be consideredseparately .

in either chamber , it would be possible to add jurisdictional aspects of certain homeland security topics to the jurisdiction of specific committees , withoutaltering the existing subject jurisdictions of committees over other topics .

for example , jurisdiction over "nationalenergy policy generally" was assigned to thehouse energy and commerce committee in 1980 without significant alteration to other committees' jurisdictions .

change referral system .

both chambers typically refer measures to a single committee , by determiningprimary jurisdiction in the house and predominant jurisdiction in the senate .

in the house , most multiple referralsare sequential , although joint referrals werepermitted until 1995 .

changing the referral system could enable all interested committees to maintain legislativeand oversight jurisdiction .

for example , thespeaker of the house ( who has the discretionary authority to impose time limits on referrals ) could be required toimpose one on all committees involved in amultiple referral of a homeland security - related bill .

in addition , for legislation on homeland security , the housecould allow joint referrals .

 ( in the 108thcongress , house rules allow referral without designation of a primary committee "under exceptionalcircumstances." ) .

in the senate , which generally requires unanimous consent for multiple referrals , party leaders could invoke their little - used authority to recommend referrals toseveral committees by debate - limited motion .

however , major changes in house or senate bill referral rules couldcomplicate action on homeland securitymatters and could be nearly as controversial as a jurisdictional realignment .

create new standing committee over homeland security .

a new standing committee could be created ineither or both chambers .

such a panel could have legislative responsibility over all aspects of the department ofhomeland security .

questions regardingwhether the new committee would absorb jurisdiction from existing panels or overlap with them would need to bedecided .

would special oversight authority ( broader in scope than the committee's legislative jurisdiction ) be granted to it ? .

create select committee over homeland security .

the house has created two temporary select committeesto deal with homeland security in the wake of the 2001 attacks .

a select committee with the same or a revisedjurisdiction could be established in the 109thcongress , with or without the creation of a companion select committee in the senate .

if such a new panel werecreated , would it have legislative authority ( forexample , in the same manner as do the current intelligence select committees ) ? .

if it were limited to conductingoversight , how and through what process wouldits findings be converted into legislative recommendations ? .

in view of the recommendations of the 9 / 11commission about the house and senate permanentselect committees on intelligence , will the views of the house and senate about creating such select committeeson other subjects change ? .

create a joint committee on homeland security .

the house and senate could create a joint committee tooversee the work of the new department .

however , only one joint committee in the last half - century has beengranted legislative jurisdiction .

if such a jointpanel were created , the question of sequential referrals to existing standing committees could still be raised .

thehouse and senate acted separately in the 107thcongress to permit the two intelligence committees to hold an inquiry into intelligence failures prior to the terroristattacks .

nothing in house or senate ruleswould preclude existing house or senate committees from holding joint hearings in the interests of greaterefficiency .

some view joint committees as a meansto permit more efficient congressional review of policy areas , while others believe that separate committees help preserve chamber autonomy and encourageindependent committee initiatives .

create leadership committee .

a small committee comprised of members named by chamber party leaderscould act to coordinate homeland security legislative and oversight work among other committees in the chamber .

the 107th congress house homelandsecurity select committee was just such a leadership panel , and a similarly constituted panel could be reestablishedon a more permanent basis .

 ( 6 ) use less formal means to coordinate policy .

in both the house and senate , many committees claimingresponsibility for specific policy areas have entered into "memoranda of understanding," or agreements among theconcerned committees , reflecting eachpanel's appropriate jurisdiction over a disputed policy area .

these memoranda serve as guidance to theparliamentarians' offices in making bill referrals andmay obviate the immediate need for a formal revision in committee jurisdictions .

the senate also makes use of "temporary standing orders," unanimous consent agreements typically in force for the current congress only , that modify thestanding rules of the senate .

one or more temporary standing orders could be used to allocate jurisdiction amongsenate committees over homeland securityissues , subject to renewal or modification at the beginning of each succeeding congress .

if successful , the temporaryorders could be converted into morepermanent changes in senate procedure ; if not , other realignments could be attempted .

further realign appropriations committees' subcommittees .

the house and senate appropriationscommittees adapted their structures in 2003 to create a new subcommittee on homeland security .

 ( 7 ) additional recommendations by the 9 / 11 commissioninclude a proposal to set out intelligence appropriations in a separate appropriations bill , or to combine authorizationand appropriations for intelligenceactivities in only one panel in each chamber .

additional changes may be required in the appropriationscommittees' structures and the procedures throughwhich they draft both regular and supplemental appropriations bills .

