argentina's political upheaval in late 2001 that led to the resignation of president fernando de la rua should be viewed in the context of its historical political development .

before 1930 , argentina enjoyed some 70 years of political stability that facilitated rapid economic development and made argentina one of the world's wealthiest countries .

it ranked seventh in the world in per capita income in the 1920s .

in contrast , from 1930 until 1983 , argentina experienced significant political instability , characterized by numerous military coups , 25 presidents , 22 years of military rule , and 13 years of "peronism. .

when the military intervened in 1943 , the regime came to be dominated by a colonel serving as secretary of labor , juan peron , who went on to build a formidable political base through support from the rapidly growing union movement .

peron's mobilization of the working class had an enduring effect on argentina's political system over the next four decades .

even when peron was ousted by the military in 1955 , peronism as a political movement survived despite attempts by the military and anti - peronist sectors to defeat it .

after his ouster , a series of civilian and military governments ruled until 1973 when peron was reelected to office after 18 years of exile .

just a year later , however , peron died and was succeeded by his second wife isabel , who had little political experience .

economic and political chaos ensued , with political violence surging and argentina experiencing its first bout of hyperinflation .

as a result , the military intervened once again in 1976 , but this time ruled directly until 1983 , when it fell into disrepute in the aftermath of its failure in the falkland islands ( islas malvinas ) war with great britain in 1982 .

it was during this period that the military conducted the so - called "dirty war" against leftists , guerrillas , and their sympathizers , and thousands of argentines "disappeared. .

in 1983 , argentina returned to civilian democratic rule with the election of raul alfonsin of the moderate radical civic union ( ucr ) .

alfonsin was widely credited with restoring democratic institutions , but economic conditions during his tenure were chaotic , with hyperinflation and considerable labor unrest .

as a result , alfonsin left office six months before his six - year term ended , letting the winner of the 1989 election , carlos menem of the justicialist party ( pj , or the peronist party ) , take office early .

menem transformed argentina from a state - dominated protectionist economy to one committed to free market principles and open to trade .

most state enterprises were privatized ; hyperinflation was eliminated ; and the economy was opened up to foreign trade and investment .

in 1991 , under the direction of minister of economy domingo cavallo , the government pegged the argentine peso to the u.s. dollar and limited the printing of pesos to the extent that they were backed by u.s. dollars , a policy which helped keep inflation in check , but as is now known , became a major factor in argentina's recent financial turmoil .

 ( the dollar peg led to an overvaluation of the peso , and continued overspending led to large increases in external debt. ) .

what made menem's transformation of argentina even more extraordinary was that he broke with the traditional peronist protectionist policies favorable to the working - class and labor .

yet increasing corruption and high unemployment at the end of menem's second term were factors that led to the defeat of his party in the october 1999 elections .

u.s. - argentine relations have been strong since the country's return to democracy in 1983 and were especially close during the menem presidency .

u.s. officials commend argentina's contributions to peacekeeping operations worldwide , including a contribution to the current u.n. peacekeeping mission in haiti .

because of its military contributions , the united states designated argentina as a major non - nato ally in 1997 , a status that gives argentina access to grants of surplus military hardware .

although u.s. - argentine relations are close , at times there have been irritants in the bilateral relationship .

the tough u.s. approach toward argentina during its political and financial crisis in 2001-2002 caused some friction in the relationship .

this turned around to some extent in 2003 when the united states supported argentina in its negotiations with the imf .

in terms of trade , the united states exported $4.1 billion in goods to argentina in 2005 ( with machinery , organic chemicals , and electrical machinery exports topping the list ) and imported $4.6 billion in goods , almost half consisting of oil imports .

in 2004 , the united states trade representative ( ustr ) placed argentina on the special 301 priority watch list regarding intellectual property rights protection because of serious concerns over the lack of adequate protection for copyrights and patents .

although the country made some improvements to its international property protection , ustr kept argentina on the priority watch list for 2005 and 2006 because of continued problems with patent protection and copyright piracy .

u.s. officials have highlighted concerns about the tri - border area ( tba ) of argentina , brazil , and paraguay because of activities of the radical lebanon - based hezbollah ( party of god ) and the sunni muslim palestinian group hamas ( islamic resistence movement ) .

the tba has long been used for arms and drug trafficking , contraband smuggling , document and currency fraud , money laundering , and the manufacture and movement of pirated goods .

the state department's 2005 annual report on terrorism ( issued in april 2006 ) maintains that the united states remains concerned that hezbollah and hamas were raising funds among the sizable muslim communities in the region but stated that there was no corroborated information that these or other islamic extremist groups had an operational presence in the area .

u.s. officials in the past have lauded engagement with argentina on counter - terrorism issues , including efforts to crack down on middle east fund - raising activities in the tba .

in september 2006 , however , a u.s. treasury department official maintained that argentina could risk international financial isolation if it did not take action to criminalize terrorist financing .

congress has expressed concern regarding argentina's investigation into the july 1994 bombing in buenos aires of the argentine - israeli mutual association ( amia ) that killed 85 people .

in the 108 th congress , both houses approved similar resolutions ( h.con.res .

469 and s.con.res .

126 ) in july 2004 , that urged argentina to provide resources to investigate all areas of the amia case .

allegations have linked hezbollah to that bombing as well as to a 1992 bombing of the israeli embassy in buenos aires that killed 30 people .

in september 2004 , all 22 argentine defendants charged in the 1994 bombing were acquitted by a three - judge panel that faulted the investigation of the original judge ( the judge was ultimately removed from office for bribery in august 2005 ) .

despite the acquittal , an argentine court reconfirmed the validity of international arrest warrants for 12 iranian nationals and one lebanese official believed to head hezbollah's terrorist wing .

 ( interpol suspended international wanted notices , or red notices , for the 12 iranians , in october 2004 , and cancelled the notices in september 2005 , maintaining that new arrest warrants were needed. ) .

a new argentine investigation of the amia case began in september 2004 , and in november 2005 , the prosecutor named a lebanese militant from hezbollah as the suicide bomber in the amia case .

in june 2006 , the house approved h.con.res .

338 ( ros - lehtinen ) , which "recognizes the potential threat that sympathizers and financiers of islamist terrorist organizations that operate in the western hemisphere pose to the united states , our allies , and interests. .

the resolution also encourages the president to direct the u.s. representatives to the organization of american states to seek support for the creation of a special task force to assist governments in investigating and combating the proliferation of islamist terrorist organizations in the region .

