côte d'ivoire , a west african country of 21.5 million people that is nearly as large as new mexico and is the world's leading cocoa producer , is emerging from a severe political - military crisis .

it grew out of a disputed november 28 , 2010 presidential runoff election between former president laurent gbagbo ( baag - boh ) and his opponent , former prime minister alassane ouattara ( wah - tah - rah ) , who both claimed electoral victory and formed opposing governments .

their rivalry erupted into a full - scale civil military conflict between their armed supporters in early march 2011 , after three months of growing political volatility and violence .

after the election , the united states , together with most governments around the world , endorsed ouattara as the legally elected president and pressed for gbagbo to cede the presidency to him , in accordance with united nations ( u.n. ) - certified run - off results announced by the ivoirian independent electoral commission .

key multilateral institutions that pushed for this end included the economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) , the african union ( au ) , and the u.n. security council .

a range of multilateral and bilateral measures were also pursued in order to pressure gbagbo to step down and to restrict his government's access to financial resources and operational funding .

these included sovereign credit restrictions and a range of multilateral and bilateral targeted sanctions , such as asset freezes and travel - related , among other sanctions .

côte d'ivoire's late 2010 presidential election was conducted under the terms of the 2007 ouagadougou political agreement ( opa ) , the most recent in a series of partially implemented peace agreements aimed at reunifying côte d'ivoire , which remained largely divided between a government - controlled southern region and a rebel - controlled zone in the north during a long political stalemate that followed the outbreak of a civil war in 2002 .

the war , along with the political events that contributed to and followed it , is discussed in appendix b .

the post - electoral crisis and conflict directly threatened long - standing u.s. and international efforts to support a transition to peace , political stability , and democratic governance in côte d'ivoire , which are prerequisites for long - term socioeconomic development in côte d'ivoire , another key u.s. bilateral objective .

while the crisis did not directly affect vital u.s. national interests , the country remained an important economic hub in the region , and the effects of a sustained armed conflict would likely have had far - reaching negative economic and humanitarian impacts in west africa .

also indirectly at stake were broad , long - term u.s. efforts to ensure regional political stability , peace , democratic and accountable governance , state capacity - building , and economic growth in west africa — along with several billion dollars worth of investments that the united states has made in the sub - region to achieve these goals .

the united states has supported the peace process in côte d'ivoire since 2002 , both politically and financially , with funding appropriated by congress .

it aided in the 2003 deployment of the former economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) mission in côte d'ivoire ( ecomici ) , a military intervention force .

it also contributed 22% of the cost of a 2003-2004 u.n. military monitoring and political mission , the u.n. mission in côte d'ivoire ( minuci ) , and continues to fund about 27% of the cost of the ongoing u.n. operation in côte d'ivoire ( unoci ) , a multi - faceted peacekeeping mission that succeeded minuci .

on november 28 , 2010 , a presidential election runoff vote was held between the incumbent president , laurent gbagbo , and former prime minister alassane dramane ouattara , the two candidates who had garnered the most votes , 38% and 32% , respectively , in a generally peaceful but long - delayed first - round presidential poll held on october 31 , 2010 .

both candidates claimed to have won the runoff vote and separately inaugurated themselves as president and appointed cabinets , forming rival governments .

both claimed to exercise national executive authority over state institutions and took steps to consolidate their control .

much of the international community — with at least one exception and some qualifications among african governments — rejected gbagbo's claim of electoral victory and endorsed ouattara as the legally elected president of côte d'ivoire .

in response to gbagbo's refusal to cede the presidency to his rival , the international community pursued a range of coordinated and bilateral efforts aimed at forcing him to abide by the results of the election .

these included diplomatic isolation and non - recognition of the gbagbo government ; personal travel and financial sanctions against members of the regime ; constriction of credit and access to state financial assets ; and the threat of military action to enforce the electoral outcome .

in late march there were calls for the imposition of expanded u.n. and european union sanctions targeting the gbagbo regime .

u.s. - ivoirian relations were traditionally cordial , but became strained after the 1999 ouster of former president henri konan bédié in 1999 in a military coup by the late general robert guéï , and remained so during president gbagbo's tenure .

the united states recognized gbagbo as the de facto leader of côte d'ivoire , but viewed the 2000 election that brought him to power as operationally "flawed" and "marred by significant violence and irregularities," and as illegitimate because it was organized by a government that came to power by undemocratic means .

since the ouster of bédié , côte d'ivoire has been subject to a restriction on bilateral aid that prohibits the use of foreign operations funds — with some exceptions for selected non - governmental organization , human welfare , and humanitarian needs programs — to a country whose democratically elected head of government is deposed by a military coup d'état .

the united states also imposed personal sanctions on selected persons viewed as threatening the peace process in côte d'ivoire ( see previous discussion of u.s. visa restrictions and financial sanctions ) .

u.s. bilateral engagement was also reduced as a result of the 2002 conflict by the suspension and later closure of a country peace corps program in 2002 and 2003 .

after the northern rebellion in october 2002 , 133 peace corps volunteers were evacuated by u.s. and french forces , and the program was suspended .

the country office closed in may 2003 .

the united states repeatedly pressed the parties to the ivorian conflict to durably and comprehensively resolve their conflict , and has attempted to foster a transition to peace and democracy by diplomatically and otherwise supporting implementation of the opa and prior peace accords .

the united states provided about $9 million in assistance to help ecomici deploy in 2003 and financially and politically supports the unoci mission ( $81 million , fy2009 actual ; $128.6 million , fy2010 enacted ; and $135 million , fy2011 request .

it has also funded limited election support activities ( see text box ) .

the united states is providing emergency assistance to respond to the humanitarian impact of the post - election crisis ; these efforts are discussed in the "humanitarian effects and responses" section , above .

in addition to this aid , côte d'ivoire has received limited u.s. food aid and substantial hiv / aids and health - related assistance in recent years ( $107 million in fy2009 and an estimated $133 million in fy2010 , with $133 million requested in fy2011 ) .

another policy concern is trafficking in persons .

the state department reports that côte d'ivoire is a source , transit , and destination country for women and children trafficked for forced labor and commercial sexual exploitation .

there are several u.s. anti - trafficking programs in place .

according to the state department's fy2011 foreign operations congressional budget justification — which was issued prior to the crisis — if côte d'ivoire's political situation is resolved "to such an extent that u.s. assistance can help restore stability and promote good governance," the administration of president barack obama would seek to promote credible and peaceful elections [eg , parliamentary or local ones] , support a deep and broad nationwide reconciliation process , restore the rule of law and combat impunity , raise public awareness of the costs of corruption , expose ivoirian youth to nontraditional ideas of civil society , help young political leaders develop new approaches and adopt better political platforms , fight trafficking in persons , stem the hiv / aids epidemic , and increase economic productivity .

in addition to $133.3 million in global health and child survival ( ghcs ) funding mentioned above , the fy2011 state department budget request envisions the provision of $4.2 million in economic support fund ( esf ) assistance for conflict mitigation and reconciliation , good governance , political competition and consensus - building and civil society support , along with $40,000 in international military education and training aid .

the capture of gbagbo by pro - ouattara frci military forces appears to have nearly ended the military conflict spurred by the post - electoral crisis .

as of mid - april , frci forces were attempting to defeat and force the surrender of a small number of die - hard armed gbagbo supporters , but the gbagbo regime otherwise appeared to have ended .

many leading figures in gbagbo's administration were also in frci custody , and the ouattara government was investigating many of them for human rights abuses and killings , arms purchases , or embezzlement and other financial crimes .

prospects for the further resolution of the crisis and the factors that underlay it are unclear , but the ouattara government has garnered substantial pledges of international political and financial support for its efforts to achieve these ends .

key objectives include the imposition of transitional justice and accountability for human rights crimes during and prior to the electoral crisis ; post - war economic recovery , notably focusing on the resumption of cocoa exports ; and military and police and governance reform .

success in these efforts will require that the ouattara government build its legitimacy in the eyes of the entire ivoirian population , including those portions of the electorate that voted for gbagbo , some elements of which may remain aggrieved and attempt to obstruct the political process .

a lengthy , complex , and possibly politically volatile series of attempts to achieve national reconciliation and unity are likely , as are efforts to address root causes of the conflict through land , constitutional , and governance reform , as well as the conduct of legislative elections .

while ouattara appears to be taking some of the actions recommended by the high - level au mediation panel in mid - march , it is not clear how closely he will adhere to the full range of these proposals , or to what extent the ouagadougou political agreement ( opa ) remains in effect .

if the crisis is resolved , côte d'ivoire is well - positioned to undertake a successful economic recovery , and to reemerge as a regional economic hub .

while the economy has suffered from some degree of lack of investment due to the uncertain political situation , the cocoa economy has performed well and the country has a fairly well developed infrastructure by regional standards .

an end to the crisis would also likely boost international political and investment confidence in west africa as a whole .

appendix a .

background on the election the long - stymied peace process the 2010 presidential election was the main political objective of a peace process aimed at reunifying côte d'ivoire under a series of political - military agreements reached between 2003 and march 2007 , when the most recent accord , the ouagadougou political agreement ( opa ) was signed .

the opa incorporated key provisions of the main preceding agreements but superseded them .

the election was originally slated to be held as constitutionally prescribed , in a manner that would allow a timely transition to a new elected government at the end of president gbagbo's initial five - year term on october 30 , 2005 .

it was delayed at least six times , however , in some cases with the explicit concurrence of the international facilitators of the various peace agreements , and in some cases in spite of their demands , political threats , and other efforts intended to expedite fulfillment of the agreements .

these delays enabled gbagbo to maintain his incumbency for five years after the termination of his electoral mandate and — according to some analysts — to significantly influence the politics of the peace process in a manner that allowed him and his key allies to consolidate state power , access to resources , and shape the electoral institutional framework to work in their favor .

key accord implementation challenges pertained to the sequence and manner in which disarmament , citizen and voter identification , voter registration , other electoral administration tasks , and various accord - prescribed legal reforms would take place ; and differences over the scope of presidential authority .

controversy over these and other issues regularly prompted episodes of political volatility , mass political protests that were , at times , violent , and underpinned electoral process delays which , in turn , spurred the successive series of accords .

the root causes underlying the conflict include contention over land ; internal and regional migration ; the nature of national identity ; qualifications for citizenship ; and the extent of foreign influence over ivorian political processes ; security force abuses ; issues of socioeconomic welfare ( eg , power cuts and uneven access to social services ) ; and other aggravating factors , such as corruption and crime .

pre - electoral processes: progress and challenges notwithstanding such challenges , the conduct of the october 31 , 2010 , first round election was made possible because substantial headway was made in 2009 and 2010 toward completing opa - required election preparation tasks , despite a number of potentially catastrophic challenges to their execution , and far less progress in attaining key non - electoral but politically critical provisions of the opa .

failure to complete the latter — primarily disarmament , demobilization and reintegration of ex - combatants and militia members ; security sector reform ; and the nationwide restoration of state authority , all of which remained incomplete by polling day , notwithstanding much progress — could well have once again prevented the elections from occurring ( see text box ) .

identification according to u.n. reporting , in 2009 the government and the fn , substantially aided by unoci , made substantial progress in completing the processes of pre - electoral citizen identification and voter registration processes .

over 6.59 million persons were legally identified and 6.38 million registered as voters , but 2.7 million of this number had to have their identification for voting purposes confirmed .

citizen identification was a prerequisite of elections and was conducted concurrently with voter registration , but was a separate objective under the opa .

the lack of identification papers for millions of ivoirian and foreign residents in côte d'ivoire was a key issue underpinning the conflict and the years of subsequent political impasse .

lack of proof of national identity was common due to factors such as historical discrimination ; lack of administrative capacity ; lack of access of ivorian - born , second generation immigrants to legal identification rights and processes ; and destruction and poor administration of civil registers during and after the conflict .

persons eligible for inclusion on the voter roll included those entered on the 2000 election voter list and any other ivoirian citizen 18 years or older who could present proof of birth , although according to the carter center , "in practice , these distinctions were not applied and individuals seeking to be on the voter list did not have to demonstrate proof of nationality. .

this situation created the basis for disputation of the validity of entries on the voter roll , and complicated the voter registration process , turning what was initially planned as a six - week exercise into a two - year process .

peace process again imperiled: voter vetting and electoral disputes voter list vetting in november 2009 by the independent electoral commission ( iec ) validated a provisional voter list that included some 5.28 million registrations ( dubbed the "white list" ) , but left an additional 1.03 million unconfirmed ( the "grey list" ) .

challenges were later made to almost half of these , and while all but 33,476 were validated , the status of the other half remained unclear .

delays in these processes and later registration appeals , however , forced a postponement of national elections , which had been scheduled for november 29 , 2009 .

notwithstanding the delay , based on voter registration progress , the validation by the constitutional council on november 19 of 14 of 20 aspirant presidential candidates , and an amendment to the remaining electoral timeline established under the opa , elections were forecast to be held by late february or early march 2010 .

on february 11 , 2010 , however , prime minister soro ordered an indefinite suspension of the national voter registration contestation process following "tensions created by the process of validating the provisional voter list. .

this process had sown fears in some areas that courts , at the direction of the fpi - led government , would purge opposition voters from the voter rolls .

this controversy arose after the then - iec chairman , robert mambé , a pdci member , reportedly erroneously distributed 429,030 voter names to local iec offices during what he asserted was an internal iec voter vetting exercise .

gbagbo's supporters claimed that the names at issue were primarily of persons of northern descent .

after an interior ministry investigation , the gbagbo government accused mambé of fraudulently trying to rig the voter list on behalf of the opposition , and demanded that he resign .

the opposition came to mambé's defense and accused the government of trying to further delay elections and extend the president's term .

mambé rejected the claims of gbagbo's supporters and called for an independent unoci probe into the affair .

the situation was further inflamed when on february 11 president gbagbo unilaterally dissolved the government , dismissed the independent electoral commission ( iec ) , and called on soro to quickly appoint a new government and propose "a new credible electoral commission. .

gbagbo's actions followed weeks of growing dispute between the presidency and the iec over the mambé controversy and mambé's refusal to resign , and invalidated the prior election schedule , raising questions about when the long delayed presidential election would occur .

the iec dissolution was strongly opposed by the opposition camp , which labeled it "undemocratic and unconstitutional" and tantamount to a coup d'état .

in subsequent weeks , demonstrations broke out in multiple ivoirian cities .

some were violent , resulting in around 12 fatalities .

after a mediation visit by the opa facilitator , president blaise compaoré of burkina faso , a new iec was appointed on february 25 , and an opposition member was later chosen as its chairman .

opposition parties then agreed to join a new government , and political tensions eased .

processes leading up to the production of a final electoral list ( which gbagbo supporters later repeatedly asserted needed to be "disinfected" to remove northern names , with which they claimed it was "infested" ) , to be followed by the production and distribution of identity and voters' cards , began in march .

on march 17 , at a u.n. security council meeting following renewed opposition demands for an election , the ivoirian delegate stated that the 429,030 voters at issue in the mambé controversy had to be stricken from the voter list , which he said would then have to be audited over a one - two month period .

in addition , citing a series of attacks on state and fpi facilities in fn - controlled areas , he stated that a free vote could not be held in a "bisected territory" beset by an "atmosphere of intimidation," and insisted that full national reunification and complete disarmament of the fn rebels take place prior to elections .

this stance prompted the opposition to accuse the government of again attempting to delay voting .

in early may there were renewed tensions after the opposition , rejecting alleged interruptions to the electoral process and to prolonged electoral list vetting appeals procedures , called for an expedited election and announced a protest march .

it was later postponed , however , due to fears that it would spur violence .

2010: electoral processes progress apace in may 2010 , work toward finalization of the voter rolls , based on a late april agreement between parties to the opa , began anew with a resumption of the appeals process of "grey list" entries .

it was undertaken by 415 local electoral commissions and completed in june , and resulted in the addition of 496,738 persons to the "white list," creating a 5.78 million person voter roll .

this list , in turn , was subjected to a further appeals process involving the public display of voter sheets in early august , which resulted in 30,293 requests for the removal of provisional voters from the roll , and local court hearings on these petitions subsequently commenced .

these hearings were controversial , in light of allegations that elements of gbagbo's fpi had requested the removal of large numbers of names from the rolls , and sparked clashes among party militants in some areas , as well as the suspension of some court proceedings due to disputes over hearing procedures .

this process , which resulted in the deletion of 1,273 entries and the addition of 7,418 new ones , ended in late august .

a separate verification process focusing on 1.79 million "white list" entries , ran to the parallel public court - based appeals process between june and early august .

it resulted in the temporary removal from the provisional voters list of 55,000 persons "for whom no civil registry records could be found" or whose voter identification data did not match the civil registry .

it was decided that their cases would be adjudicated after the election .

after consultations between the main political parties , a final voters list of 5.73 million persons was announced , and on september 9 president gbagbo ordered by decree that national identity cards to be issued to the listed persons .

in accordance with the opa and u.n. security council resolution 1826 july 2008 , among others , srsg choi certified the final voters list .

positive momentum toward finalizing the voter rolls was accompanied by progress in setting out an election timeline .

on august 5 , prime minister soro announced that , as proposed by the iec , a first round of presidential elections would be held on october 31 , 2010 , and a presidential decree was signed enacting the date in law .

in late august , the iec announced a schedule for completing outstanding elections preparation tasks , and attention turned to completing them .

key tasks included: the distribution of 11,658,719 identity and voters cards ; the establishment of the electoral map of 10,179 polling sites and 20,073 polling stations ; the identification , recruitment and training of 66,000 polling staff ; the coordination of electoral observers ; the transportation of the electoral material ; the establishment of a results tally centre ; and the provision of security for the election .

the two month timeline for accomplishing these tasks was tight and — given côte d'ivoire's lengthy history of technical and political delays regarding accomplishment of election administration tasks — the potential risk of further electoral delays or operational failures , especially in remote areas , was high .

in general , however , the remaining electoral process progressed smoothly , with the exception of one significant controversy .

on october 21 , the iec announced plans to manually tabulate polling station results , rather than do so electronically , as previously planned , after some iec members and opposition candidates asserted that the electronic tabulation contractor , sils technology , might be biased due to the close ties of a company official to gbagbo's fpi party .

after consultations between choi , the representative of the opa facilitator , and the iec spurred by worries that manual tabulation would likely delay vote counting past the legally required three - day deadline , the iec agreed to implement the original electronic tabulation plan .

however , this process was subjected to oversight by a committee of experts .

final preparations for poll day — which were the responsibility of the iec but , as with significant portions of earlier tasks , were substantially carried out by unoci — were not completed until just prior to polling .

the joint distribution of voter and national identity cards by the iec and the national identification office ( oni ) began on october 6 .

these materials were transported by unoci to individual polling stations .

by october 19 , 83% of voter cards had been distributed in the commercial capital , abidjan , but only 40% had been distributed in other areas of the country .

distribution of ballot boxes and other polling materials took place between october 8 and 11 october , and sensitive electoral materials — ballot papers , indelible ink , and electoral documents — began on october 23 .

a two - day training of the 66,000 polling station workers took place in the final four days prior to the vote ; most poll workers received their training less than 48 hours prior to the start of polling .

according to the carter center , limited voter education outreach posters and similar information tools were produced by the iec , but in practice , voter education was largely delegated by the iec to "external actors including civil society , political parties , and the international community," and on polling day , little information on voting procedures was reportedly available to voters .

during the run - up to polling , unoci's public service radio station , covering 75% the national territory , broadcast "continuous information on the electoral process in five national languages" and gave "equal broadcast time to all candidates for campaign statements. .

the limited scope of voter education , and the distribution of public education appears to have been reflected in national variations in the incidence of invalid balloting , which ranged from 2.34% in abidjan to much higher levels in the remote , social services - poor north , such as 8.58% in the northeastern zanzan region .

election security election security — given the importance of the poll to the peace process and threats by militia and other elements to disrupt the electoral process — was a key challenge .

the opa had provided for the creation of an entity known as the integrated command centre ( icc ) , to be comprised of 8,000 mixed gendarmerie brigades and police units made up of jointly deployed government and fn force members .

under the opa , the icc was to be responsible for providing security during the elections .

icc units had few resources and limited operational capacities , however , and only slightly more than 1,000 men , about two - thirds from the government side and about a third from the fn , had been assigned to the icc by prior to the election .

in addition , the fn elements were not receiving salaries , unlike their government counterparts , creating morale problems .

while responsibility for elections security formally remained a responsibility of national authorities — and while the fn and the government deployed an additional 5,300 police and gendarmes to the icc at the last minute , on october 30 ( 2,500 and 2,800 , respectively ) — in light of the icc's limited capacity , unoci played a major role in providing security for the elections process .

unoci's efforts were aided by the u.n. - sanctioned french operation licorne military force .

to help ensure a secure election , on september 29 , the unsc passed resolution 1942 , authorizing a six - month , 500-person plus - up of unoci's military and police strength , bringing the total force size from 8,650 to 9,150 .

election campaign the two - week official electoral campaign , which was extensively preceded by technically prohibited informal campaigning , began on october 15 .

the leading contenders , gbagbo , ouattara , and henri konan bédié , a former head of state , campaigned nationwide , while the remaining 11 lesser candidates focused their campaigns in their political base areas .

the campaign was generally peaceful , with some limited exceptions involving "isolated acts of violence , provocation and vandalism , including tearing down campaign posters" and clashes between party militants in several towns .

political tensions also arose as a result of a sometimes provocative media environment and as a result of heated rhetoric by party supporters .

unoci reported that while access to state media remained uneven , and that "some opposition candidates ... denounced alleged unequal media coverage of the candidates by state - controlled media , candidates' access to state media significantly improved during the official electoral campaign , in comparison to the preceding period. .

the ruling fpi also reportedly claimed that it lacked access to fn - controlled media in the northern part of the country , notably to the fn - controlled television station tv notre patrie .

a regional think tank reported that "it is clear that prior to the campaigning period some candidates particularly the incumbent , used their advantageous positions in using public media to reach supporters. .

several high - level foreign delegations toured the country during the campaign period to monitor the campaign and urge ivoirians to conduct a peaceful election .

political parties generally appeared to observe a political party code of good conduct that 40 parties had signed in 2008 .

prior to the first round , members of the houphouëtist rally for democracy and peace ( rhdp ) coalition , which includes the bédié's democratic party of côte d'ivoire ( pdci ) and ouattara's rally of the republicans ( rdr ) and two other parties , mutually pledged to jointly support whichever of their two leading candidates eventually stood against gbagbo in the event of a run - off vote .

the first and second round polls first round voting during the first round vote on october 31 — which featured a historically high 83.7% voter participation rate , with 4.84 million voters out of 5.78 million registered going to the polls — was generally peaceful .

polling was observed by a 14-member civil society observer group , the civil society coalition for peace and democratic development in côte d'ivoire ( cosopci ) and some affiliated organizations , such as the convention of civil society of côte d'ivoire ( csci ) .

it was also monitored by international observers , including the carter center and the european union .

polling generally proceeded smoothly , in part due to the use of a single ballot and a scheme in which each polling station served a maximum of 400 voters , although it was reportedly marred , in some cases by technical failures .

the vote tallying process reportedly took place transparently and in accordance with applicable regulations .

it proceeded slowly in some instances , however , due to lack of transportation , some failures of the electronic tabulation transmission system , and the refusal of some polling staff to transmit official results prior to receiving stipend payments .

there were a very limited , statistically insignificant number of tallying irregularities reported , and in some instances , observers were illicitly barred from monitoring vote counting .

results the three top vote - earning candidates were: gbagbo , of the ivorian popular front ( fpi ) , running as the candidate of the presidential majority ( lmp ) coalition , who won , 756,504 votes , or a 38.04% vote share ; ouattara , of the rally of the republicans ( rdr ) , who won 1,481,091 votes , or a 32.07% share ; and bédié , of the democratic party of côte d'ivoire ( pdci ) , who garnered 1,165,532 votes , or a 25.24% share .

the next highest vote - earner was mabri toikeusse albert , of the union for democracy and peace in côte d'ivoire ( udpci ) , who won 2.57% of votes cast .

no other candidate won more than a 0.37% vote share .

since no candidate won an absolute majority of votes cast ( i.e .

over 50% of votes , as required by the ivoirian electoral code ) , a second round was required .

the iec released initial partial results on november 2 , and on november 3 , bédié's pdci party asserted that there had been irregularities and non - transparency in tallying , resulting in inaccurate results .

it called for the iec to stop issuing provisional results and requested a vote recount .

on november 4 , iec released complete provisional results .

the pdci's demand of a recount , underpinned by protest demonstrations by pdci supporters , was joined by the udpci party on november 4 and on november 6 by the rhdp coalition , which alleged that "serious irregularities" had occurred during the first round .

the constitutional council reportedly claimed , counter to the assertions of opposition applicants , that no appeals were filed within the legal time frame .

it effectively dismissed all allegations of irregularities by certifying the iec's announced provisional results .

after having assessed the entire first round election process , srsg choi certified the constitutional council - vetted first round results on november 12 .

second round the constitutional council initially scheduled the runoff vote for november 21 , counter to standing iec plans for it to be held on november 28 , but on november 9 , prime minister soro announced that the cabinet had decided that due to technical and logistical challenges , the second round would be held as originally planned by the iec .

president gbagbo fixed the date in law by decree .

on november 10 , the iec scheduled the second round electoral campaign between november 20 and 26 .

on november 7 , bédié called for his supporters to vote for ouattara in the second round , as per the rhdp coalition's pre - electoral agreement , and on november 10 , ouattara publicly promised to form a union government with bédié if he won the runoff .

in a later debate he also pledged to appoint fpi ministers .

in the second round , gbagbo , running as the candidate of the presidential majority ( lmp ) coalition , ran against ouattara , who ran as the candidate of the rhdp .

the carter center reported that , as in the first round campaign , technically prohibited informal campaigning occurred prior to the official campaign period .

the campaign also featured , for the first time ever in côte d'ivoire , a live debate that was broadcast nationally on november 25 .

the debate , a two hour and fifteen minute forum , was wide - ranging and substantive .

both candidates used the occasion to appeal for a peaceful democratic election and use of non - violence to achieve political ends .

the first half focused primarily on differences between the two candidates' views of the ivoirian conflict , the stalled peace process , and the election of 2000 , in which gbagbo came to power .

the latter portion highlighted policy differences between the two rivals and their respective policy agendas , focusing on such issues as deficiencies in the judicial system and state structure , military reform , and economic and social services policy .

notably , ouattara pledged to establish a truth and reconciliation commission if elected .

despite the substantive tone of the debate and the two candidates' appeals for peace and national reconciliation , the carter center reported that the runoff poll took place against the background of a tense and often negative campaign .

long - standing disputes about national identity issues and land ownership were … inflamed by negative political rhetoric and fueled by a partisan media .

sporadic incidents of violence , including several deaths , occurred in the days preceding the election and on election day itself .

it also stated that "the run - off climate quickly degenerated with widespread communication strategies based essentially on negative portrayals of the opposing camp and the use of politically affiliated newspapers to spread rumors. .

clashes between opposed youth party militants occurred in several places in the days leading up the poll , and at least seven people were reported killed in political violence in abidjan on the day before the vote , while at least two were killed in northern côte d'ivoire on polling day .

according to srsg choi , during the second round , state - controlled media , as in the first round , provided "unbalanced" coverage before and after the official electoral campaign , but "generally guaranteed equal access to the two presidential candidates" during the campaign .

he also noted that "major political parties['] ... newspapers... enjoyed complete freedom of press before , during and after the election. .

in light of the rising tension associated with the runoff vote , the government and the fn deployed 4,000 troops to join the integrated command center prior to the vote .

plans called for an additional 1,500 government soldiers to be deployed to fn - controlled areas , to be accompanied by 500 fn soldiers , while 1,500 fn troops would deploy to government - held areas and be joined by 500 government troops .

president gbagbo also imposed a curfew after 11 pm on the day of the poll to ensure the security of ballot box returns and freedom of movement for the security forces .

the carter center and other vote - monitoring groups reported that substantial improvements in poll worker training and administration were made in support of the runoff poll , and that logistics in support of the polling improved compared to those provided during the first round .

the carter center also reported that while "voting and counting operations were largely well - conducted by polling station officials," many of the same deficiencies relating to the supply and distribution of election materials that occurred during the first poll were reiterated during the runoff .

the carter mission also reported that an iec order that tabulation results be publicly displayed at local precincts was applied in only about half of the locations it monitored .

according to the united nations , voting reportedly generally proceeded peacefully and transparently , was "generally conducted in a democratic climate ; " featured a voter turnout of 81.1% — nearly as high as that during the first round .

there reportedly were , however , "some incidents , which were at times violent ; " "isolated disruptions," including electoral violence ; and irregularities in a small minority of polling places .

the carter center , like the european union ( eu ) observation mission , also reported witnessing acts of "potential voter intimidation in some five percent of the polling stations visited a higher level than was reported for the first round , and perhaps a reflection of the hardened tactics of the run - off campaign. .

similarly , its findings stated that it had received but not witnessed "serious election day irregularities occurred after the close of polling stations [reported to include] ... cases of efforts to obstruct the physical transfer of ballot boxes and results , the destruction of election materials , and the theft of ballot boxes. .

a contested runoff on the runoff polling day , the gbagbo and ouattara camps accused one other of orchestrating electoral irregularities , voter intimidation , or actions aimed at blocking voters from accessing polls .

some complaints of this nature were confirmed by european union election observers .

this outcome was not surprising , even though the vast majority of polling had occurred without problems .

the possibility that the election would be controversial had long been predicted by analysts , given the longstanding difficulties encountered in conducting a poll , the use of the slogan "we win or we win" by gbagbo supporters , and pre - election statements by supporters of gbagbo and ouattara that they would never accept a win by their rival .

many observers believed that gbagbo would not have agreed to allow voting to occur unless he felt assured of a win , for example , on the basis that he felt that the opposition would not remain united during a runoff vote ; because he believed that electoral institutions and legal process were structured in his favor ; and a belief the international community , in a desire for an end to the ivoirian crisis , might accept some flaws in the polling process .

if this analysis is correct , the current crisis suggests that he miscalculated regarding multiple factors: strong electoral opposition to his continued incumbency ; the strength of international support for the opa and the role of u.n. certification vis - à - vis ivoirian legal processes ( i.e. , the role of the constitutional council ) ; and the unwillingness of the international community — to date — to alter the election outcome through a negotiated resolution to the crisis , despite the threat of political violence .

an early indication that the vote would , in fact , be legally contested emerged the day after polling , when gbagbo's campaign manager announced plans to contest the results in at least three heavily pro - ouattara districts in the north .

on december 1 , the gbagbo campaign formally filed five applications for the annulment of the second round of balloting in eight northern departments "because of serious irregularities in the integrity of the poll. .

these related primarily to allegations of the absence of lmp representatives at the polls , including through acts of kidnapping or physical obstruction ; ballot stuffing ; transport of ballot tally sheets by unauthorized persons ; establishment of impediments to voting ; a lack of voting booths and of guaranteed secret suffrage ; and the misattribution of unearned or fictitious votes to ouattara .

the constitutional council then reviewed the results and on december 3 overturned the findings of the iec , as discussed above , and proclaimed gbagbo winner of the election .

appendix b .

background to the crisis historical background as discussed in the body of this report ( see text box "côte d'ivoire: country overview" ) , in the mid - 1980s , demands for increased democratization , periodic social unrest , and political tensions emerged .

long - term cocoa price and production declines , growing national debt , austerity measures , and pressures on land , in particular new tree cropping land for cocoa , which contributed to a gradual economic decline in côte d'ivoire , helped foster these political dynamics .

while economic decline underpinned these tensions , social competition increasingly began to be expressed through ethnic , regional , and religious identity .

the large , mostly muslim populations of immigrant workers and northern ivoirians resident in the south faced increasing resistance by southern ethnic groups and the state to their full participation in national civic life and rights to citizenship .

these developments set the stage for subsequent political developments and contributed to the 2002 rebellion and the years of political impasse that followed .

bédié administration houphouët , who died in december 1993 , was immediately succeeded by the president of parliament , henri konan bédié .

he declared himself president , in accordance with provisions in the 1990 constitution , even though then - prime minister alassane dramane ouattara — a former world bank economist who had held his post since it was created in 1990 — was widely seen as houphouët's designated successor .

ouattara initially contested bédié's succession claim , but resigned as prime minister after the french government accepted the claim and left the country , taking up a position as deputy managing director of the international monetary fund .

he remained a key political figure , however .

in mid - 1994 ouattara supporters — predominantly northern muslims , intellectuals , and young professionals , and defectors from the reformist wing of the ruling democratic party of côte d'ivoire ( pdci ) — formed a new political party , the republican rally ( rdr ) that became a vehicle for ouattara's later return to ivoirian electoral politics in 1995 .

employing his influence over houphouët's pdci , bédié began to consolidate his own power base , in part by replacing ouattara allies with loyalists , and by assuming the pdci chairmanship in1994 .

bédié emphasized the close linkages and sources of continuity between his government and the system he had inherited from houphouët , but many observers saw him as a considerably less effective leader than houphouët .

bédié also ushered in a transformation of ivoirian politics that helped spur the later division of the country .

increasingly , bédié was accused by critics of blaming immigrants for many of the country's problems , and of fueling public anti - immigrant sentiments .

he used these divisions to rally political support , making use of a nationalist ideology known as ivoirité .

it defined southerners as "authentic" ivoirians , in opposition to "circumstantial" ones , that is , northerners and immigrants , and helped initiate the later evolution of ultra - nationalist , xenophobic political views among some in the south .

it also helped fuel increasingly volatile national politics encompassing electoral competition ; military , student , and labor unrest ; conflict over land and residency rights ; and periodic mass protests , some violent , over economic and other issues .

the 1995 election , candidate eligibility , and the nationality issue the bédié government again increased its power after presidential elections in october 1995 , which were held under a controversial electoral law passed by the pdci - dominated parliament just prior to the elections , prompting several mass demonstrations calling for electoral transparency .

bédié won 95% of the vote , but the electoral process and outcome was vocally protested by opposition parties , on the grounds that the electoral law had been specifically engineered to exclude ouattara .

the electoral law barred persons lacking "pure" ivoirian parentage and those who had resided abroad during the previous five years from standing as electoral candidates .

ouattara was disqualified from standing in the poll because he had resided in the united states while working for the imf from december 1993 , and was of alleged mixed burkinabe - ivoirian descent .

the opposition fpi presidential candidate laurent gbagbo , for his part , withdrew from the race , alleging that the electoral process was subject to extensive state manipulation .

despite continuing ire over the presidential election , the political environment became less volatile after peaceful legislative elections in november that drew cross - party participation .

the pdci won a decisive victory , taking 149 of the 175 seats ; the remaining ones were split between the fpi ( 9 ) and the rdr ( 14 ) .

the vote showed distinct ethno - regional divisions in voting patterns , with the rdr gaining and the pdci losing support in the north , while gbagbo's fpi predominated in the central - west region and the pdci in urban areas and in central and western parts of the country .

bédié continued to pursue efforts to consolidate his power .

in january 1996 , the cabinet was shuffled ; military general robert guéï , who had previously been relieved of his military command post after being appointed minister of employment and civil service in october 1995 , was made minister of sports .

in may 1996 , following news reports that there had been a coup attempt planned by restive soldiers in mid - 1995 , the army leadership was shaken up .

guéï was demoted to a minor administrative post because the planned coup was attributed to elements under his former command .

the latter part of bédié's tenure was beset by accusations of human rights abuses associated with security force crackdowns on the opposition ; student protests ; economic pressures ; and accusations of corruption by domestic critics and donor governments .

in 1998 , the national assembly passed a series of constitutional changes viewed as highly favorable to the incumbent .

they increased executive control of elections , extended the presidential term of office , and codified in the constitution nationalities laws defining political candidacy requirements .

candidates were required to be ivoirian by birth , parentage , and to have lived continuously in côte d'ivoire for ten years prior to running .

military coup of december 1999 pressures on the bédié government came to a head when disgruntled soldiers mutinied over pay and living conditions , commandeering public buildings and firing into the air .

the government quickly promised to meet their demands , but the mutineers then altered their position , demanding that general robert guéï be awarded his former chief of staff post , from which he had been removed by bédié after refusing to crack down on protesters .

guéï , who had a history of strained relations with bédié , had served as former chief of staff from 1990 until 1995 and had founded a rapid commando intervention force that was reportedly at the center of the mutiny , then stepped in as a "spokesman" for the soldiers on the second day of the mutiny , december 24 .

he announced that the mutineers would establish a national committee of public salvation ( cnsp ) , and that the parliament , government , the constitutional council and the supreme court were dissolved .

guéï promised to maintain respect for democracy , eradicate government corruption , re - appropriate funds seized in corrupt dealings , rewrite the constitution , and hold transparent elections within a year .

bédié , who at first sought refuge in the french embassy , fled to france after a sojourn in togo .

after negotiations , all major political parties , including bédié's pdci , agreed top support the "transitional" cnsp junta , which was established in early 2000 .

it established a 27-member consultative commission on constitutional and electoral matters , composed of representatives of the main political parties , civil society and labor organizations , and religious institutions .

this entity drafted proposals for a new constitution and electoral code , which it presented in march 2000 in anticipation of a later referendum on these proposals .

guéï's leadership as junta leader , guéï was initially seen as a pro - ouattara , partly due to bédié's opposition to ouattara .

many ivoirians nursed hopes that the guéï's administration would bridge the growing ethno - regional divisions in the country and usher in a rapid transition to transparent constitutional civilian rule .

guéï's hoped - for collegial and consensual leadership , however , developed into a governing style based on top - down commands and a public rhetoric focused on discipline and order .

personal political ambition also came to define his leadership .

he made public statements replete with grandiose patriotic rhetoric and flattering self - representations , casting himself as the redeemer of common citizens' aspirations against the machinations of corrupt politicians , leading some to label him a narcissist .

his leadership increasingly came to be seen as motivated by the goal of eliminating perceived rivals in the military , weakening the rdr and the potential for a strong ouattara candidacy , and getting himself elected into office .

in april 2000 he created a political party , the rassemblement pour le consensus national ( rally for national consensus ) that was expected to support his candidacy .

the guéï government began a program to issue national identity cards to citizens and resident permits to foreigners , as a prerequisite for voter registration ahead of elections .

the issue was considered sensitive because it was seen as providing a potential means for the state to exclude native - born ivoirians of northern origins and the ivoirian - born children of immigrants from participating in the political process .

it also would enable officials to formally differentiate between ivoirians and non - ivoirians , a point of controversy because id checks of persons of perceived northern origins and foreign west african economic migrants were reportedly often used to threaten such persons with deportation , refusal of employment , residence , or land rights .

the rule of law also suffered in other ways .

in response to public protests against rising crime , the military undertook to arrest criminals directly , especially targeting organized gangs in abidjan .

the use of military forces to enforce civilian criminal law , however , reportedly prompted some members of the military to themselves engage in acts of banditry and highway robbery .

extortion and harassment reportedly became common at military roadblocks .

military indiscipline was not limited to soldiers' public conduct .

in march 2000 , soldiers mutinied over salary demands ; officers were taken hostage and one base commander was killed .

in july , troops mutinied over non - payment of $9,000 allotments that they claimed they had been promised by guéï after the coup of the previous december .

soldiers looted , stole vehicles and weapons , and paralyzed commerce and public services in abidjan and the secondary cities of bouaké and korhogo .

the uprising was violently crushed by the gendarmerie following imposition of a curfew and after the negotiation of a far lower allotment payment .

only a fraction of the promised payment was subsequently made , due to government insolvency , and over 50 of hundreds of mutineers were court marshaled .

urban infrastructure damage due to the rebellion was extensive .

key political developments in 2000 in july 2000 , constitutional changes were approved by an 87% margin in a referendum that featured a 57% voter participation rate .

while northerners voted strongly ( 68% ) against the changes , a widespread boycott of the vote in the north meant that voter turnout in that region was low .

the provisions required that both parents of presidential candidates be ivoirian - born citizens ; previously only one parent had been required to be of ivoirian birth .

also in july , an rdr party event was halted by security forces and an rdr demonstration in support of french statements cautioning against the exclusion of candidates was broken up .

as the year proceeded , harassment of muslims and northerners by security officials reportedly increased .

in august , guéï launched a failed bid to become the pdci presidential candidate , and he later announced plans to run as a "people's candidate. .

later in august , rdr supporters and their opponents clashed after security forces halted an rdr demonstration , and elections slated for september were postponed until october .

as the election drew nearer , public security deteriorated .

harassment of immigrants by security forces reportedly increased .

in september , the high council of imams ( csi ) and national islamic council ( cni ) warned that unfair restrictions on electoral eligibility would result in social unrest .

they also condemned official harassment of northerners and muslims , and later called for a boycott of the election , after ouattara was excluded .

during pre - poll voter registration , nationality documentation restrictions prevented many northerners from registering as new voters .

on september 18 , an attack on guéï's residence was suppressed .

the attack , a putative attempted putsch and assassination by members of the military and his own presidential guard , was suspected by some observers to be have been mounted by guéï himself as a pretext to purge the military of perceived opponents and undercut political opposition to his candidacy .

after the incident , a state of emergency was declared and political meetings were banned , and a number of predominantly northern soldiers were arrested ; some were reportedly summarily executed , while others reportedly were tortured .

in october , the supreme court , headed by tia kone , a former personal legal advisor to guéï , declared 14 of 19 prospective presidential candidates ineligible to run , including six pdci candidates .

included among them was bédié and the pdci's official presidential nominee , emile bombet , due to embezzlement allegations in both cases , and ouattara .

only guéï and the fpi's gbagbo , along with three minor candidates , were allowed to run .

guéï opponents claimed that the supreme court should also have banned guéï's candidacy because military law required him to resign from the military six months prior to the election .

guéï had not met that requirement , and when a newspaper reporter raised the question in an article , the reporter was beaten by the presidential guard .

a similar legal question was raised in relation to the candidacy of gbagbo , whose status as a state employee may have made him technically ineligible to run .

october 2000 election after further electoral controversies , including a suspension of u.s. and european union ( eu ) election aid and a call by the rdr and pdci for an election boycott , polling was held on october 22 .

extensive violence , which revealed how deep - seated ethno - regional and religious divisions had become , followed the poll .

on october 23 , the fpi , claiming that the election had been rigged by guéï and that gbagbo had won , initiated large street protests , which were joined by elements of the security forces .

in the face of gbagbo's claim to victory , ouattara and the rdr demanded that the election be re - run .

this demand prompted clashes between fpi and rdr supporters , resulting in hundreds of deaths and thousands of injuries .

gbagbo's victory was ratified days later by the supreme court , which awarded him 53% of the vote .

the clashes quickly took on an ethnic and religious tone ; muslim neighborhoods , seen as hotbeds of rdr support , were attacked by fpi supporters , and several mosques were damaged or destroyed , as was a church in retaliation .

many members of the security forces joined in these attacks , and were later accused of human rights abuses after 57 bodies were later discovered in yopougon , an area outside abidjan .

all of the victims , later identified as northern muslims , had been shot at close range .

at least 18 bodies were also pulled from the lagoon surrounding abidjan soon after the fpi - rdr clashes .

some of these victims were reported to have been gbagbo supporters fired upon by members of the presidential guard as they marched on the presidential compound .

some were reportedly forced to jump off bridges , where many drowned .

less extensive incidents of election unrest also occurred in several secondary cities .

gbagbo government takes power the new government faced a number of immediate tasks that required gbagbo to rapidly transition from being an opposition leader whose legitimacy derived from his position as an outsider and popular street activist to becoming a national leader capable of integrating the diverse and conflicting interests of a divided nation .

first , the government had to launch a credible investigation into responsibility for the deaths during the elections — especially the cases of summary mass execution .

its other most important immediate task was to hold a free and fair legislative election , and to prove that the fpi was not a minority party , as its detractors claimed , while the former ruling party , the pdci , was under pressure to demonstrate that it remained a viable party .

the legislative election was held with decidedly mixed success , primarily related to ouattara's disqualification as a parliamentary candidate by the supreme court , on the basis that his nationality certificate was technically invalid .

ouattara's rdr boycotted the polls , rejecting what it called the gbagbo's "sham reconciliation process," and mounted protests .

the rdr's actions had a significant effect .

in abidjan , large and violent rdr protests were held .

in the north , prefectures and constabulary stations were attacked , and the vote was widely boycotted .

ouattara's disqualification prompted international concern over the poll's validity , and major international organizations and donor governments did not deploy election monitoring missions .

despite such obstacles , voting went smoothly nationwide , except in the north , where elections could be held in only four of 32 electoral districts , due to attacks on election equipment and the subjection of election officials to intimidation .

in the south , by contrast , voting was peaceful but the turnout rate was low , at about 34% .

a by - election was held in the north in january 2001 .

while calls by the rdr for another boycott resulted in very high abstention rate ( about 87% ) , the poll went forward peacefully , in part due to close supervision and heavy security , despite being held in a tense atmosphere one week after an attempted coup .

despite rising political tensions and social cleavages , in 2001 and 2002 there were signs that côte d'ivoire was beginning to make limited progress toward national reconciliation and political compromise .

in late 2001 , a national reconciliation forum , in which all of the major parties , constituencies , and key leaders participated , was organized by the government .

it focused on barriers toward national unity , governance , civil - military relations , immigration , and ethno - regional and religious divisions .

september 2002 rebellion guarded optimism by many over the country's prospects was undermined on september 19 , 2002 , when a military rebellion quickly turned into an attempted coup d'état against the government while gbagbo was on an official visit to italy .

the rebels , made up of units of aggrieved soldiers , predominantly of northern ethnic origins , were opposed by loyalist units , predominantly southern in their ethnic makeup .

although a military takeover of the key government institutions and facilities was prevented by loyalist forces , the insurrection rapidly broadened an existing national fissure between north and south .

during the initial uprising , guéï was killed under unclear circumstances .

after clashes with loyalists near the commercial capital , abidjan , and elsewhere , the rebel units gradually withdrew to the central city of bouaké and from there rapidly took control of over half of the country .

they then formed a political organization called the patriotic movement of côte d'ivoire ( mpci , after the french ) , and began to articulate a political agenda and lay out demands , and reportedly appointed provincial governors .

the mpci took control of local administration in northern rebel - held territory , and civil and commercial life reportedly resumed a relatively routine character after being disrupted by population shifts and displacements .

the provision of social services , however , sharply declined under rebel administration , and never recovered fully .

periodic , sometimes fierce fighting ensued , as the government unsuccessfully attempted to retake towns along the north - south dividing line .

the mpci also allied itself with two small rebel groups in western côte d'ivoire .

the groups , which reportedly included many liberians and sierra leonean combatants , announced their existence in november 2002 by seizing several towns in the west .

in late 2002 , early 2003 , and periodically since , the west has been the scene of armed clashes over territory ; communal violence related to immigrants' land and residency rights ; and criminal armed violence .

international peacekeepers also clashed with the western rebels in the first several years after the rebellion .

peace mediation the country remained divided and often tense in the years after the uprising , but military conflict generally subsided after 2002 , with some notable exceptions ( eg , periodic but localized armed conflict in the west ; occasional ceasefire line provocations ; and a brief resumption of warfare in late 2004 ) .

international conflict mediation efforts , notably by ecowas , began soon after the rebellion , but made little progress until early 2003 , when a french - brokered peace accord , the linas - marcoussis accord ( lma ) , was signed .

it allowed gbagbo to remain in power , but provided for the creation of an interim government of national reconciliation ( gnr ) under a "consensus" prime minister .

the lma charged the gnr with preparing for presidential elections in 2005 and reforming the armed forces with external aid to ensure ethnic and regional balance in the military .

it required the disarming of all armed forces , the expulsion of foreign mercenaries , and the creation of an international lma monitoring group .

an lma annex set out a roadmap for resolving key issues underlying the crisis .

it called for reform of electoral candidacy and citizenship eligibility rules , the electoral system , and land tenure and press laws ; creation of a human rights abuse panel ; and freedom of movement and post - war economic recovery planning .

no war , no peace the lma was immediately opposed — vocally and with violence , including assaults on french - owned businesses and homes — by partisans of gbagbo's fpi party and elements of the military and government .

they asserted that it ceded too much power and made too many other concessions to the rebels .

gbagbo , under pressure to repudiate the lma , indicated that he had signed it reluctantly under intense foreign pressure .

these and later remarks hindered implementation of the lma , which was later amended by a series of internationally mediated accords , though its basic provisions remained a keystone of most of these later agreements .

from early 2003 through early 2007 , the two sides endeavored to implement the provisions of the lma and subsequent peace agreements by pursuing a range of political and legal reform processes and reaching various agreements to achieve military and militia disarmament and demobilization .

focal issues included the sequence and manner in which disarmament , voter registration , citizen identification , and elections would take place ; the content of proposed laws aimed at implementing the key provisions of the lma and other agreements , and the manner in which they would be enacted ; and differences over the scope and exercise of presidential authority .

these efforts were overseen and sometimes led by two consensus prime ministers .

the first was seydou diarra , appointed in 2003 after the lma was signed .

charles konan banny succeeded diarra in december 2005 after a crisis over delayed national elections and an internationally endorsed , non - electoral extension of gbagbo's tenure in office for a year .

during this period , notably under banny's tenure , talks and other cooperative efforts between the opposed parties sometimes resulted in significant progress toward the key goals set forth in the various peace accords .

such progress was , however , often interspersed with and undercut by political backtracking and obstructionism by one or both parties , political gridlock , and frequent accusations by one or both sides charging their opponent with undermining progress toward peace , often spurred by incendiary political rhetoric and partisan journalism .

similarly , mediation efforts by external governments or u.n. officials , while sometimes nominally successful , were often criticized by one or both sides as being biased .

armed conflict briefly flared on several occasions , most notably in november 2004 , when a government attempt to attack the north was repulsed by french and u.n. troops .

this effort included an air attack on a french base ( see text box "france's military presence in côte d'ivoire" in body of report ) .

mass protests , sometimes including violent mob actions , subsequently periodically punctuated the conflict .

the political division of the country also led to breakdowns in law and order , frequent impunity for security officials accused of human rights abuses and other crimes , and a rise in corruption .

due to the weak rule of law , local officials on both sides of the conflict reportedly gained access to and at times diverted official revenues .

such funding sources have taken the form of official taxes and fees and illicit , extortion - based payments , from such sources as domestic and international trade in goods , travelers , state - controlled firms ; agricultural commodity sales , notably in the key cocoa sector ; and illicit diamond exports .

access to such revenue streams was long seen as undermining political support for a quick resolution of the conflict .

international peacekeeping role the international community supported the lma and later subsidiary agreements , notably through resolutions by the u.n. security council .

the council first endorsed the lma in early 2003 , when it authorized two peacekeeping force deployments , one french and one by the economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) , dubbed ecomici .

they were charged with helping to implement the lma and a may 2003 ceasefire accord ; resolving the conflict ; guaranteeing their own security and freedom of movement ; and protecting civilians .

in may 2003 , after fighting in the west , the security council created a u.n. mission in côte d'ivoire ( minuci ) , a political and military monitoring mission .

in early 2004 , the security council authorized the u.n. operation in côte d'ivoire ( unoci ) , which took over minuci's mandate and incorporated the ecomici forces in april 2004 ; see textbox entitled "unoci" for more information on the mission .

peace process of 2007 a new peace accord , the ouagadougou agreement , was signed in march 2007 after opposition party - backed talks mediated by burkina faso's president between president gbagbo and fn leader guillaume soro .

the accord was preceded in 2006 by halting progress toward citizen identification ; voter registration ; disarmament ; and some other elements of the peace process , but also by marked tension over these processes and between president gbagbo and prime minister banny in the wake of an imported toxic waste dumping scandal .

such tension also arose over the two leaders' conflicting claims regarding their peace process implementation decision - making powers , notably after the u.n. security council passed resolution 1721 , which recognized banny's broad power to implement the peace process , but did not , according to gbagbo's interpretation , reduce gbagbo's constitutional authorities .

the 2007 accord superseded but incorporated all earlier agreements .

under its provisions , fn leader guillaume soro became foreign minister .

the accord also renewed and amended processes for conducting citizen identification , voter registration , elections ( but mandated no election deadline ) , and provided for the formation of a new transitional government ; laid out procedures for disarmament and a merging of the fn and the government military - security structures ; created a youth civic service , a political party code of conduct , and an accord monitoring organ made up of the leaders of the top political parties ; re - established state structures and authority nation - wide ; and requested the lifting of u.n. sanctions and a reduced role for international peacekeepers , who were to be gradually replaced in certain areas by the newly merged security forces .

while many of the accord's provisions were fulfilled , most notably the conduct of the 2010 presidential election , many key elements remain significantly unimplemented .

international reaction to the accord was generally positive but cautionary .

while welcome as an ivorian solution to an ivorian conflict , it gave substantial leeway to presidential authority , which was viewed as potentially leading to contention over accord implementation , especially since it reduced the international political and military role in the peace process , provided no sanctions for implementation failures , and empowered only the four leading political parties .

appendix c. acronym tabl .

