the devastation caused by the january 12 , 2010 , earthquake in haiti focused world attention on the humanitarian crisis and prompted u.s. leaders to reconsider policies on haitian migration .

most recently , the u.s. centers for disease control ( cdc ) has stated: "an epidemic cholera strain has been confirmed in haiti , causing the first cholera outbreak in haiti in at least 100 years. .

some members of congress have long criticized the interdiction and mandatory detention of haitians who attempted to enter the united states without proper immigration documents as too harsh given country conditions .

proponents of immigration control policies have held sway for many years in large part because they argue that more lenient treatment of haitians would serve as a magnet for illegal migration from the poorest nation in this hemisphere .

whether the balance should tip more toward humanitarian policies as a consequence of the humanitarian crises that resulted from last year's earthquake in haiti is an issue before the 112 th congress .

the issue of haitian tps has arisen several times in the past few years , most notably after the u.s .

ambassador declared haiti a disaster in september 2004 due to the magnitude of the effects of tropical storm jeanne .

more recently , a series of tropical cyclones in 2008 resulted in hundreds of deaths and led some to label the city of gonaives uninhabitable .

the administration of president george w. bush did not grant tps or other forms of blanket relief to haitians , nor was legislation that would have provided tps to haitians , such as h.r .

522 in the 110 th congress , enacted .

opponents of haitian tps traditionally argue that it would result in an immigration amnesty for unauthorized haitians and foster illegal migration from the island .

the scale of the current humanitarian crisis — estimated thousands of haitians dead and reported total collapse of the infrastructure in the capital city of port au prince — led dhs to announce on january 13 , 2010 , that it is temporarily halting the deportation of haitians .

"tps is in the range of considerations we consider in a disaster," stated dhs deputy press secretary matthew chandler , "but our focus remains on saving lives. .

in the 111 th congress , representative alcee hastings introduced h.r .

144 , which would have made nationals from haiti eligible for tps status .

h.r .

264 , introduced by representative shelia jackson - lee , included a sense of congress that "the secretary of homeland security should be more liberal with respect to haiti in deciding whether to designate that country for temporary protected status. .

neither bill received action in the 111 th congress .

on january 15 , 2010 , dhs secretary napolitano granted tps for 18 months to haitian nationals who were in the united states as of january 12 , 2010 .

she stated: "providing a temporary refuge for haitian nationals who are currently in the united states and whose personal safety would be endangered by returning to haiti is part of this administration's continuing efforts to support haiti's recovery. .

secretary napolitano extended and re - designated tps for haitians on may 17 , 2011 .

the extension becomes effective july 23 , 2011 , and enables eligible individuals who arrived up to one year after the earthquake in haiti to receive tps .

the re - designation targets individuals who were allowed to enter the united states immediately after the earthquake on temporary visas or humanitarian parole but were not covered by the initial tps grant .

the extension and re - designation is for a period of 18 months , through january 22 , 2013 .

those haitians who are deemed cuban - haitian entrants are among the subset of foreign nationals who are eligible for federal benefits and cash assistance .

those haitians who are newly arriving lprs , however , are barred from the major federal benefits and cash assistance for the first five years after entry .

over a decade ago , title iv of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) established comprehensive restrictions on the eligibility of noncitizens for means - tested public assistance and limited the eligibility of refugees and asylees to five years .

foreign nationals who enter the united states on temporary visas ( i.e. , nonimmigrants ) and those who enter the united states without authorization are barred from any federal public benefit except the emergency services and programs expressly listed in prwora .

amendments in p.l .

105-33 and p.l .

105-185 extended the period of food stamp / supplemental security income ( ssi ) / medicaid ( but not temporary assistance for needy families ) eligibility for refugees and asylees from five to seven years and added cuban and haitian entrants to those eligible for these benefits for seven years .

as noted above , u.s. citizens and lprs have family in haiti for whom they have petitioned for visas to become lprs in the united states .

according to the dos , there were 105,193 haitians who had approved petitions to immigrate to the united states at the end of fy2010 .

last year , the government of canada established the haiti special measures program to expedite the processing of haitians with family members in canada and reported processing more than five times the number of applications in 2010 than were processed in 2009 for the same time frame .

some have called on dhs secretary napolitano to use the humanitarian parole authority under the ina to allow haitians with approved visa petitions to enter the united states without waiting for visas to become available .

those opposed to expediting the admission of haitians argue that it would not be fair to other foreign nationals waiting to reunite with their families .

the cholera outbreak , which cdc confirmed on october 21 , 2010 , has renewed appeals to congress to enact legislation that would expedite the admission of haitians with family in the united states .

although some concerns are being raised about the possible spread of cholera by haitians coming to the united states , others point out that medical examinations and health screenings are core features of u.s. immigration policy .

supporters of the current policy assert that expediting the admission of haitians would not be in the u.s. national interest at this time , especially given the cholera outbreak .

there are concerns that the ongoing crisis in haiti may result in mass migration from the country .

not only has there been massive displacement of people caused by the earthquake , but observers of the situation warn of potential and widespread lawlessness as well as outbreaks of disease .

these health , safety , and security factors — individually or in combination — could trigger an exodus of haitians seeking refuge in nearby countries , including the united states .

moreover , the unexpected return to haiti on january 16 , 2011 , of jean - claude "baby doc" duvalier , the dictator deposed 25 years ago , has heightened fears that political turmoil may ensue .

the practice of haitians fleeing by the thousands began when duvalier was dictator .

at least five federal agencies now handle haitian migrants: dhs's coast guard ( interdiction ) ; customs and border protection ( apprehensions and inspections ) ; immigration and customs enforcement ( detention ) ; u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( credible fear determination ) ; and doj's eoir ( asylum and removal hearings ) .

dhs would take the lead in handling a potential mass migration and has long had a set of operational plans in place to respond to such a situation .

in her tps announcement , secretary napolitano warned of the consequences of haitians fleeing to the united states: at this moment of tragedy in haiti it is tempting for people suffering in the aftermath of the earthquake to seek refuge elsewhere .

but attempting to leave haiti now will only bring more hardship to the haitian people and nation... .

it is important to note that tps will apply only to those individuals who were in the united states as of january 12 , 2010 .

those who attempt to travel to the united states after january 12 , 2010 will not be eligible for tps and will be repatriated .

the balancing of dhs's border security and immigration control responsibilities during an ongoing humanitarian crisis poses a unique challenge .

in january 2011 , dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) bureau deported 27 haitians , 26 of whom reportedly had criminal convictions and one of whom was deemed a national security risk .

ice had announced in december 2010 that it was resuming the haitian deportations that were halted immediately following the 2010 earthquake .

reportedly 300-350 haitians with criminal convictions are currently in custody and slated for removal .

in response to questions about who among those haitians with orders of removal were actually scheduled for deportation , ice spokeswoman barbara gonzalez stated that the decisions would be made "consistent with our domestic immigration enforcement priorities. .

advocates for the haitians point out that an estimated 1.3 million haitians remain displaced from their homes after the 2010 earthquake and that the forced repatriation of haitians would fuel the political turmoil in haiti .

some argue further that deportation would endanger the lives of the deportees because the haitian government often detains criminals who have been repatriated , and the haitian jails are riddled with cholera .

ice , however , maintains that deportation is preferable to releasing large numbers of people with criminal convictions back into u.s. communities .

an ice official said dos had been working with haitian officials "to ensure that the resumption of removals is conducted in a safe , humane manner with minimal disruption to ongoing rebuilding efforts. .

