the differences between the sunni and shiite islamic sects are rooted in disagreements over the succession to the prophet muhammad , who died in 632 ad , and over the nature of leadership in the muslim community .

the historic debate centered on whether to award leadership to a qualified , pious individual who would follow the customs of the prophet or to transmit leadership exclusively through the prophet's bloodline .

the question was settled initially when community leaders elected a companion of the prophet's named abu bakr to become the first c aliph ( arabic for "successor" ) .

although most muslims accepted this decision , some supported the candidacy of ali ibn abi talib , the prophet's cousin and son - in - law , husband of the prophet's daughter fatima .

ali had played a prominent role during the prophet's lifetime , but he lacked seniority within the arabian tribal system and was bypassed .

this situation was unacceptable to some of ali's followers , who considered abu bakr and the two succeeding caliphs ( umar and uthman ) to be illegitimate .

ali's followers believed that the prophet muhammad himself had named ali as successor and that the status quo was a violation of divine order .

a few of ali's partisans orchestrated the murder of the third caliph uthman in 656 ad , and ali was named caliph .

ali , in turn , was assassinated in 661 ad , and his son hussein ( 680 ad ) died in battle against forces of the sunni caliph .

ali's eldest son hassan ( d. 670 ad ) is also revered by shiite muslims , some of who claim he was poisoned by the sunni caliph muawiyah .

those who supported ali's ascendancy became later known as "shi'a," a word stemming from the term " shi ' at ali," meaning "supporters" or "helpers of ali. .

others respected and accepted the legitimacy of his caliphate but opposed political succession based on bloodline to the prophet .

this group , who constituted the majority of muslims , came to be known in time as "sunni," meaning "followers of [the prophet's] customs [ sunna ]. .

the caliphate declined as a religious and political institution after the 13 th century , although the term "caliph" continued to be used by some muslim leaders until it was abolished in 1924 by turkey's first president mustafa kemal ataturk .

the decline and abolition of the caliphate became a powerful religious and political symbol to some sunni islamist activists during the 19 th and 20 th centuries .

these activists argued that leaders in the islamic world had undermined the caliphate by abandoning the "true path" of islam .

inspired by these figures , some contemporary sunni islamist extremists , such as osama bin laden and others , advocate the restoration of a new caliphate based on "pure" islamic principles .

the religious , ethnic , linguistic , and socioeconomic diversity that exists within the global muslim community presents significant challenges to the reemergence of centralized , pan - sectarian , and widely recognized islamic religious leadership .

although there are considerable differences between sunni and shiite islam , the two islamic sects share common traditions , beliefs , and doctrines .

all muslims believe that the prophet muhammad was the messenger of allah ( the arabic word for god ) .

all believe that they must abide by the revelations given to the prophet by allah ( as recorded in the quran ) and by the hadith ( sayings of the prophet and his companions ) .

the concepts of piety , striving for goodness , and social justice are fundamental to islamic belief and practice .

additionally , all muslims are expected to live in accordance with the five pillars of islam: ( 1 ) shahada — recital of the creed "there is no god but allah , and muhammad is his prophet" ; ( 2 ) salat — five obligatory prayers in a day ; ( 3 ) zakat — giving alms to the poor ; ( 4 ) sawm — fasting from sunrise to sunset during the month of ramadan ; and ( 5 ) hajj — making a pilgrimage to mecca once during a lifetime if one is physically and financially able .

the basic sources for islamic jurisprudence , be it sunni or shiite , are the quran , the sunna ( customs of the prophet muhammad ) as relayed in the hadith ( collected accounts of the prophets sayings ) , qiyas ( interpretive analogy ) , ijma ' ( scholarly consensus ) , and ijtihad ( individual reasoning ) .

the primary function of learned religious leaders in the islamic faith is the interpretation of islamic law ( shari ' a ) .

there are no codified laws in either sunni or shiite islam .

rather , there are sources for the interpretation of law outlined above , and these sources are similar among shiites and sunnis .

shiite hadith differ from sunni hadith , mainly in that they include the sayings of the shiite imams who are considered to have been divinely inspired .

shiite legal interpretation also allows more space for human reasoning than sunni interpretation does .

initially , the shiite movement gained a wide following in areas that now include iraq , iran , yemen , and parts of central and south asia .

in most of the world , shiites would continue as a minority .

today , according to some estimates , shiite islam is practiced among approximately 10% to 15% of the world's muslim population .

for shiites , the first true leader of the muslim community is ali , who is considered an imam , a term used among shiites not only to indicate leadership abilities but also to signify blood relations to the prophet muhammad .

as ali's descendants took over leadership of the shiite community , the functions of an imam became more clearly defined .

each imam chose a successor and , according to shiite beliefs , he passed down a type of spiritual knowledge to the next leader .

imams served as both spiritual and political leaders .

but as shiites increasingly lost their political battles with sunni muslim rulers , imams focused on developing a spirituality that would serve as the core of shiite religious practices and beliefs .

shiites believe that when the line of imams descended from ali ended , religious leaders , known as mujtahid s , gained the right to interpret religious , mystical , and legal knowledge to the broader community .

the most learned among these teachers are known as ayatollah s ( lit .

the "sign of god" ) .

shiite religious practice centers around the remembrance of ali's younger son , hussein , who was martyred near the town of karbala in iraq by sunni forces in 680 .

his death is commemorated each year on the 10 th day of the islamic month of muharram in a somber and sometimes violent ritualistic remembrance known as "ashura," marked among some shiites by the ritual of self - flagellation .

as a minority that was often persecuted by sunnis , shiites found solace in the ashura ritual , the telling of the martyrdom of hussein and the moral lessons to be learned from it , which reinforced shiite religious traditions and practices .

twelver shiism — the most common form of shiism today — is pervasive in iran , iraq , lebanon , and bahrain .

twelvers accept a line of 12 infallible imams descendent from ali and believe them to have been divinely appointed from birth .

the 12 imams are viewed as harbors of the faith and as the designated interpreters of law and theology .

twelvers believe that the 12 th and last of these imams "disappeared" in the late ninth century .

this "hidden imam" is expected to return to lead the community .

following the 12 th imam's disappearance , as one scholar notes , a "pacifist" trend emerged among twelvers who "chose to withdraw from politics and quietly await his coming. .

in the 20 th century , changes in the political landscape of the middle east led to a new competing "activist" trend among twelver groups in iran and lebanon , typified by the late iranian religious leader ayatollah khomeini .

although most shiites agree on the basic premise that ali was the first rightful imam , they disagree on his successors .

the ismailis , who are the second - largest shiite sect , broke off in the eighth century , recognizing only the first seven imams ( the seventh was named ismail , hence the names "ismaili" and "sevener" ) .

historically and at least until the 16 th century , the ismailis were far more disposed than the twelvers to pursuing military and territorial power .

in the past , they established powerful ruling states , which played significant roles in the development of islamic history .

today , ismailis are scattered throughout the world but are prominent in afghanistan ( under the naderi clan ) , in india , and in pakistan .

there are also ismaili communities in east and south africa .

the zaydis , who acknowledge the first five imams and differ over the identity of the fifth , are a minority sect of shiite islam , mostly found in yemen .

the zaydis reject the concepts of the imams' infallibility and of a "hidden imam. .

other sects , such as the alawites and druzes , are generally considered to be derived from shiite islam , although their religious practices are secretive , and some do not regard their adherents as muslims .

alawites exist mostly in syria and lebanon .

the asad family that effectively has ruled syria since 1971 are alawite .

many alawites interpret the pillars ( duties ) of islam as symbolic rather than applied , and celebrate an eclectic group of christian and islamic holidays .

in turkey , the alevi s are an offshoot group of shiite islam that has been often confused with syrian alawites or other shiites .

most alevis are well - integrated into turkish society and speak both turkish and kurdish .

the druze community was an 11 th - century offshoot of ismaili shiite islam and is concentrated in lebanon , jordan , syria , and israel .

today , the druze faith differs considerably from mainstream shiite islam .

