on november 4 , 2002 , united states trade representative ( ustr ) robert b. zoellick notified congress of the administration's intention to launch negotiations for a free trade agreement ( fta ) with the southern african customs union ( sacu ) , comprised of botswana , namibia , lesotho , south africa , and swaziland .

this agreement would be the first u.s. fta with a sub - saharan african country .

the first round of negotiations for the sacu fta began on june 3 , 2003 , in johannesburg , south africa .

the negotiations were initially scheduled to conclude by december 2004 , but the deadline was pushed to the end of 2006 after negotiations stalled in late 2004 and resumed in late 2005 .

the talks continued to move at a slow pace until april 2006 , when u.s. and sacu officials decided to suspend negotiations and instead begin a longer term joint work program .

on july 16 , 2008 , ustr susan schwab signed a trade , investment and development cooperation agreement ( tidca ) with trade ministers from sacu .

several possible rationales exist for the negotiation of an fta with sacu .

one impetus derives from sec .

116 of the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) ( title i , p.l .

106 - 200 ) , in which congress declared its sense that ftas should be negotiated with sub - saharan african countries to serve as a catalyst for trade and for u.s. private sector investment in the region .

such trade and investment could fuel economic growth in southern africa , by creating new jobs and wealth .

sacu member countries have achieved the most robust export growth under agoa , and an fta may expand their access to the u.s. market .

an fta may also encourage the continued economic liberalization of the sacu members , and it could move sacu beyond one - way preferential access to full trade partnership with the united states .

finally , although sacu is a customs union , its members' investment and regulatory regimes are not fully harmonized .

a comprehensive fta with the united states could force sacu to achieve greater harmonization .

a potential u.s. - sacu fta is of interest to congress because: ( 1 ) congress will need to consider ratifying any agreement signed by the parties ; ( 2 ) provisions of an fta may adversely affect u.s. business in import - competing industries , and may affect employment in those industries ; and ( 3 ) an fta may increase the effectiveness of agoa and bolster its implementation .

on january 9 , 2003 , a bipartisan group of 41 representatives wrote to ambassador zoellick to support the beginning of fta negotiations with sacu .

the u.s. business community has also shown interest in a u.s. - sacu fta .

the u.s. - south african business council , an affiliate of the national foreign trade council , announced the creation of an fta advocacy coalition in december 2002 .

the corporate council on africa , a u.s. organization dedicated to enhancing trade and investment ties with africa , also supports the negotiations .

for these business groups , a primary benefit of an fta with sacu would be to counteract the free trade agreement between the european union and south africa , which has given a price advantage to european firms .

the fta could also provide an opportunity to address the constraints on u.s. exports to sacu countries , such as relatively high tariffs , import restrictions , insufficient copyright protection , and service sector barriers .

some u.s. businesses have reportedly expressed skepticism about an fta with sacu , citing concerns over corruption and inadequate transparency in government procurement , particularly in south africa .

on december 16 , 2002 , the interagency trade policy staff committee , which is chaired by the ustr , held a hearing to receive public comment on negotiating positions for the proposed agreement .

several groups representing retailers , food distributors , and metal importers supported the reduction of u.s. tariffs on sacu goods that an fta would bring .

others representing service industries and recycled clothing favored negotiations to remove tariff and non - tariff barriers in the sacu market .

yet other groups opposed the additional opening of u.s. markets to sacu goods or sought exemptions for their products .

they included the growers and processors of california peaches and apricots , the american sugar alliance , rubber footwear manufacturers , and producers of silicon metal and manganese aluminum bricks .

some u.s. civil society organizations are concerned that a sacu fta could have negative consequences for poor southern africans , citing potential adjustment costs for import - competing farmers , poor enforcement of labor rights , privatization of utilities , and increased restrictions on importing generic drugs to treat hiv / aids .

the south african customs union consists of botswana , lesotho , namibia , south africa , and swaziland: five contiguous states with a population of 51.9 million people encompassing 1.7 million square miles on the southern tip of the african continent .

although this figure represents less than 1% of the population of sub - saharan africa , sacu accounts for one - half of the subcontinent's gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

wide differences exist among the economies of sacu .

while south africa has developed a significant manufacturing and industrial capacity , the other countries remain dependent on agriculture and mineral extraction .

the grouping is dominated by south africa , which accounts for 87% of the population , and 93% of the gdp of the customs area .

sacu member states had combined real gdp of about $158 billion in 2005 .

sacu is the united states' second largest trading partner in africa behind nigeria whose exports are almost exclusively petroleum products .

overall , sacu is the 33 rd largest trading partner of the united states .

merchandise imports from sacu totaled $10.0 billion in 2007 , a 33% increase from 2005 and a 169% increase from 1997 .

they were composed of minerals such as platinum and diamonds , apparel , vehicles , and automotive parts .

major u.s. exports to the region include aircraft , automobiles , computers , medical instruments and construction and agricultural equipment .

the 2007 merchandise trade deficit with sacu was $4.4 billion .

the united states ran a services trade surplus with south africa ( the only member of sacu for which service data are available ) with exports of $1.6 billion and imports of $1.1 billion in 2006 .

services trade between the united states and south africa has increased steadily over the last decade , with both imports and exports doubling since 1996 .

the stock of u.s. foreign direct investment in south africa totaled $3.8 billion in 2006 and was centered around manufacturing , chemicals and services .

the stock of south african investment in the u.s. stood at $652 million in 2006 .

fta negotiations with sacu may result in the first u.s. trade agreement with an existing customs union .

sacu is the world's oldest customs union ; it originated as a customs agreement between the territories of south africa in 1889 .

the arrangement was formalized through the customs agreement of 1910 and was renegotiated in 1969 .

in 1994 , the member states agreed to renegotiate the treaty in light of the political and economic changes implicit from the end of the apartheid regime .

the renegotiated agreement was signed on october 21 , 2002 in gaborone , botswana , and it is now being implemented .

some observers are concerned that further integration of the customs union may be threatened by individual member countries signing economic partnership agreements ( epas ) with the european union ( eu ) , because these agreements would include policies that sacu has yet to harmonize , such as rules of origin and customs procedures .

some observers believe that sacu should only negotiate these policies as a group to avoid roadblocks to harmonization .

after nearly three years of slow - moving and stalled negotiations , u.s. and sacu trade officials called off the fta negotiations in april 2006 in favor of a longer term trade and investment work plan .

on july 16 , 2008 , they signed a trade , investment and development cooperation agreement ( tidca ) , which is the first of its kind .

the tidca is reportedly a formal mechanism for the united states and sacu to negotiate interim trade - related agreements which may serve as the building blocks for a future fta .

the agreement will also allow the two parties to work on key issues in their trade , such as trade facilitation , technical barriers , investment promotion , and sanitary and phytosanitary standards .

observers have cited several possible reasons for the halt in fta negotiations .

first , the united states and sacu did not agree on the scope of the negotiations .

per their mandate from congress to pursue comprehensive ftas , u.s. negotiators attempted to proceed with negotiations including intellectual property rights , government procurement , investment , and services provisions .

however , sacu officials reportedly argued for these provisions to be excluded from the negotiations .

they called for making market access commitments first , and then negotiating the other areas .

now that congress has extended the agoa benefits to 2015 through the agoa acceleration act of 2004 ( p.l .

108 - 274 ) , there may be less incentive for sacu countries to complete an fta with the united states .

also , the united states and sacu reportedly held different views on how to include certain industrial sectors in the negotiations .

the united states preferred what is called a negative list , where all industries are negotiable unless specifically excluded .

meanwhile , sacu preferred a positive list , where the industries to be included in the negotiations are specified in advance , and additional industries may be included in the agreement over time .

finally , the united states and sacu differed on issues concerning labor rights and environmental regulations .

some observers have speculated that south africa may be leery of negotiating issues that are included in the current wto negotiations , so as not to influence their positions in the wto .

former ustr robert zoellick has stated that the united states recognizes that sacu is still an emerging entity .

it has not developed harmonized policies on many of the issues that would be included in an fta , which may add to the challenges of negotiating an fta .

