the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) , p.l .

107-155 ( h.r .

2356 , 107 th congress ) significantly amended federal campaign finance law .

shortly after president bush signed bcra into law , senator mitch mcconnell filed suit in u.s. district court for the district of columbia against the federal election commission ( fec ) and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) arguing that portions of bcra violate the first amendment and the equal protection component of the due process clause of the fifth amendment to the constitution .

likewise , the national rifle association ( nra ) filed suit against the fec and the attorney general arguing that the law deprives it of freedom of speech and association , of the right to petition the government for redress of grievances , and of the rights to equal protection and due process , in violation of the first and fifth amendments to the constitution .

ultimately , eleven suits challenging the law were brought by more than 80 plaintiffs and were consolidated into one lead case , mcconnell v. fec .

on may 2 , 2003 , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia issued its decision in mcconnell v. fec , striking down many significant provisions of the law .

the three - judge panel , which was split 2 to 1 on many issues , ordered that its ruling take effect immediately .

after the court issued its opinion , several appeals were filed and on may 19 the u.s. district court issued a stay to its ruling , leaving bcra , as enacted , in effect until the supreme court ruled .

under the bcra expedited review provision , the court's decision was directly reviewed by the u.s. supreme court .

on september 8 the supreme court returned to the bench a month before its term officially began to hear four hours of oral argument in the case , and issued its decision in december .

in its most comprehensive campaign finance decision since its 1976 decision in buckley v. valeo , the u.s. supreme court in mcconnell v. fec upheld against facial constitutional challenges key portions of bcra .

the most significant portion of the court's decision is the 119 page majority opinion coauthored by justices stevens and o'connor , joined by justices souter , ginsburg , and breyer , in which the court upheld two critical features of bcra: the limits on raising and spending previously unregulated political party soft money , and the prohibition on corporations and labor unions using treasury funds — which is unregulated soft money — to finance electioneering communications .

instead , bcra requires that such ads may only be paid for with corporate and labor union political action committee ( pac ) funds , also known as hard money .

in general , the term "hard money" refers to funds that are raised and spent according to the contribution limits , source prohibitions , and disclosure requirements of the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , while the term "soft money" is used to describe funds raised and spent outside the federal election regulatory framework , but which may have at least an indirect impact on federal elections .

in upholding bcra's "two principal , complementary features," the mcconnell court readily acknowledged that it was under "no illusion that bcra will be the last congressional statement on the matter" of money in politics .

"money , like water , will always find an outlet," the court predicted , and therefore , campaign finance issues that will inevitably arise , and corresponding legislative responses from congress , "are concerns for another day. .

indeed , in 2007 , the court in fec v. wisconsin right to life , inc. ( wrtl ii ) determined that bcra's "electioneering communications" provision was unconstitutional as applied to ads that wisconsin right to life , inc. , sought to run , thereby limiting the law's application .

the court invalidated bcra's requirement that political parties choose between coordinated and independent expenditures after nominating a candidate , finding that it burdens the right of parties to make unlimited independent expenditures .

the court invalidated bcra's prohibition on individuals age 17 or younger making contributions to candidates and political parties .

determining that minors enjoy first amendment protection and that contribution limits impinge on such rights , the court determined that the prohibition is not "closely drawn" to serve a "sufficiently important interest. .

