rs21703 - - croatia: 2003 elections and new government january 6 , 200 .

the november 2003 elections were croatia's fourth parliamentary contest since the country became independent in 1991 .

in the lastvote of january 2000 , a coalition of center - left parties soundly defeated the incumbent croatian democratic union ( hdz ) government , weeks after the death of franjo tudjman , the longstanding leader of the hdz and president of thecountry .

to supporters , tudjman represented the father of croatian independence .

to critics , however , tudjman closely resemblednationalist serb leader slobodan milosevic and demonstrated similar territorial designs on neighboring bosnia .

in1995 , croatialaunched two military operations , "flash" and "storm," to regain control over the krajina , croat territory held byrebel serbs after1991 .

the attacks drove out much of the local serb population from croatia and tipped the balance of forces inbosnia againstmilosevic and the bosnian serbs .

tudjman was a signatory to and guarantor of the 1995 dayton peace agreementthat ended the warin bosnia .

however , he and other hdz leaders came under frequent international criticism for nationalist policies,authoritarianleadership , and overt support for ethnic croat separatists in bosnia .

domestically , the hdz's popularity eventuallydeclined as theeconomy deteriorated and as hdz officials became tainted by corruption scandals .

the 2000 parliamentary andpresidential votesbrought in a new set of leaders .

ivica racan of the social democratic party ( sdp ) became prime minister and stipemesic of thecroatian people's party ( hns ) became president that year .

the racan government swiftly took measures to reform the economy and repair croatia's damaged relations with its neighbors andwith the international community .

above all , improving the country's international standing and prospects for euand natointegration became a focal point for the racan government .

since 2000 , croatia has joined nato's partnershipfor peace ( pfp ) program and membership action plan ( map ) .

it has concluded a stabilization and association agreement withthe europeanunion ( eu ) and formally applied for eu membership .

it also joined the world trade organization ( wto ) in 2003 .

the racangovernment sought a second mandate in the 2003 elections that would enable it to fulfill these goals , possibly inits next term .

economic reforms as well as international support yielded steady growth and other positive indicators in 2001 and2002 ; however,croatia's external debt and unemployment levels remained high .

corruption scandals also plagued the government,though not atthe level of the tudjman era , and it failed to deliver major prosecution victories from its anti - crime rhetoric .

 ( 1 ) .

the official 2003 campaign period ran for three weeks , from november 5 until the 23rd .

pre - election polls predicted a close racebetween the sdp - led coalition parties and the hdz .

since its fall from power in 2000 , the hdz has attempted aradical overhauland re - invention of its image and platform .

hdz leader ivo sanader emphasized the party's new moderate,pro - european outlook,economic reform and tax cutting plans , and support from prominent and mainstream european conservatives .

during the campaign,sanader reversed the party's longstanding opposition to the international criminal tribunal for the formeryugoslavia ( icty ) andpledged full cooperation with the court in principle .

sanader also called for the return to croatia of ethnic serbrefugees uprootedsince the 1995 conflict .

on behalf of the government , prime minister racan presented his cabinet as the best means to guarantee the country's path towardeu membership , a goal shared by a large majority of the population .

however , the coalition parties opted tocompete separately andin an uncoordinated fashion , thus dividing allegiances of the center - left electorate .

the large number of smallcenter - left parties alsodiluted support for the larger parties .

a prominent campaign issue was the case of former croat general ante gotovina , who has been indicted by the icty for warcrimes related to the 1995 offensive against formerly serb - held areas in croatia .

the racan government pledgedto hand him overto the hague , but claimed not to be able to locate him after he went into hiding in mid - 2001 .

despite mountinginternationalpressure , the former croat general remains a popular figure in croatia , especially among the population's right - wing,who view himas a national hero and a symbol of croatia's right to self - defense .

strong support for gotovina among hdzfollowers and localpoliticians was evident at some hdz rallies .

 ( 2 ) croatia's electoral system is based on proportional representation .

the country is divided into ten electoral districts , plus oneconstituency each for ethnic minorities and the expatriate community ( mainly in neighboring bosnia ) .

the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) assessed that the november 23 elections were conducted"generally in line" with international standards for democratic elections .

the organization said that improvementswere needed inelection legislation and voting access for refugees .

 ( 3 ) turnout was 69% for the 10 electoral districts in croatia .

the total turnoutdropped to 60% because of lower turnout among the expatriate community and ethnic minorities ( each counting asseparatedistricts ) .

the hdz ended up with a plurality of the vote and 66 seats in parliament - still several votes short of a majority .

all four diasporaseats went to the hdz .

the social democrats came in second , but combined with their four previous coalitionpartners also cameup short of a majority .

initial analyses of the election results proclaimed croatia's shift to the right , and the dramatic gain in support for the hdz aloneappears to support this claim .

however , many observers believe that the rightward shift resulted more from theelectorate's generic desire for change and a sense of frustration with the disparate incumbent leaders than from nostalgia for theproblematic tudjmanera .

the racan government's strategic goals for croatia - including full integration into euro - atlantic institutions - continue to behighly popular in croatia , and sanader closely echoed these goals in the hdz platform .

moreover , the margin ofdifference in votersupport between the right and left remains small , with the left hurt considerably by its own infighting andfragmentation .

after the vote , the hdz reached out to other parties to try to form a majority coalition .

top partner prospects appeared to be thepeasant party ( hss ) , part of the outgoing coalition , and the right - wing party of rights ( hsp ) .

some peasant partyleaders appearedto favor a coalition , but the party as a whole did not approve such a move .

european union representativesexpressed strongopposition to the possible inclusion of the hsp in croatia's government because of the party's extreme nationalisticreputation .

hspleaders , who insist that their party has reformed , have said they would remain in opposition .

instead the hdzresorted to solicitingsupport from various small parties including the social liberal / democratic center ( hsls / dc ) coalition and thepensioners party .

the hdz also gained support from a handful of national minority deputies , including the serb democraticindependent party ( sdss ) .

in december , prime minister - designate sanader announced that he had secured enough votes to support a minority government .

ondecember 23 , he presented to parliament his cabinet and outlined the government's policy priorities , mainly relatingto economicreforms .

sanader's lack of sufficient coalition partners to secure a stable parliamentary majority will leave thehdz - led governmentdependent on its cooperation agreements with parties outside of government .

the return of the hdz to power after the 2003 elections has prompted some speculation about the sanader government's possibleareas of continuity or change from the last government .

hdz leaders wish to distinguish the party from , rather thanharken , itslegacy in government in the 1990s .

prime minister sanader has repeatedly tried to convey the party's transformationinto a moderateconservative movement that is pro - european and rejects "radicalism , extremism , xenophobia , and nationalism. .

the extent of thehdz's transformation may become evident in the government's approach to numerous key issues .

government stability the hdz's inability to forge a majority coalition will make for an inherently unstable government .

the sanader government mayhave to grant concessions on a regular basis in exchange for parliamentary support from small parties and individualdeputies .

evenminor setbacks in parliament could lead to the government's fall .

maintaining unity within the hdz could representanotherchallenge , especially if some party members do not approve of their leadership's outlook and direction .

the hdz's weak standing may negatively affect the government's ability to pursue its policy agenda .

croatia's overarching goals ofnato and especially eu membership will require adherence to reform policies consistent with european standards .

observersbelieve that an hdz - led government can only reach its strategic objectives by continuing the path - breaking workof the previousgovernment .

however , the hdz's dependence on a variety of small parties could lead to unpredictable policies .

a first test for thesanader government is likely to be the budget , since planned spending and tax cuts may have to be sacrificed forconcessions toother parties on costly items such as pensions .

progress toward eu integration ( including icty and refugee return issues ) foremost among the government's priorities is securing croatia's path toward eu membership .

croatia has set 2007 as a target datefor eu entry , modeled after the date set by the eu for the accession of romania and bulgaria ( both of which haveheld longerassociation relations with the eu ) .

croatia signed a stabilization and association agreement ( saa ) with theeuropean union injuly 2001 ( the saa has yet to be ratified by all eu member states ) .

croatia formally applied for eu membershipin february 2003and submitted its responses to a lengthy european commission questionnaire in october .

the commission isexpected to give its"opinion" on croatia's candidacy by mid - 2004 , which may open the door for the council to start accessionnegotiations .

at ameeting of eu foreign ministers with their western balkan counterparts in december 2003 , eu ministers urgedthe incomingcroatian government to make all efforts toward compliance with eu political and economic conditions formembership .

inparticular , the eu ministers cited full cooperation with the icty , the return of refugees to croatia , and minorityrights as keyperformance benchmarks .

cooperation with the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia ( icty ) remains a difficult issue for the hdz .

despite sanader's pledges to uphold croatia's international commitments , the war crimes tribunal remains unpopularin croatia,especially among hdz supporters .

the specific case of former general gotovina is yet to be resolved .

moreover,new indictmentsare expected to be delivered to zagreb in early 2004 , likely against current or former hdz members .

the situationregarding refugeereturns is also problematic .

according to the u.n. high commissioner for refugees , about 100,000 of 280,000ethnic serbs whofled during the 1995 croatian offensive have returned to croatia .

during the election campaign , sanader said thathe favored refugeereturns , without outlining any specific plans .

the refugee issue is complicated by property rights issues , the statusof bosnian croattenants in former serb homes , and implementation of minority rights .

in return for serb party support in parliament,sanaderpledged to accelerate property restitution and housing construction for returning refugees .

regional relations the new croatian government will face many challenges relating to regional affairs , especially given the hdz's legacy in neighborlyrelations .

the racan government and president mesic had made a concerted effort to end direct croatianinvolvement in bosnia'sinternal affairs and improve bilateral relations .

during the 1990s , the late former president tudjman had maintainedpolitical andfinancial ties to the separatist bosnian croat community , which hindered the development of an integrated bosnianstate .

thecurrent hdz's relationship with its sister party in bosnia ( hdz - bih ) - still the strongest party among the bosniancroat electorate - may have more complicated facets .

on the one hand , hdz leaders have repeatedly pledged to respect bosnia'ssovereignty andindependence , and the croat electorate generally favors this policy .

on the other hand , all of the diaspora votes frombosnia went tothe hdz , demonstrating the bosnian croat community's strong political support for the hdz , which the hdz maynot wish to riskweakening .

meanwhile , the hdz in bosnia may itself be ripe for a transformation and image makeover similar tosanader's effortswith the hdz in croatia .

political relations with serbia appeared to improve in 2003 .

making his first official visit to serbia in september , president mesicreceived a public apology from serbia and montenegro president svetovar marovic for "all evils" committed againstcroatia in thepast .

mesic reciprocated with an apology for past "pain or damage" committed by croatia .

to some observers , thesymbolicgestures marked the possibility for greater reconciliation between the two countries , including closer economic tiesand cooperationon refugee returns .

in 2003 , the racan government sparked a dispute with neighboring slovenia by declaring an exclusive economic zone in the adriaticsea .

slovenia has strongly objected to croatia's claim and its potential impact on slovenia's access to the open seas .

some sloveneleaders have threatened to block croatia's eu aspirations if this issue is not resolved , once slovenia joins the euin 2004 .

the previous croatian government promoted closer regional ties in the security arena .

at the prague nato summit in november2002 , the presidents of albania , croatia , and macedonia proposed to president bush the creation of a u.s. - adriaticcharter,modeled after the u.s. - baltic charter ( established in 1998 ) .

the adriatic charter initiative aims to deepen regionalcooperation,promote reforms , and improve the collective integration prospects of the three countries .

secretary of state powelland the foreignministers of the three countries signed the charter on may 2 , 2003 , in albania .

in 2000 , the clinton administration warmly welcomed the electoral victory of the center - left coalition and subsequently praised thereform efforts of the racan government .

the united states continues to support croatia's transition fromcommunism and theeffects of ethnic war , as well as its goals for full integration into euro - atlantic institutions .

at the same time , theunited statessupports nato and eu conditionality policies on meeting membership standards , including building democracy,implementinghuman rights policies , respecting the dayton agreement , and cooperating with the war crimes tribunal .

the bushadministration hasdesignated over $30 million in seed act and security assistance to croatia for fy2004 .

however , bilateral securityassistance tocroatia has been suspended since july 2003 , when u.s. sanctions came into force against certain countries whichhad not agreed toexempt u.s. personnel from possible extradition to the international criminal court ( icc ) .

the bushadministration continues toseek to conclude bilateral agreements with all icc party countries , including croatia , that would provide for suchan exemption .

