one of the most lively debates among economists and policymakers during the 1980s was the relationship between the federal budget deficit and the international trade deficit .

when the dust settled those arguing that the two deficits should move together seemed to have carried the day , although doubters remained .

this prediction was based on mainstream macroeconomic theory .

as the 1990s unfolded , the two deficits did not move together .

as the federal budget deficit came down as a fraction of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , the trade deficit rose as a fraction of gdp .

is this evidence inconsistent with theory ? .

the analysis will suggest that the answer is no .

there are other forces besides the federal budget deficit that can influence the u.s. trade deficit .

they were not decisive during the 1980s .

they appear to have been operative during the 1990s .

with the onset of the recession in 2001 and subsequent move to expansion , the coincident shift back to budget deficit , the two deficits began to move together again .

mainstream macroeconomic theory explains the twin deficit phenomenon as follows .

an increase in the federal budget deficit ( measured as an increase in the structural deficit as a percent of full employment gdp ) will— all else held constant both in the united states and abroad —put upward pressure on u.s. interest rates , raising them above comparable rates abroad .

this occurs because the position of the government's budget influences the national saving rate .

when the structural budget deficit shrinks , the government adds to the national saving supplied by households and businesses and interest rates fall .

when the structural budget deficit grows , it represents a claim on those savings , and interest rates must rise for the market to remain in equilibrium .

in a world in which u.s. assets are good substitutes for foreign assets , foreign investors will be tempted to buy more of the now higher yielding american assets .

before they can buy these assets , they must first purchase dollars .

thus , the net demand for dollars in the foreign exchange market rises and the dollar increases in value and it is said to appreciate .

dollar appreciation reduces the price of foreign goods and services in america and increases the price of american goods and services abroad .

the net result is that americans spend more on foreign goods and services ( the value of american imports rise ) and foreigners spend less on american goods and services ( the value of u.s. exports fall ) .

if the trade accounts were in balance to begin with , the united states now has a trade deficit .

and , indeed , the data during the 1980s , shown on table 1 , conform to what the theory predicts .

the full employment or structural deficit rose from 0.6% of full employment gdp in 1981 to an expansion high of 4.8% in 1986 , a rise of 4.2 percentage points .

the trade balance rose over this period from a surplus of 0.2% of gdp to a deficit of 2.5% of gdp , a rise of 2.7 percentage points ( thus , the rise in the trade deficit was about 59% of the rise in the structural budget deficit ) .

further , as the structural budget deficit fell from 4.7% of gdp in 1986 to 2.2% in 1989 , the last full year of the 1982-1990 economic expansion , a fall of 2.5 percentage points , the trade deficit fell from 2.5% , of gdp to 1.1% of gdp , a fall of 1.4 percentage points ( or about 56% of the decline in the structural budget deficit ) .

before looking at developments during the late 1990s , it should be noted that mainstream macroeconomic theory has never excluded an independent causal role for international capital movements .

that is , international capital movements can occur independent of any change in the federal budget deficit .

foreign capital may come to the untied states for a variety of circumstances unrelated to the pressures the federal budget deficit puts on u.s. interest rates .

a change in u.s. tax law which increases the after tax rate of return on capital could attract foreign funds even if it had no effect on the federal budget deficit .

rising prospects for profit because of boom conditions in the u.s. economy or an increase in productivity could increase domestic investment relative to gdp , and could attract foreign capital even as the federal budget moves toward balance or into surplus .

similarly , fears of inflation , currency devaluation , or political repression could induce foreigners to seek the safety of u.s. assets .

moreover , if a falling federal deficit in the united states occurs with the onset of an economic downturn abroad such that yields on foreign assets fall relative to comparable u.s. yields , the emerging differential in favor of the united states could serve as a magnet attracting additional capital that could forestall a fall in the trade deficit or lead to a rise in that deficit .

in this instance , it would be possible to have a falling budget deficit and a rising trade deficit .

other possibilities also suggest themselves .

the data on table 2 show a very different pattern in the last half of the 1990s from the twin deficits of the 1980s .

as the structural budget deficit fell from 2.0% of gdp in 1995 to a surplus of 1.1% of gdp in 2000 ( a shift of 3.1 percentage points ) , the last full year of the 1991-2001 expansion , the trade deficit rose over the same period from 0.9% to 3.9% of gdp ( a shift of 3 percentage points ) .

these data show clearly that changes in the magnitude and direction of the net inflow of foreign capital can occur independently of changes in the federal budget deficit .

the data in themselves do not explain why these movements occur , however .

yet , there are some interesting clues in the data on domestic investment that suggest at least a proximate explanation for why the two deficits have not moved in the same direction in the 1990s .

the data in table 3 report real gross domestic investment as a fraction of real gdp during the years 1983-1989 ( the expansion of the 1980s ) and 1995-2007 .

there is a noticeable difference between these two expansions .

unlike 1983-1989 , real gross domestic investment during the 1990s expansion was a rapidly rising fraction of gdp .

the increase was especially strong in the period 1995-2000 .

the increase in desired investment , motivated by the increase in productivity and the related rise in the real rate of return on american capital in the last half of the 1990s , served as a magnet for attracting foreign capital to the united states .

and this increased inflow of foreign capital ( saving ) made possible the additional investment in the united states .

upward pressure on u.s. interest rates was the proximate cause of the inflow of capital , and resulting trade deficit , in both the 1980s and late 1990s .

the difference between the two periods was what caused the pressure on interest rates .

in the 1980s , the upward pressure came from the rise in the structural budget deficit .

in the 1990s , it came from the increased productivity and related rise in the profitability of private investment .

an interesting aspect of both historical periods is that policymakers in the united states have managed to bring the u.s. economy to full employment with large and even growing trade deficits .

these trade deficits have not hampered the overall creation of jobs .

they have , however , influenced the nature of job creation since they alter the composition of u.s. output , away from export and import - competing industries toward industries the demand for whose output is sensitive to interest rates .

during the 1980s , a lively debate occurred , the outcome of which was a convincing case linking the growth in the structural measure of the federal budget deficit with the growth of the trade deficit ( with cause and effect running from budget deficit to trade deficit via interest rates and dollar appreciation ) .

lost in the "small print" of this debate was that the budget deficit is not the exclusive determinant of net capital flows and trade deficits .

international capital flows into and out of the united states can move in directions contrary to the movements in the position of the federal budget .

they depend not only on economic conditions in the united states , but on similar conditions and decisions made abroad .

during the 1990s , the u.s. trade deficit did not moved in concert with the structural ( or even the actual ) measure of the federal budget deficit ( both absolutely and as a fraction of gdp ) .

beginning in 1995 , real gross domestic investment rose as a fraction of real gdp reflecting the increase in productivity and related increase in the real rate of return on american capital .

this increase served to attract private capital to the united states .

thus , the trade deficit rose even as the budget deficit fell .

during the recovery that began in the fourth quarter of 2001 and the subsequent expansion , a rising structural budget deficit and the recovery of private investment spending once again attracted foreign capital to the united states , although in this episode the proportion of the inflow coming from foreign official sources ( central banks and treasuries ) has been especially important during 2002-2004 and 2006-2007 .

if the twin deficits theory is correct , it has an adverse implication for the efficacy of fiscal policy as a stimulus tool .

it suggests that when international capital flows are highly mobile , the effect of policy induced increases in the structural budget deficit ( through tax cuts or increases in government spending ) on short - run output growth and employment would be largely offset by increases in the trade deficit .

