prior to the new deal , decisions regarding classification of national security information were left to military regulation .

in 1940 , president franklin roosevelt issued an executive order authorizing government officials to protect information pertaining to military and naval installations .

presidents since that time have continued to set the federal government's classification standards by executive order , but with one critical difference: while president roosevelt cited specific statutory authority for his action , later presidents have cited general statutory and constitutional authority .

the supreme court has never directly addressed the extent to which congress may constrain the executive branch's power in this area .

citing the president's constitutional role as commander - in - chief , the supreme court has repeatedly stated in dicta that "[the president's] authority to classify and control access to information bearing on national security ... flows primarily from this constitutional investment of power in the president and exists quite apart from any explicit congressional grant. .

this language has been interpreted by some to indicate that the president has virtually plenary authority to control classified information .

on the other hand , the supreme court has suggested that "congress could certainly [provide] that the executive branch adopt new [classification procedures] or [establish] its own procedures — subject only to whatever limitations the executive privilege may be held to impose on such congressional ordering. .

in fact , congress established a separate regime in the atomic energy act for the protection of nuclear - related "restricted data. .

congress has directed the president to establish procedures governing the access to classified material so that generally no person can gain such access without having undergone a background check .

congress also directed the president , in formulating the classification procedures , to adhere to certain minimum standards of due process with regard to access to classified information .

these standards include the establishment of uniform procedures for , inter alia , background checks , denial of access to classified information , and notice of such denial .

there is an exception to the due process requirements , however , where compliance could damage national security , although the statute directs agency heads to submit a report to the congressional intelligence committees in such a case .

with the authority to determine classification standards vested in the president , these standards tend to change when a new administration takes control of the white house .

the differences between the standards of one administration and the next have often been dramatic .

as one congressionally authorized commission put it in 1997: the rules governing how best to protect the nation's secrets , while still insuring that the american public has access to information on the operations of its government , past and present , have shifted along with the political changes in washington .

over the last fifty years , with the exception of the kennedy administration , a new executive order on classification was issued each time one of the political parties regained control of the executive branch .

these have often been at variance with one another ... at times even reversing outright the policies of the previous order .

various congressional committees have investigated ways to bring some continuity to the classification system and to limit the president's broad powers to shield information from public examination .

in 1966 , congress passed the freedom of information act ( foia ) , creating a presumption that government information will be open to the public unless it falls into one of foia's exceptions .

one exception covers information that , under executive order , must be kept secret for national security or foreign policy reasons .

in 2000 , congress enacted the public interest declassification act of 2000 , which established the public interest declassification board to advise the president on matters regarding the declassification of certain information .

however , the act expressly disclaims any intent to restrict agency heads from classifying or continuing the classification of information under their purview , nor does it create any rights or remedies that may be enforced in court .

most recently , congress passed the reducing over - classification act , p.l .

111-258 ( 2010 ) , which , among other things , requires executive branch agencies' inspectors general to conduct assessments of their agencies' implementation of classification policies .

congress occasionally takes an interest in declassification of specific materials that might be deemed essential for some public purpose .

the procedural rules of both the senate and house provide a means for disclosing classified information in the intelligence committees' possession where the intelligence committee of the respective house ( either the house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) or the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) ) determines by vote that such disclosure would serve the public interest .

in the event the intelligence committee votes to disclose classified information that was submitted by the executive branch , and the executive branch requests it be kept secret , the committee is required to notify the president .

the information may be disclosed after five days unless the president formally objects and certifies that the threat to the u.s. national interest outweighs any public interest in disclosing it , in which case the question may be referred to the full chamber .

it does not appear that either house has invoked its procedure for disclosing classified information .

in fact , in at least one instance , congress deferred to the executive branch even with respect to materials prepared by congress , albeit perhaps using documents obtained from the executive branch .

a recent example involved the 28 pages of classified text from the report of the joint inquiry of the hpsci and the ssci into the intelligence community activities before and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

the report of the joint inquiry was completed in 2002 and referred to the executive branch for a classification review , which determined that three of the four parts of the report could be disclosed to the public , but that the disclosure of a portion of the report would pose national security risks .

despite calls for the release of the 28 pages by some members and former members , and legislative proposals to mandate disclosure , the intelligence committees awaited a declassification review by the intelligence community before releasing the material in redacted form .

one notable instance in which congress sought and procured the declassification of government information involved records pertaining to prisoners of war and personnel listed as missing in action after the vietnam war ( "pow / mia" ) .

congress initially required certain agencies to provide information regarding "live - sightings" of such personnel to next of kin , with the exception of "information that would reveal or compromise sources and methods of intelligence collection. .

congress subsequently directed the department of defense ( dod ) to create an accessible library of documents related to pow / mia , excluding records that would be exempt under certain provisions of foia .

the senate select committee on pow / mia affairs considered invoking the procedural rule described above to declassify relevant documents , but deemed that untested avenue unsuitable because it would have required the committee to identify the documents beforehand and to have had them in its possession .

furthermore , enforcement of the measure would have required the full vote of the senate .

instead , members wrote to president george h. w. bush requesting an executive order to accomplish the declassification of relevant records .

it was followed by a resolution expressing the sense of the senate that the president should expeditiously issue an executive order for the declassification , without compromising national security , of relevant documents .

president bush complied .

more recently , congress has directed the president or agency heads to undertake a declassification review of records pertaining to specific matters and to release them as appropriate .

for example , congress in 2000 directed the president to "order all federal agencies and departments that possess relevant information [about the murders of churchwomen in el salvador] to make every effort to declassify and release" them to victims' families .

in 2002 , congress directed the secretary of defense to submit to congress and to the secretary of veterans affairs "a comprehensive plan for the review , declassification , and submittal" of all information related to project 112 — a series of biological and chemical warfare vulnerability tests conducted by the department of defense — that would be relevant for that project's participants' health care .

in 2004 , congress directed the secretary of defense to "review and , as determined appropriate , revise the classification policies of the department of defense with a view to facilitating the declassification of data that is potentially useful for the monitoring and assessment of the health of members of the armed forces who have been exposed to environmental hazards during deployments overseas. .

in 2007 , congress directed the director of the central intelligence agency ( cia ) to make public a version of the executive summary of the cia office of the inspector general report on "cia accountability regarding findings and conclusions of the joint inquiry into intelligence community activities before and after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001," declassified "to the maximum extent possible , consistent with national security. .

and in 2014 , congress directed the director of national intelligence ( dni ) to conduct a declassification review of documents collected during the raid that killed osama bin laden , requiring a justification for materials that remain classified after the review .

the current standards for classifying and declassifying information were last amended on december 29 , 2009 , in executive order 13526 .

under these standards , the president , vice president , agency heads , and any other officials designated by the president may classify information upon a determination that the unauthorized disclosure of such information could reasonably be expected to damage national security .

such information must be owned by , produced by , or under the control of the federal government , and must concern one of the following: military plans , weapons systems , or operations ; foreign government information ; intelligence activities , intelligence sources / methods , cryptology ; foreign relations or foreign activities of the united states , including confidential sources ; scientific , technological , or economic matters relating to national security ; federal programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities ; vulnerabilities or capabilities of national security systems ; or weapons of mass destruction .

information may be classified at one of three levels based on the amount of danger that its unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause to national security .

information is classified as "top secret" if its unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause "exceptionally grave damage" to national security .

the standard for "secret" information is "serious damage" to national security , while for "confidential" information the standard is "damage" to national security .

significantly , for each level , the original classifying officer must identify or describe the specific danger potentially presented by the information's disclosure .

in case of significant doubt as to the need to classify information or the level of classification appropriate , the information is to remain unclassified or be classified at the lowest level of protection considered appropriate .

the officer who originally classifies the information establishes a date for declassification based upon the expected duration of the information's sensitivity .

if the office cannot set an earlier declassification date , then the information must be marked for declassification in 10 years' time or 25 years , depending on the sensitivity of the information .

the deadline for declassification can be extended if the threat to national security still exists .

classified information is required to be declassified "as soon as it no longer meets the standards for classification. .

the original classifying agency has the authority to declassify information when the public interest in disclosure outweighs the need to protect that information .

on december 31 , 2006 , and every year thereafter , all information that has been classified for 25 years or longer and has been determined to have "permanent historical value" under title 44 of the u.s. code will be automatically declassified , although agency heads can exempt from this requirement classified information that continues to be sensitive in a variety of specific areas .

agencies are required to review classification determinations upon a request for such a review that specifically identifies the materials so that the agency can locate them , unless the materials identified are part of an operational file exempt under the freedom of information act ( foia ) or are the subject of pending litigation .

this requirement does not apply to information that has undergone declassification review in the previous two years ; information that is exempted from review under the national security act ; or information classified by the incumbent president and staff , the vice president and staff ( in the performance of executive duties ) , commissions appointed by the president , or other entities within the executive office of the president that advise the president .

each agency that has classified information is required to establish a system for periodic declassification reviews .

the national archivist is required to establish a similar systemic review of classified information that has been transferred to the national archives .

access to classified information is generally limited to those who demonstrate their eligibility to the relevant agency head , sign a nondisclosure agreement , and have a need to know the information .

the need - to - know requirement can be waived , however , for former presidents and vice presidents , historical researchers , and former policy - making officials who were appointed by the president or vice president .

the information being accessed may not be removed from the controlling agency's premises without permission .

each agency is required to establish systems for controlling the distribution of classified information .

the information security oversight office ( isoo ) — an office within the national archives — is charged with overseeing compliance with the classification standards and promulgating directives to that end .

isoo is headed by a director , who is appointed by the archivist of the united states , and who has the authority to order declassification of information that , in the director's view , is classified in violation of the aforementioned classification standards .

in addition , there is an interagency security classifications appeals panel ( iscap ) , headed by the isoo director and made up of representatives of the heads of various agencies , including the departments of defense , justice , and state , as well as the central intelligence agency , and the national archives .

iscap is empowered to decide appeals of classifications challenges and to review automatic and mandatory declassifications .

if the isoo director finds a violation of e.o .

13526 or its implementing directives , then the director must notify the appropriate classifying agency so that corrective steps can be taken .

under e.o .

13526 , each respective agency is responsible for maintaining control over classified information it originates and is responsible for establishing uniform procedures to protect classified information and automated information systems in which classified information is stored or transmitted .

standards for safeguarding classified information , including the handling , storage , distribution , transmittal , and destruction of and accounting for classified information , are developed by the isoo .

agencies that receive information classified elsewhere are not permitted to transfer the information further without approval from the classifying agency .

persons authorized to disseminate classified information outside the executive branch are required to ensure it receives protection equivalent to those required internally .

in the event of a knowing , willful , or negligent unauthorized disclosure ( or any such action that could reasonably be expected to result in an unauthorized disclosure ) , the agency head or senior agency official is required to notify isoo and to "take appropriate and prompt corrective action. .

officers and employees of the united states ( including contractors , licensees , etc. ) .

who commit a violation are subject to sanctions that can range from reprimand to termination .

executive order 12333 , united states intelligence activities , spells out the responsibilities of members of the intelligence community for the protection of intelligence information , including intelligence sources and methods .

under section 1.7 of e.o .

12333 , heads of departments and agencies with organizations in the intelligence community ( or the heads of such organizations , if appropriate ) must report possible violations of federal criminal laws to the attorney general "in a manner consistent with the protection of intelligence sources and methods. .

in addition to administrative penalties agencies may employ to enforce information security , there are several statutory provisions that address the protection of classified information as such , but only certain types of information or in specific situations .

there is no blanket prohibition on the unauthorized disclosure of classified information .

the espionage act itself does not mention classified information , but prohibits transmittal of national defense information with the relevant intent or state of mind .

as noted above , e.o .

13526 sets the official procedures for the declassification of information .

once information is declassified , it may be released to persons without a security clearance .

leaks , by contrast , might be defined as the release of classified information to persons without a security clearance , typically journalists .

in 2012 , some allegedly high - profile leaks of information regarding sensitive covert operations in news stories that seemed to some to portray the obama administration in a favorable light raised questions regarding the practice of "instant declassification," or whether disclosure of classified information to journalists may ever be said to be an "authorized disclosure" by a senior official .

the processes for declassification set forth in e.o .

13526 seem to presuppose that agencies and classifying officials will not have any need or desire to disclose classified information in their possession other than to comply with the regulations .

yet it has long been noted that there seems to be an informal process for "instant declassification" of information whose release to the public serves an immediate need .

as representative william moorhead , at the time chairman of the foreign operations and government information subcommittee of the house government operations committee , stated in 1974: critics of the present system of handling classified information within the executive branch point to an obvious double standard .

on one hand , the full power of the government's legal system is exercised against certain newspapers for publishing portions of the pentagon papers and against someone like daniel ellsberg for his alleged role in their being made public .

this is contrasted with other actions by top executive officials who utilize the technique of "instant declassification" of information they want leaked .

sometimes it is an "off - the - record" press briefing or "backgrounders" that becomes "on - the - record" at the conclusion of the briefing or at some future politically strategic time .

such executive branch leaks may be planted with friendly news columnists .

or , the president himself may exercise his prerogative as commander in chief to declassify specific information in an address to the nation or in a message to the congress seeking additional funds for a weapons system .

e.o .

13526 does not address an informal procedure for releasing classified information .

section 1.1 of the e.o .

provides that "[c]lassified information shall not be declassified automatically as a result of any unauthorized disclosure of identical or similar information," but does not address what happens in the event of a disclosure that was in fact authorized .

by definition , classified information is designated as classified based on whether its unauthorized disclosure can reasonably be expected to cause a certain level of damage to national security .

this definition may be read to suggest that disclosures may be authorized under such circumstances when no damage to national security is reasonably expected .

nothing in the order provides explicit authority to release classified information that exists apart from the authority to declassify , but it is possible that such discretionary authority is recognized to release information outside the community of authorized holders without formally declassifying it .

part 4 of the e.o .

13526 describes safeguarding of classified information from unauthorized disclosure and preventing access to such information by "unauthorized persons. .

most of the provisions appear to envision classified documents or communications and storage devices used for classified information rather than the spoken word .

section 4.1 ( g ) requires agency heads and the director of national intelligence to "establish controls to ensure that classified information is used , processed , stored , reproduced , transmitted , and destroyed under conditions that provide adequate protection and prevent access by unauthorized persons. .

if "transmitted" is interpreted to include oral dissemination and "unauthorized persons" is interpreted to mean persons who do not meet the criteria set forth in section 4.1 ( a ) , then it would seem that agency heads who approve leaks could be in breach of their responsibilities under the order .

moreover , there is a provision for "emergency disclosure" of classified information "when necessary to respond to an imminent threat to life or in defense of the homeland" to "an individual or individuals who are otherwise not eligible for access. .

section 4.2 ( b ) provides that such disclosures must be in accordance with implementing regulations or procedures the classifying agency implements ; must be undertaken in such a way as to minimize the information disclosed and the number of individuals who receive it ; and must be reported promptly to the originator .

information disclosed under this provision is not deemed to be declassified .

the existence of this provision could be read to cut against an interpretation that permits selected release of classified information to reporters for broader dissemination .

however , it could also be read to allow a different procedure by which an agency head , who is the original classifying authority for the information at issue , might simply authorize remarks to the press that reference classified information in such a way as to minimize harm to national security .

as a practical matter , however , there is seemingly little to stop agency heads and other high - ranking officials from releasing classified information to persons without a security clearance when it is seen as suiting government needs .

the attorney general has prosecutorial discretion to choose which leaks to prosecute .

if , in fact , a case could be brought that a senior official has made or authorized the disclosure of classified information , successful prosecution under current laws may be difficult because the scienter requirement ( i.e. , guilty state of mind ) is not likely to be met .

the espionage act of 1917 , for example , requires proof that the discloser has the intent or reason to believe the information will be used against the united states or to the benefit of a foreign nation .

although the nature and sensitivity of the information that was released are elements for the jury to decide , knowledge that the information is classified may be enough to persuade a court that damage to national security can be expected .

however , in the event the disclosure was made or authorized by a person who has the authority to make such determinations — as to whether the information will be used against the united states or to the benefit of a foreign nation — it would seem likely that such deference would potentially result in not meeting the scienter requirement absent some proof of ill intent .

for example , a belief on the part of a lower level official that a particular disclosure was authorized could serve as an effective defense to any prosecution , and could entitle the defendant to depose high level government officials in preparation for his or her defense .

executive branch policy appears to treat an official disclosure as a declassifying event , while non - attributed disclosures have no effect on the classification status of the information .

for example , the department of defense instructs agency officials , in the event that classified information appears in the media , to neither confirm nor deny the accuracy of the information .

the under secretary of defense for intelligence is then advised to "consult with the assistant secretary of defense for public affairs and other officials having a primary interest in the information to determine if the information was officially released under proper authority. .

the regulation does not clarify what happens in the event the disclosure turns out to have been properly authorized .

it appears no further action need be taken , whether to inform employees that the information no longer needs to be protected or to make annotations in classified records to reflect the newly declassified status of the information .

in any event , any documents that contain that information potentially contain other classified information as well , in which case each such document would retain the highest level of classification applicable to information in the document .

thus , it seems unlikely that the authorized disclosure of classified information to the media would often result in the public release of any records .

the intelligence authorization act for fy2013 , p.l .

112-277 ( 2013 ) section 504 requires a government official who approves a disclosure of classified information to the media , or to another person for publication , to first report the decision and other matters related to the disclosure to the congressional intelligence committees .

the provision applies to "national intelligence or intelligence related to national security" that is classified or has been declassified for the purpose of making the disclosure , where the disclosure is made by a government officer , employee , or contractor .

according to the original committee report , the reporting is intended to keep the intelligence committees apprised of expected media disclosures of relevant classified information and to assist in distinguishing between "authorized disclosures" and "unauthorized leaks. .

originally scheduled to sunset after a year , the provision was made permanent in the intelligence authorization act for 2014 .

any reports to congress of authorized disclosures submitted pursuant to this provision apparently are classified .

in october 2011 president obama issued executive order 13587 , "structural reforms to improve the security of classified networks and the responsible sharing and safeguarding of classified information. .

among other measures , it established an interagency insider threat task force with a mandate to: develop a government - wide program ( insider threat program ) for deterring , detecting , and mitigating insider threats , including the safeguarding of classified information from exploitation , compromise , or other unauthorized disclosure , taking into account risk levels , as well as the distinct needs , missions , and systems of individual agencies .

this program shall include development of policies , objectives , and priorities for establishing and integrating security , counterintelligence , user audits and monitoring , and other safeguarding capabilities and practices within agencies .

president obama issued the resulting new policy and minimum standards for agencies in implementing their own insider threat programs in november 2012 .

concerned about wikileaks and other disclosures of classified information by those with access , the 112 th congress held at least two hearings on the topic of unauthorized disclosures of classified information .

congress also passed a measure as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2012 to require the defense department to establish a "program for information sharing protection and insider threat mitigation for the information systems of the department of defense to detect unauthorized access to , use of , or transmission of classified or controlled unclassified information. .

the program is required to make use of both technology based solutions as well as a "governance structure and process" to integrate these technologies into existing security measures .

as initially reported by the senate intelligence committee , s. 3454 ( 112 th cong. ) .

contained a number of measures to address the disclosure of classified information by federal employees , whether authorized or not , especially if the disclosure were to the media .

opposition to these measures resulted in a manager's amendment to the bill with all but the reporting provision regarding authorized disclosures removed .

some of the measures that were eliminated from the bill involved restrictions on media access to government officials .

one was a prohibition on federal officers , employees , and contractors who have security clearances , including some who have left government service within the prior year , from entering into agreements with the media to provide analysis or commentary on matters related to classified intelligence activities or intelligence related to national security .

another would have limited the individuals authorized to provide background or off - the - record information to the media regarding intelligence activities to the director and deputy directors or their equivalents of each agency and designated public affairs officers .

another would have required the director of national intelligence to prescribe regulations regarding the interaction of cleared personnel with the media .

such persons would have been required to report all contacts with the media to the appropriate security office .

also eliminated was a prohibition on federal officers , employees , and contractors from possessing a security clearance after having made any unauthorized disclosure regarding the existence of , or classified details relating to , a covert action as defined in 50 u.s.c .

section 413 ( b ) ( now classified at 50 u.s.c .

section 3091 ) .

the insider threat issue was revisited in the intelligence authorization act for fy2016 , passed as division m of the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 , p.l .

114-113 ( 2015 ) .

section 306 added a requirement to title 5 , u.s. code , for the dni to direct agencies to each establish an "enhanced personnel security program" to integrate a broader data set into reassessments of the continuing eligibility of personnel to hold security clearances or sensitive positions .

specifically , the enhanced personnel security program of an agency shall integrate relevant and appropriate information from various sources , including government , publicly available and commercial data sources , consumer reporting agencies , social media and such other sources as determined by the director of national intelligence .

the provision requires the agency programs to conduct random automated record checks of the selected sources of data at least twice within a five - year period for each covered person , unless that individual is subject to more frequent reviews .

the deadline to implement the programs is five years after enactment ( which will occur december 15 , 2020 ) or the date on which the backlog of overdue periodic reinvestigations is eliminated , as determined by dni .

