the office of management and budget traces its origin to 1921 .

established as the bureau of the budget ( bob ) within the treasury department by the budget and accounting act , 1921 ( 42 stat .

20 ) , it functioned under the supervision of the president .

reorganization plan no .

1 of 1939 ( 53 stat .

1423 ) transferred the bureau to the newly created executive office of the president ( eop ) .

subsequently , bob was designated as the office of management and budget ( omb ) by reorganization plan no .

2 of 1970 ( 84 stat .

2085 ) .

concern about omb's accountability prompted congress to make the director and deputy director subject to senate confirmation in 1974 ( 88 stat .

11 ) .

congress also established four statutory offices within omb to oversee several cross - cutting processes and management matters .

the office of federal procurement policy act ( 88 stat .

796 ) established the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) in 1974 .

the paperwork reduction act of 1980 ( 94 stat .

2812 ; later recodified as the paperwork reduction act of 1995 , 109 stat .

163 ) established the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) .

the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 ( 104 stat .

2838 ) established the office of federal financial management ( offm ) .

the e - government act of 2002 ( 116 stat .

2899 ) established the office of electronic government ( e - gov office ) .

the current profile of omb's leadership and organizational structure is available on the agency's website .

in addition to omb's leadership and their support staff , omb has three major types of offices: ( 1 ) resource management offices ; ( 2 ) statutory offices ; and ( 3 ) omb - wide support offices .

each of omb's four resource management offices ( rmos ) focuses on a cluster of related agencies and issues ( eg , natural resource programs ) to examine budget requests and make funding recommendations .

in addition , rmos are tasked with integrating management , budget , and policy perspectives in their work as a result of omb's latest major reorganization in 1994 .

politically appointed program associate directors ( pads ) lead the rmos .

below the pad level , rmo staff are almost always career civil servants , and are organized into divisions and branches .

each rmo branch covers a cabinet department or collection of smaller agencies and is led by a career member of the senior executive service ( ses ) .

omb's program examiners staff each rmo branch .

three of the statutory offices focus on management areas: financial management ( offm ) , procurement policy ( ofpp ) , and information technology ( e - gov office , shared with oira ) .

the fourth office , oira , has a broad portfolio of responsibilities , including regulation , information policy and technology , paperwork reduction , statistical policy , and privacy .

analysts in the statutory offices develop policy , coordinate implementation , and work with the rmos on agency - specific issues .

omb's seven support offices also play key roles .

for example , the budget review division ( brd ) coordinates the process for preparing the president's annual budget proposal to congress .

the legislative reference division ( lrd ) coordinates review of agencies' draft bills , congressional testimony , and correspondence to ensure compliance with the president's policy agenda .

omb's economic policy office works with the president's council of economic advisers ( cea ) and the treasury department to develop economic assumptions .

the other support offices are general counsel , legislative affairs , communications , and administration .

omb had 484 full - time equivalent ( fte ) positions in fy2005 and estimated 500 for fy2006 .

omb typically has a total of 20-25 political appointees and staff , while the rest are career civil servants .

omb's director , deputy director , and deputy director for management are presidentially appointed with senate confirmation ( pas ) .

the heads of ofpp , offm , and oira are also pas officials .

in contrast , the administrator of the e - gov office is presidentially appointed ( pa ) .

figure 1 shows omb's historical staffing .

omb's budget is driven mainly by personnel costs .

compensation and benefits were 88% of omb's $67.8 million in total obligations for fy2005 .

the remainder chiefly covered contractual services ( 8% ) .

among omb's offices , 51% of fy2005 funding went to the rmos , 31% to the omb - wide support offices ( including the e - gov office ) , and 18% to the statutory offices .

figure 2 shows omb's budget history .

omb's budget has fluctuated in recent years due to reallocations of funding , related to the "enterprise services program," among budget accounts in the eop .

for fy2003 , congress reallocated $8.3 million from omb to the eop's office of administration ( oa ) for central procurement of goods and services , reducing omb's appropriation compared to the prior fiscal year .

the president subsequently requested for both fy2004 and fy2005 that similar , though slightly reduced , funding be shifted back to omb , but congress continued a similar reallocation in both years .

for fy2006 , the president requested that the reallocation to oa continue , but congress shifted $7 million , for rent and health unit costs , from oa back to omb , and appropriated $76.2 million ( after rescission ) to omb .

for fy2007 , the president proposed $68.8 million for omb ( 9.7% lower than the fy2006 level ) and $7.9 million ( related to omb's rent , health unit , transit subsidy , and flexible spending account costs ) for oa .

including the $7.9 million proposed for oa that otherwise might be in omb's budget , the fy2007 omb proposal is a 0.6% increase in nominal dollars compared to fy2006 , and a 1.7% decrease in constant dollars .

as a primary support agency for the president , omb has important and varied responsibilities .

a 1986 study identified 95 statutes , 58 executive orders , five regulations , and 51 circulars that reflected omb's operational authorities at the time .

most observers include as "major functions" of omb those listed below .

the budget and accounting act , 1921 , as amended and recodified , requires the president to submit each year a consolidated budget proposal for congress's consideration .

in this "formulation phase," omb sends budget guidance to agencies via its circular no .

a - 11 , which is updated each year to reflect the president's budget and management priorities .

agency heads then forward their formal budget requests to omb , where the rmos and e - gov office ( for information technology initiatives ) assemble options and analysis for decisions by omb and the white house .

after an opportunity for agency appeals , omb's brd coordinates production of the president's budget .

when congress completes action on appropriations bills and they are signed into law , the "execution phase" begins .

the antideficiency act ( which includes 31 u.s.c .

â§â§ 1511-1514 ) requires omb to "apportion" appropriated funds ( usually quarterly ) to prevent agencies from spending at a rate that would exhaust their appropriations before the end of the fiscal year .

omb plays a key role in coordinating the president's legislative activities .

under circular no .

a - 19 , omb's lrd coordinates executive branch review and clearance of congressional testimony and correspondence and agencies' draft bills to ensure compliance with the president's policy agenda , make known the administration's views on legislation , and allow affected agencies to provide input during intra - executive branch policy development .

for non - appropriations legislation , lrd plays a coordination role in preparing "statements of administration policy" ( saps ) for congress , and memoranda to advise the president on enrolled bills ( eg , recommending signature or veto , or contents for signing statements ) .

brd performs similar duties for appropriations legislation .

omb exercises considerable influence over agency regulations .

under executive order 12866 , oira works with omb's rmos to review agency rules and cost - benefit analyses .

in addition , other oira policy and oversight responsibilities include statistical policy ; paperwork reduction ; government use of personal information under the privacy act ( 5 u.s.c .

â§ 552a ) ; information technology investment under the clinger - cohen act ( p.l .

104-106 , 110 stat .

679 ) ; and information security .

oira shares some responsibilities with the e - gov office .

omb has responsibility for overseeing management in the executive branch .

omb is responsible for clearing and approving proposed executive orders ( eos ) and many proclamations .

omb's deputy director for management ( ddm ) is charged with overall responsibility for general management policies in the executive branch , including the domains of the statutory offices , plus human resources management .

the statutory offices also develop policy and coordinate implementation in the areas of financial management ( offm ) , procurement policy ( ofpp ) , and information policy and technology ( oira and e - gov office ) .

omb's rmos are tasked with integrating budget , policy , and management issues for specific agencies in cooperation with the statutory offices .

observers disagree as to how well omb has fulfilled these management responsibilities .

some have argued that the "m" in omb is more mirage than real , because budget responsibilities crowd out attention to management issues , while others have argued that budget and management responsibilities cannot realistically be separated .

omb leads implementation of the george w. bush administration's program assessment rating tool ( part ) and president's management agenda ( pma ) .

the part , which omb uses to rate the "overall effectiveness" of programs , has been used to help justify the president's budget proposals .

the pma includes , among other things , five government - wide initiatives and quarterly evaluation of agencies on a "scorecard" with red , yellow , or green "stoplight scores" for each of the initiatives , based on published "standards for success. .

as an agency , omb's scorecard ratings for december 31 , 2005 , were two yellow and three red for "status" and , for "progress," four green and one yellow .

