the fundamental policy assumption that has changed between the u.s. ratification of the 1992 framework convention on climate change ( fccc ) and the current bush administration's decision to abandon the kyoto protocol process concerns costs .

the ratification of the fccc was based at least partially on the premise that significant reductions could be achieved at little or no cost .

this assumption helped to reduce concern some had ( including those of the former bush administration ) that the treaty could have deleterious effects on u.s. competitiveness — a significant consideration because developing countries are treated differently from developed countries under the fccc .

further ameliorating this concern , compliance with the treaty was voluntary .

while the united states could "aim" to reduce its emissions in line with the fccc's goal , if the effort indeed involved substantial costs , the united states could fail to reach the goal ( as has happened ) without incurring any penalty under the treaty .

this flexibility would have been eliminated under the kyoto protocol with its mandatory reduction requirements .

the possibility of failure to comply with a binding commitment intensifies one's perspective on potential costs: how confident can one be in the claim that carbon reductions can be achieved at little or no cost ? .

compliance cost estimates ranging from $5.5 billion to $200 billion annually cause some to pause .

the current bush administration was sufficiently concerned about potential co 2 control costs to reverse a campaign pledge to seek co 2 emissions reductions from power plants , in addition to its decision to abandon the kyoto protocol process .

proposed co 2 reduction schemes present large uncertainties in terms of the perceived reduction needs and the potential costs of achieving those reductions .

in an attempt to prevent any co 2 control program from incurring unacceptable costs , several cost - limiting "safety valves" have been proposed to bound costs .

these safety valves are designed to work with market - based co 2 reduction schemes , similar to the tradeable permit strategy used by the acid rain program , and would effectively limit the unit ( per ton of emissions ) control costs sources would pay .

this report examines four such safety valves: ( 1 ) a straight carbon tax , ( 2 ) a contingent reduction scheme , ( 3 ) unlimited permit purchases , ( 4 ) cost - based excess emissions penalties .

in general , market - based mechanisms to reduce co 2 emissions focus on specifying either the acceptable emissions level ( quantity ) , or compliance costs ( price ) , and allowing the marketplace to determine the economically efficient solution for the other variable .

for example , a tradeable permit program sets the amount of emissions allowable under the program ( i.e. , the number of permits available caps allowable emissions ) , while permitting the marketplace to determine what each permit will be worth .

likewise , a carbon tax sets the maximum unit ( per ton of co 2 ) cost that one should pay for reducing emissions , while the marketplace determines how much actually gets reduced .

in one sense , preference for a carbon tax or a tradeable permit system depends on how one views the uncertainty of costs involved and benefits to be received .

for those confident that achieving a specific level of co 2 reduction will yield significant benefits — enough so that even the potentially very high end of the marginal cost curve does not bother them — a tradeable permit program may be most appropriate .

co 2 emissions would be reduced to a specific level , and in the case of a tradeable permit program , the cost involved would be handled efficiently , though not controlled at a specific cost level .

this efficiency occurs because through the trading of permits , emission reduction efforts concentrate at sources at which controls can be achieved at least cost .

however , if one feels more certain of the potential downside risk of substantial control costs to the economy than of the benefits of a specific level of reduction , then a carbon tax may be most appropriate .

in this approach , the level of the tax effectively caps the marginal cost of control that affected activities would pay under the reductions scheme , but the precise level of co 2 achieved is less certain .

emitters of co 2 would spend money controlling co 2 emissions up to the level of the tax .

however , since the marginal cost of control among millions of emitters is not well known , the overall emissions reductions for a given tax level on co 2 emissions cannot be accurately forecast .

hence , a major policy question is whether one is more concerned about the possible economic cost of the program and therefore willing to accept some uncertainty about the amount of reduction received ( i.e. , carbon taxes ) ; or one is more concerned about achieving a specific emission reduction level with costs handled efficiently , but not capped ( i.e. , tradeable permits ) .

a model for a tradeable permit approach is the sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) allowance program contained in title iv of the 1990 clean air act amendments .

also called the acid rain control program , the tradeable permit system is based on two premises .

first , a set amount of so 2 emitted by human activities can be assimilated by the ecological system without undue harm .

thus the goal of the program is to put a ceiling , or cap , on the total emissions of so 2 rather than limit ambient concentrations .

second , a market in pollution licenses between polluters is the most cost - effective means of achieving a given reduction .

this market in pollution licenses ( or allowances , each of which is equal to one ton of so 2 ) is designed so that owners of allowances can trade those allowances with other emitters who need them or retain ( bank ) them for future use or sale .

initially , most allowances were allocated by the federal government to utilities according to statutory formulas related to a given facility's historic fuel use and emissions ; other allowances have been reserved by the government for periodic auctions to ensure market liquidity .

there are no existing u.s. models of an emissions tax , although five european countries have carbon - based taxes .

as a stalemate has continued on strategies to control co 2 emissions , particularly because of costs fears , attention increasingly focuses on the cost - limiting benefit of a carbon tax , either as the primary strategy or as a component blending a carbon tax with the reduction certainty of the tradeable permit system .

the object is to create a safety valve to avert unacceptable control costs , particularly in the short term .

these safety valves limit unit ( per ton ) costs of reducing emissions .

four ideas are identified below: carbon taxes: generally conceived as a levy on natural gas , petroleum , and coal according to their carbon content , in the approximate ratio of 0.6 to 0.8 to 1 , respectively .

however , proposals have been made to impose the tax downstream of the production process .

several european countries have carbon taxes in varying degrees and forms .

unlimited permits at set price: generally conceived as part of an auction system where permits are allocated to affected sectors by auction with an unlimited number available at a specific price .

the most recent proposal is by the national commission on energy policy , which recommends an initial limiting price of $7 / ton that would increase by 5% annually .

other variations include the resources for the future / skytrust proposal , which would increase the limiting price ( $25 / ton ) by 7% above inflation annually , and the brookings proposal , which would set up a short - term market based on a $10 / ton price , and a long - term market based on market rates .

contingent reduction: generally conceived as a declining emission cap system where the rate of decline over time is determined by the market price of permits .

if permit prices remain under set threshold prices , the next reduction in the emission cap is implemented .

if not , the cap is held at the current level until prices decline .

discussions have centered on a 2% annual declining cap subject to a $5 a permit co 2 cost cap .

excess emissions penalty: generally involves a fee on emissions exceeding available permits based on control costs or other economic criteria , rather than criminal or civil considerations .

for example , oregon's co 2 standard for new energy facilities includes a fee of 57 cents per short ton on co 2 emissions in excess of the standard ( increase to 85 cents proposed ) .

 table 1 summarizes the key considerations of each of the proposals identified above .

as indicated , each safety valve effectively controls cost , but at the price of some uncertainty about the amount of emissions reduced .

if one uses the existing title iv acid rain control program as a baseline , the excess emissions penalty option is the most similar , while the carbon tax option is the most different .

the excess emissions penalty option would work in essentially the same fashion as the acid rain program , with the primary difference being the penalty for having insufficient permits at the end of the year .

under title iv , the penalty is intended to be punitive — to punish the offender for breaking the law .

thus , the offender pays a fine three times the estimated cost of control in addition to forfeiting a future permit .

the overriding assumption is that the offender could have reduced his emissions sufficiently , but refused to do so .

under the excess emissions penalty option , there is uncertainty as to whether an offender could have reduced his emissions sufficiently at the estimated price , and that reductions at a cost greater than that price are either socially unacceptable or economically unjustifiable .

hence , the penalty is assessed on the basis of a socially acceptable or economically justifiable price so that the offender pays a cost for his unlawful activity and is encouraged to comply with the law , but is not punished beyond what society has deemed reasonable .

arriving at such an acceptable penalty could be contentious .

the carbon tax is the most radical compared with the title iv program because it dispenses with the permit system approach to emissions control .

all the pressure under a carbon tax scheme is on the timing , pace , and level of the tax , as there is no stigma for not controlling pollution .

the strength of this approach is that it is self - enforcing , and considerable revenues will be generated that could be recycled to polluters or used for other priorities .

however , u.s. environmental policy has generally opposed any approach suggesting a polluter's right to pollute , which the carbon tax approach does grant .

depending on how the unlimited permit approach is implemented , it can look and act a lot like a carbon tax .

if the initial allocation of permits is by auction and unlimited permits are available at a low price , the auction price will equal the unlimited permit price , resulting in a carbon tax equal to the excess emissions permit price .

thus , without limits on the quantity of permits allowed , the unlimited permits approach is merely a carbon tax by another name , at least in the short term .

in addition , the unlimited permits system requires the tracking mechanisms of a tradeable permit system if it is ever to evolve into a permit system .

as with a carbon tax , setting the unlimited permit price could be contentious .

the contingent reduction approach attempts to turn both the price and the quantity of reductions into variables solved by the trading market .

this requires agreements on both the profiles of emissions reductions and threshold price triggers .

it also puts enormous pressure on the trading permit market to produce an accurate price to make the whole system work .

although in some ways the most innovative , the contingent approach also could be the most difficult in terms of arriving at acceptable parameters for the reductions and triggers .

in short , employing a safety valve shifts much of the emission reduction debate from compliance targets to the specifications of the safety valve .

the safety valve becomes the controlling mechanism of the permit tradeable system , or the sole mechanism in the case of a carbon tax .

whether this shift would contribute to an acceptable result is not clear .

