house rule x , clause 5 ( c ) ( 2 ) , adopted in 1995 limited committee ( and subcommittee ) chairs to three terms of consecutive service .

service for less than a full session in a congress is disregarded .

a rules change adopted on january 7 , 2003 , pursuant to h.res .

5 , exempted the intelligence committee chair from the limit .

a rules change adopted on january 4 , 2005 , pursuant to h.res .

5 , exempted the rules committee chair from the limit .

in 2009 , the democratic majority removed term limits from house rules .

the rules adopted on january 3 , 2013 , reinstituted term limits for all committee chairs , but continued the exemption for the rules committee chair .

republican conference rules delineate procedures for the selection of standing committee chairs and ranking minority members .

the speaker , with the republicans in the majority , has the authority to nominate the chairs of the house administration committee and rules committee .

in the minority , these appointments are made by the minority leader .

the speaker's or minority leader's nominations for these two positions are submitted directly to the full republican conference for ratification .

if the conference rejects the leader's nominee , the speaker or minority leader has the authority to submit another name to the conference .

all other standing committee chairs or ranking minority members are nominated by the republican steering committee and ratified by the full republican conference .

pursuant to conference rules , the member nominated to be chair or ranking minority member does not need to be the member with the longest continuous service on the committee .

in recent congresses , the steering committee "interviewed" prospective candidates for chair or ranking slots .

some of the new chairs and ranking members have been the most senior members of the committee , others were not .

the steering committee is composed of party leaders , selected committee leaders , class leaders , and regional representatives .

the steering committee is reconstituted each congress .

regions are restructured to reflect as closely as possible an equal number of republican members from each region .

each region elects its steering committee member .

if steering committee members are elected from states that have four or more republican members , a "small state" group is triggered to also elect a member to the steering committee ; the small state group is composed of states that have three or fewer republican members .

on november , 19 , 2015 , the house republican conference adopted a conference resolution redesigning the composition of the steering committee .

the chairs of the committees on appropriations , budget , energy and commerce , financial services , rules , and ways and means were removed , except when the steering committee is considering members for election to one of those specific committees .

if , for example , a member is elected to the ways and means committee , that committee's chair would join the steering committee to deliberate and vote on the new member .

six members are to be elected by the conference as at - large members .

the speaker has the authority to appoint one at - large designee .

the speaker , who previously had five votes , will have four votes .

the conference resolution stated that elections for the at - large members would be held not later than 30 calendar days after the resolution was adopted .

the six members receiving the greatest number of votes would be elected .

the republican conference elected the six members on december 10 , 2015 .

it is anticipated that the number of regions and the regional allocation will be reviewed in the near future .

table 1 depicts the membership of the reconstituted republican steering committee as of july 1 , 2017 .

democratic caucus rules address selecting committee chairs and ranking minority members .

the democratic leader nominates a chair and ranking member for the committees on rules and house administration , who must be approved by the entire democratic caucus .

the budget committee chair and ranking member are selected from among members choosing to run for the position .

other chair and ranking member nominations are made by the democratic steering and policy committee and voted on by the entire democratic caucus .

in making selections , the steering committee considers , pursuant to caucus rules , "merit , length of service on the committee and degree of commitment to the democratic agenda of the nominee , and the diversity of the caucus. .

the steering committee is reconstituted each congress , and regions can be restructured to reflect equal democratic representation among regions .

the number of appointments made by the party leader can also change .

table 2 depicts the democratic steering and policy committee as constituted as of july 1 , 2017 .

