rs21135 - - the enron collapse: an overview of financial issues updated august 12 , 200 .

enron corp. , the first nationwide natural gas pipeline network , shifted its business focus during the 1990s from the regulated transportation of natural gas totrading in unregulated energy markets .

until late 2001 , nearly all observers - - including wall street professionals - - regarded this transformation as anoutstanding success .

enron's reported annual revenues grew from under $10 billion in the early 1990s to $139billion in 2001 , placing it fifth on the fortune500 .

enron continued to transform its business but , as it diversified out of its core energy operations , it ran intoserious trouble .

like many other firms , enronsaw an unlimited future in the internet .

during the late 1990s , it invested heavily in online marketers and serviceproviders , constructed a fiber opticcommunications network , and attempted to create a market for trading broadband communications capacity .

enronentered these markets near the peak of theboom and paid high prices , taking on a heavy debt load to finance its purchases .

when the dot com crash came in2000 , revenue from these investments driedup , but the debt remained .

enron also recorded significant losses in certain foreign operations .

the firm made major investments in public utilities in india , south america , and the u.k.,hoping to profit in newly - deregulated markets .

in these three cases , local politicians acted to shield consumers fromthe sharp price increases that enronanticipated .

by contrast , enron's energy trading businesses appear to have made money , although that trading was probably less extensive and profitable than the companyclaimed in its financial reports .

energy trading , however , did not generate sufficient cash to allow enron towithstand major losses in its dot com and foreignportfolios .

once the internet bubble burst , enron's prospects were dire .

it is not unusual for businesses to fail after making bad or ill - timed investments .

what turned the enron case into a major financial scandal was the company'sresponse to its problems .

rather than disclose its true condition to public investors , as the law requires , enronfalsified its accounts .

it assigned business lossesand near - worthless assets to unconsolidated partnerships and "special purpose entities. .

in other words , the firm'spublic accounting statements pretended thatlosses were occurring not to enron , but to the so - called raptor entities , which were ostensibly independent firmsthat had agreed to absorb enron's losses , butwere in fact accounting contrivances created and entirely controlled by enron's management .

in addition , enronappears to have disguised bank loans as energyderivatives trades to conceal the extent of its indebtedness .

when these accounting fictions - - which were sustained for nearly 18 months - - came to light , and corrected accounting statements were issued , over 80% ofthe profits reported since 2000 vanished and enron quickly collapsed .

the sudden collapse of such a largecorporation , and the accompanying losses of jobs,investor wealth , and market confidence , suggested that there were serious flaws in the u.s. system of securitiesregulation , which is based on the full andaccurate disclosure of all financial information that market participants need to make informed investment decisions .

the suggestion was amply confirmed bythe succession of major corporate accounting scandals that followed .

enron raised fundamental issues about corporate fraud , accounting transparency , and investor protection .

several aspects of these issues are briefly sketchedbelow , with reference to crs products that provide more detail .

federal securities law requires that the accounting statements of publicly traded corporations be certified by an independent auditor .

enron's auditor , arthurandersen , not only turned a blind eye to improper accounting practices , but was actively involved in devisingcomplex financial structures and transactions thatfacilitated deception .

an auditor's certification indicates that the financial statements under review have been prepared in accordance with generally - accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) .

in enron's case , the question is not only whether gaap were violated , but whether current accountingstandards permit corporations to play"numbers games," and whether investors are exposed to excessive risk by financial statements that lack clarity andconsistency .

accounting standards forcorporations are set by the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) , a non - governmental entity , though thereare also securities and exchangecommission ( sec ) requirements .

 ( the sec has statutory authority to set accounting standards for firms that sellsecurities to the public. ) .

some describefasb's standards setting process as cumbersome and too susceptible to business and / or political pressures .

in response to the auditing and accounting problems at enron and other major corporations scandals , congress enacted the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 ( p.l.107-204 ) , containing perhaps the most far - reaching amendments to the securities laws since the 1930s .

very briefly,the law does the following: creates a public company accounting oversight board to regulate independent auditors of publicly traded companies - - a private sectorentity operating under the oversight of the sec ; raises standards of auditor independence by prohibiting auditors from providing certain consulting services to their audit clients andrequiring preapproval by the client's board of directors for other nonaudit services ; requires top corporate management and audit committees to assume more direct responsibility for the accuracy of financialstatements ; enhances disclosure requirements for certain transactions , such as stock sales by corporate insiders , transactions with unconsolidatedsubsidiaries , and other significant events that may require "real - time" disclosure ; directs the sec to adopt rules to prevent conflicts of interest that affect the objectivity of stock analysts ; authorizes $776 million for the sec in fy2003 ( versus $469 million in the administration's budget request ) and requires the sec toreview corporate financial reports more frequently ; and establishes and / or increases criminal penalties for a variety of offenses related to securities fraud , including misleading an auditor , mailand wire fraud , and destruction of records .

see also crs report rl31554 , corporate accountability: sarbanes - oxley act of 2002: ( p.l .

107-204 ) , by michael seitzinger ; and crs report rs21120 , auditing and its regulators: proposals for reform after enron , by [author name scrubbed] .

like many companies , enron sponsored a retirement plan - - a "401 ( k ) " - - for its employees to which they can contribute a portion of their pay on atax - deferred basis .

as of december 31 , 2000 , 62% of the assets held in the corporation's 401 ( k ) retirement planconsisted of enron stock .

many individualenron employees held even larger percentages of enron stock in their 401 ( k ) accounts .

shares of enron , which injanuary 2001 traded for more than $80 / share,were worth less than 70 cents in january 2002 .

the catastrophic losses suffered by participants in the enroncorporation's 401 ( k ) plan have promptedquestions about the laws and regulations that govern these plans .

in the 107th congress , the house passed legislation ( h.r .

3762 ) that would have required account information to be provided moreoften to plan participants , improved access to investment planning advice , allowed plan participants to diversifytheir portfolios by selling company stockcontributed by employers after three years , and barred executives from selling company stock while a plan is "lockeddown. .

 ( the latter provision was enactedby the sarbanes - oxley act. ) .

similar legislation has not advanced in the 108th congress .

see also crs report rl31507 , employer stock in retirement plans: investment risk and retirement security , by [author name scrubbed] ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ; and crs report rl31551 , employer stock in pension plans: economic and tax issues , by jane gravelle .

in the wake of enron and other scandals , corporate boards of directors were subject to critical scrutiny .

boards , whose chief duty is to represent shareholders'interests , utterly failed to prevent or detect management fraud .

several provisions of sarbanes - oxley were designedto boost the power of independent directorsand the audit committee of the board to exercise effective oversight of management and the accounting process.under sarbanes - oxley , the board's auditcommittee must have a majority of independent directors ( not affiliated with management or the corporation ) andis responsible for hiring , firing , overseeing,and paying the firm's outside auditor .

the audit committee must include at least one director who is a financialexpert , that is , able to evaluate significantaccounting issues and / or disagreements between management and auditors .

in 2003 , the new york stock exchange and the nasdaq adopted rules requiring listed corporations to have a majority of independent directors ( not affiliatedwith management or the corporation ) on their boards .

in 2004 , the sec is considering a rule that would facilitatethe nomination of directors by shareholders .

securities analysts employed by investment banks provide research and make "buy," "sell," or "hold" recommendations .

these recommendations are widelycirculated and are relied upon by many public investors .

analyst support was crucial to enron because it requiredconstant infusions of funds from the financialmarkets .

on november 29 , 2001 , after enron's stock had fallen 99% from its high , and after rating agencies haddowngraded its debt to "junk bond"status,only two of 11 major firm analysts rated its stock a "sell. .

was analyst objectivity - - towards enron and other firms - - compromised by pressure to avoidalienating investment banking clients ? .

the sarbanes - oxley act directs the sec to establish rules addressing analysts' conflicts of interest ; these were issued in 2003 .

in december 2002 , 10 majorinvestment banks reached a settlement with state and federal securities regulators under which they agreed toreforms to make their analysts independent of theirbanking operations , and to pay fines totaling about $1 billion .

see also crs report rl31348 ( pdf ) , enron and stock analyst objectivity , by [author name scrubbed] .

one part of the fallout from enron's demise involves its relations with banks .

prominent banking companies , notably citigroup and j.p. morgan chase , wereinvolved in both the investment banking ( securities ) and the commercial banking ( lending and deposit ) businesseswith enron .

in 2003 , the sec fined the twobanks $120 and $135 million , respectively , for their roles in enron's accounting frauds .

several aspects of enron's relations with its bankers have raised several questions .

 ( 1 ) do financial holding companies ( firms that encompass both investmentand commercial banking operations ) face a conflict of interest , between their duty to avoid excessive risk on loansfrom their bank sides versus their opportunityto glean profits from deals on their investment banking side ? .

 ( 2 ) were the bankers enticed or pressured to providefunding for enron and recommend itssecurities and derivatives to other parties ? .

 ( 3 ) did the dynegy rescue plan , proposed just before enron's collapse,and involving further investments by j.p.morgan chase and citigroup , represent protective self - dealing ? .

 ( 4 ) what is the proper accounting for banks'off - balance - sheet items including derivativepositions and lines of credit , such as they provided to enron ? .

 ( 5 ) did the enron situation represent a warning thatglba may need fine - tuning in the way itmixes the different business practices of wall street and commercial banking ? .

see also crs report rs21188 , enron's banking relationships and congressional repeal of statutes separating bank lending from investment banking , by[author name scrubbed] .

part of enron's core energy business involved dealing in derivative contracts based on the prices of oil , gas , electricity and other variables .

for example , enronsold long - term contracts to buy or sell energy at fixed prices .

these contracts allow the buyers to avoid , or hedge,the risks that increases ( or drops ) in energyprices posed to their businesses .

since the markets in which enron traded are largely unregulated , with no reportingrequirements , little information is availableabout the extent or profitability of enron's derivatives activities , beyond what is contained in the company's ownfinancial statements .

while trading inderivatives is an extremely high - risk activity , no evidence has yet emerged that indicates that speculative losses werea factor in enron's collapse .

since the enron failure , several energy derivatives dealers have admitted to making "wash trades," which lack economic substance but give the appearance ofgreater market volume than actually exists , and facilitate deceptive accounting ( if the fictitious trades are reportedas real revenue ) .

in 2002 , energy derivativestrading diminished to a fraction of pre - enron levels , as major traders ( and their customers and shareholders ) re - evaluate the risks and utility of unregulatedenergy trading .

several major dealers have withdrawn from the market entirely .

internal enron memoranda released in may 2002 suggest that enron ( and other market participants ) engaged in a variety of manipulative trading practicesduring the california electricity crisis .

for example , enron was able to buy electricity at a fixed price in californiaand sell it elsewhere at the higher marketprice , exacerbating electricity shortages within california .

the evidence to date does not indicate that energyderivatives - as opposed to physical , spot - markettrades - - played a major role in these manipulative strategies .

numerous firms and individuals have been chargedwith civil and criminal violations related tothe manipulation of energy prices in california and elsewhere .

even if derivatives trading was not a major cause , enron's failure raises the issue of supervision of unregulated derivatives markets .

would it be useful ifregulators had more information about the portfolios and risk exposures of major dealers in derivatives ? .

althoughenron's bankruptcy appears to have hadlittle impact on energy supplies and prices , a similar dealer failure in the future might damage the dealer's tradingpartners and its lenders , and couldconceivably set off widespread disruptions in financial and / or real commodity markets .

legislation proposed , but not enacted , in the 107th congress ( h.r .

3914 , h.r .

4038 , s. 1951 , and s. 2724 ) would have ( among other things ) given the cftc more authority to pursue fraud ( including wash transactions ) inthe otc market , and to require disclosure ofcertain trade data by dealers .

in the 108th congress , the senate twice rejected legislation ( s.amdt .

876 and s.amdt .

2083 ) that wouldhave increased regulatory oversight of energy derivatives markets by the cftc and ferc .

see also crs report rs21401 , regulation of energy derivatives , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rs20560 , the commodity futures modernization act ( p.l .

106-554 ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

