rs21510 - - nato's decision - making procedure updated march 8 , 200 .

in february 2003 , the united states asked that nato begin planning to provide turkey with defensive systems in the event of an attack by iraq during theimpending war with saddam hussein's regime .

the request also asked that nato members backfill for some u.s.forces in the balkans , needed for thepossible conflict with iraq .

france , germany , and belgium objected in the north atlantic council ( nac ) , nato'ssupreme political body .

they contendedthat granting the request would be the equivalent of acknowledging that iraq had impeded u.n. weaponsinspections , as yet unproven in the view of the threegovernments , and be a pretext for war .

nato secretary general robertson at that point invoked the "silenceprocedure," under which any membergovernment objecting to the request must send him a formal letter stating its opposition .

the three governmentssent such a letter in the stated time frame,stymieing the u.s. request .

turkey itself then asked for consultations concerning its defense needs under articleiv of the north atlantic treaty .

the united states asked that turkey's request for assistance be discussed in the defense planning committee ( dpc ) , where france is not a member .

thegerman government was willing to grant the request for assistance to turkey , and dropped its opposition .

thebelgian government , now isolated , dropped itsobjection .

the dpc then granted the request for defense planning , which resulted in the deployment of awacs,patriot missiles , and other defensive systemsto protect turkey .

consensus in the nac is generally sought when allied governments must formulate policy on an important strategic issue .

examples include approval ofnato's strategic concept ( nato's document that serves as a strategic guideline ) , relations with partnership forpeace countries , the nato budget,deployment of forces for peace operations , and invocation of article v. consensus is clearly differentiated from"unanimity," which nato does not seek .

unanimity would require an actively stated vote in favor of a measure .

structure and process .

nato has a civil and a military structure .

the supreme political decision - makingbody , the north atlantic council ( nac ) , sits in brussels , and is chaired by the secretary general .

each of the 19member states has a representative on thenac .

key proposals for military decisions are made by the military committee ( mc ) .

a senior european military officer chairs the military committee .

the mchas 18 members because france withdrew from the alliance's integrated military structure in 1966 .

france sendsan observer , without a vote , to the mc .

france has full representation on the nac , however , as paris did not withdraw from nato's politicaldecision - making structure .

the nac has the authorityto approve all key mc documents .

normally , any government may have two opportunities to influence a major nato decision .

for example , the mc established a working group at the level ofcolonel to work out the deployment and responsibilities of nato member state forces to be sent to bosnia for peaceoperations in the 1990s .

the 18representatives on the working group met for eight months , and eventually drafted a document that was approvedby the mc .

the mc then sent the documentto the nac's international staff .

ultimately , all 19 representatives on the nac refined the document's language,and approved it .

reaching consensus is therefore a process in which member governments have ample opportunity to provide language to nato documents and decisions thatreflect national governments' individual views .

the north atlantic council ( nac ) .

the nac achieves consensus through a process in which nogovernment states its objection .

a formal vote in which governments state their position is not taken .

during thekosovo conflict , for example , it was clear toall governments that greece was uncomfortable with a decision to go to war .

nato does not require a governmentto vote in favor of a conflict , but rather toobject explicitly if it opposes such a decision .

athens chose not to object , knowing its allies wished to take militaryaction against serbia .

in contrast tonato , the eu seeks unanimity on key issues .

unanimity characterizes eu decision - making when , for example,new members are invited to join , or revisionsto the union's governing treaties must be adopted .

at nato , the "silence procedure" may be used for any decision requiring a consensus .

at times , the procedure allows governments in opposition to a measureto avoid confronting other allies around the table during a session of the nac .

the procedure can also providecover for a government from unwanted pressreporting that might characterize its policy as out of step with other allies .

by not sending a letter to the secretarygeneral within a specified time period , agovernment can avoid the step of stating its explicit objection to a policy if it believes other allies are set on a courseof action .

this procedure failed in theeffort to begin defense planning for turkey when three governments were in opposition .

the procedure can be moresuccessful if only one government is put inthe position of having to take the formal step of sending a letter of opposition to the secretary general , and mayrefrain from doing so to avoid being isolated .

nato uses the same principle of consensus in the dpc , where 18 members make proposals on such matters as force structure .

normally , the dpc's proposalsare sent to the military committee or to the nac for approval .

when france withdrew from the militarycommittee in 1966 , it also surrendered its seat on thedpc .

nato in the past has made important preliminary decisions on military operations in the dpc .

however,in 1992 , when nato decided to enforce thearms embargo in the adriatic sea against the countries of the disintegrating yugoslavia , france wished to participatein the decision and to send forces as partof the operation .

for this reason , nato transferred the decision to the nac , where france could play a role .

thispractice set a precedent for subsequentnato military operations .

the nac made the decisions to establish sfor , approve the plan for operationallied force in kosovo , and establish kfor inthe conflict's aftermath , each time because france wished to participate in these operations .

when france ( andbelgium and germany ) objected in february2003 to military assistance to turkey , however , the united states was instrumental in the maneuver to move outof the nac and back to the dpc to approveankara's request for assistance under article iv .

the maneuver raised the question of whether the united states,and other allies , were attempting to avoid orweaken the principle of consensus .

within the u.s. government and in allied governments , there is varied support for preserving decision - making by consensus .

most senior u.s. officialsassociated with nato affairs contend that they support the principle of consensus , although some acknowledgethat forging consensus in an era when natomay go out - of - area is likely to be difficult .

support for preserving the principle of consensus centers upon a desire to maintain political solidarity for controversial measures .

in this view , the consent of19 sovereign governments , each taking an independent decision to work with other governments , is a formidableexpression of solidarity .

at the same time,there can be political costs due to the sparring and the time involved in reaching consensus .

nato's decision togo to war against serbia in 1999 was anexample of such an instance .

military action against serbia had been postponed for a number of days , whilecivilians were losing their lives in kosovo .

theallies first made an effort to achieve legitimization for the operation in the u.n. , but did not submit the requisiteresolution when russia signalled that it wouldcast a veto .

the allies decided to debate in the nac the issue of going to war without such a resolution , in the enddeciding that 19 governments consenting tothe use of military force supplied a measure of political legitimacy .

officials involved in that nac debate say thatthe need for obtaining consensus outweighedthe need for acting quickly .

the kosovo conflict illustrated some of the difficulties involved in maintaining consensus .

some critics of management of the conflict , including somemembers of congress , criticized the target - selection process .

press reports indicated that all governments in thenac had to approve nato's individualtargets for serbia .

france , in particular , was singled out in press reports for criticism for objecting to specifictargets .

in fact , nato was following a verydifferent procedure for target selection .

member governments , including the united states , wished to be carefulto avoid civilian casualties , particularly in theabsence of a u.n. resolution that might be cited to legitimize the ends used to compel the milosevic governmentto cease ethnic cleansing .

they made adecision before the conflict began , after an initial operational plan produced by the mc , to attack targets in threephases .

each phase marked an escalation overthe previous one ; stepping up to the next phase - and not individual targets - required consent from the nac .

phasei targets were indisputably militarytargets , such as air defense systems , airfields , and troop concentrations , and there was strong agreement that thesemust be struck .

phase ii targets wereinfrastructure , such as bridges and petroleum depots , that might serve both civilian and military usage , and weretherefore more controversial .

phase iii targetswere "the more significant targets associated with serb repression," such as police headquarters involved in ethniccleansing , often located in urban centers suchas belgrade .

according to then saceur general wesley clark , and to sources interviewed , it was the pentagonand the white house , as well as the britishgovernment , that above all raised barriers and sought delays before attacking phase ii and iii targets , with franceand other governments raising occasionalobjections .

 ( 2 ) the kosovo conflict underscores the political pressure placed on the nac in maintaining consensus when military action comes into play , and the fact that thefrench government has often been singled out when disagreements arise .

different governments place varyingdegrees of emphasis on civilian control of themilitary , and on the reactions of their own populations when there are civilian casualties .

the united statesgovernment tends to have more confidence in itsarmed forces in target selection and in making decisions on the battlefield than do most allied governments .

someallies , given the recent history of theirmilitaries stepping into political affairs or using excessive force against civilians , place greater restraints on theirarmed forces .

in france , the effort by armyofficers to overthrow president de gaulle's government in 1960-62 , and in germany , excesses of the wehrmacht and the gestapo in the second world war , arewithin the memory of many leaders and populations , and affect how these governments seek to manage militaryconflict .

the diversity of viewpoints in thenac means that constant negotiation is necessary in providing authority to the saceur to plan and execute amilitary operation .

wrangling over precisephrasing of a document can be a means to provide clarity for decision - makers ; in contrast , it can also be meant toprovide vagueness that gives political cover toa member government that may give its own interpretation to its populace about the purpose of a nato decision .

altering or abandoning the principle of consensus at a moment when nato may accept new members poses other problems .

for candidate state governments,the prospect of such a change raises the question of whether the united states and other current members lackconfidence in the candidates to participate in thefull range of allied decision - making .

representatives of some of these governments also express displeasure withthe tendency of some administration officialsto divide the continent into an "old" and "new" europe , even if the characterization is meant to favor them .

sucha division suggests a possible marginalizationof france and germany , and of an alliance where member states are set against each other , implicit for some in anyabandonment of the consensus principle .

some officials view any prospective effort by the united states to move away from the consensus principle as aversion of u.s. "unilateralism," in whichwashington might pressure weaker or small - state governments to follow its lead , an issue raised when the bushadministration sought support of several alliedgovernments in the coalition against iraq .

the political complexities inherent in nac and mc debates mean that there is no simple fix to improve nato decision - making .

at the same time , some u.s.officials believe that the growing necessity for out - of - area missions indicates a clear need to develop a new processto permit participation under natoauspices by willing allies in such operations .

 ( 3 ) some u.s. officials , without enthusiasm , suggest an eu model , where member states' votes are weighted , based on their populations .

this form of "qualifiedmajority voting" ( qmv ) gives greater influence to the largest countries , but small states may still band together toblock an initiative .

critics of adopting suchan approach for nato point out that the alliance is a mutual defense organization , where supreme national interestssuch as the survival of a country and thelives of a government's soldiers are at issue .

in such circumstances , they believe that the eu's mechanistic approachto decision - making over less momentousissues is inappropriate for nato .

the eu is different in nature from nato .

the eu must grapple with issuesinvolving the sharing of national sovereignty ona wide range of issues .

as a result , extensive deal - making has been part of the eu ( earlier , the europeancommunity ) since its origins , but has not beenprevalent in nato .

nonetheless , qmv in nato could lead , as it often does in the eu , to faction - building orextended horse - trading .

however , one system used in elements of eu decision - making is drawing interest from those in nato who support coalitions of the willing and capable .

forissues that involve only selected governments , the eu has devised "committees of contributors. .

in this concept,governments that wish to participate in aproject receive general approval from a principal eu governing body to proceed among themselves , while the othergovernments take a general interest and aresponsibility that might involve oversight .

an element of the concept involves "constructive abstention," in whichgovernments with interests not directlyaffected stand aside and permit action by those with interests that are directly in play .

a "committee of contributors" in nato might follow a similar outline , and might appeal especially to governments that are both nato and eu members .

countries on the committee for a military operation , for example , would be those willing to contribute troops andother assets .

the committee would formulatea general plan for operations , and submit it to the nac for a "blessing. .

the nac might allow the committee touse nato assets , such as awacs and theplanning staff .

the nac , in effect , would endorse the right of committee members to act in their own interests , butnot specifically endorse the operation itself .

committee members among themselves could then make key decisions , possibly based on consensus , such as howmuch authority to delegate to saceur forcontingency planning and target selection .

the committee would keep the nac informed on a regular basis .

shouldthe nato response force ( nrf ) ,comprised of 25,000 troops , be fully developed for "expeditionary" operations beyond the treaty area , "committeesof contributors" could be a means tostreamline decision - making and keep it within the ken of interested governments .

such committees could serve to avoid the recent maneuver of having to go to the dpc , since that step is effective only for sidelining france .

france , after all,has been involved in virtually all key nato military operations , and might in the future wish to participate inmissions .

france's forces constitute a largecomponent of the eurocorps , one of the high - value multinational military formations available to nato .

france,with britain , has the only other continental"expeditionary" military able to serve in high - intensity conflicts .

the "committees of contributors" might isolatesmall countries such as belgium , which inrecent times has increasingly criticized nato as a "toolbox" of u.s. policy , and opposed out - of - area operations,but has only minimal military capability tocontribute in any event .

some officials who have served at nato make a contrary argument to the possible usefulness of "committees of contributors. .

they believe that smallcountries such as belgium might insist that any out - of - area mission be decided by the nac as a whole , since assets ( awacs , intelligence ) being used wouldbelong to nato as a whole , and would thus be assets for which , in part , each country pays .

