the federal election campaign act ( feca ) regulates contributions and expenditures for federal election campaigns .

the term "hard money," which is not statutorily defined , typically refers to funds raised and spent in accordance with the limitations , prohibitions , and reporting requirements of feca .

unlike soft money , which will be discussed in the next section , hard money may be used "in connection with" or "for the purpose of influencing" federal elections .

under feca , hard money restrictions apply to contributions from and expenditures by any "person," as defined to include "an individual , partnership , committee , association , corporation , labor organization , or any other organization or group of persons," but not including the federal government .

feca provides that a "person" is limited to contributing no more than $2,000 per candidate , per election ( adjusted for inflation to $2,300 for the 2007-2008 election cycle ) ; $25,000 per year to a national committee of a political party ( adjusted for inflation to $28,500 for the 2007-2008 election cycle ) ; and $5,000 per year to pacs ( limits on contributions by and to pacs are not adjusted for inflation ) .

feca further provides that an "individual" is subject to an aggregate limit on all contributions per two - year election cycle ( encompassing all contributions to federally registered candidates , parties , and pacs ) : $95,000 per two - year election cycle , with sub - limits: ( a ) $37,500 to all candidates and ( b ) $57,500 to all pacs and parties ( no more than $37,500 of which is to state and local parties and pacs ) .

as indexed for inflation , the 2007-2008 election cycle limit is $108,200 , with sub - limits: ( a ) $42,700 to all candidates and ( b ) $65,500 to all pacs and parties ( no more than $42,700 of which is to state and local parties and pacs ) .

in interpreting such statutory provisions , the federal election commission ( fec ) has consistently found that the act's definition of "person" includes unincorporated indian tribes , thereby subjecting tribes to the $2,300 per candidate per election limit , the $28,500 per year limit to a national party , and the $5,000 per year limit to pacs .

on may 15 , 2000 , however , the fec found that whereas an unincorporated indian tribe is considered a "person" under feca , it is not considered an "individual" and therefore is not subject to the aggregate election - cycle limit .

as a result of that ruling , it appears that an indian tribe , by making , for example , an unlimited number of $2,300 , $28,500 , and $5,000 contributions , could significantly exceed the $108,200 aggregate election - cycle limit applicable to "individuals. .

feca also prohibits corporations , labor unions , and national banks from using their treasury funds to make contributions and expenditures in connection with federal elections .

such entities may , however , participate in financing federal elections by establishing separate segregated funds , also known as political action committees ( pacs ) , which are permitted to raise voluntary contributions for use in federal elections .

pac contributions are subject to limitations under feca , as are contributions from individual citizens and political parties .

generally , as most indian tribes are unincorporated , they are not subject to the feca ban on the use of corporate treasury funds for contributions and expenditures in connection with federal elections .

accordingly , most tribes may make contributions in federal elections directly from their tribal funds , without establishing a pac .

this appears to facilitate the ability of indian tribes to make federal election contributions .

that is , while current law limits contributions to a pac to $5,000 per year from any source , a tribe may acquire a large amount of funds for use in federal elections more directly ( i.e. , from its own tribal funds , including , for example , income from tribal enterprises , so long as those enterprises are neither incorporated nor government contractors ) .

in one key respect , the fec treats indian tribes differently than pacs .

although a 1978 fec ruling had required indian tribes making contributions to comply with the periodic reporting requirements of feca , this requirement was explicitly superceded by a 1995 agency ruling .

although contributions from tribes must be reported by recipients , one must view the fec filings of candidates , pacs , and parties in order to track the funds given by an indian tribe , as well as the irs filings by section 527 political organizations .

politicalmoneyline found that some $25 million was donated for 2000-20005 federal elections by 212 federally recognized indian tribes , and that the reporting was made under almost 2,000 different variations of their names .

thus , the ability to track the flow of election - related money from indian tribes is more difficult than it is for other large entities .

several observations may be made about the ability of indian tribes to spend money in federal elections compared with that of other interest groups , which typically operate through pacs .

like other interest groups , indian tribes are subject to no aggregate limit on their total federal election contributions ( only individual citizens are subject to this limit ) .

unlike an interest group pac , however , an indian tribe may have a more readily available pool of funds that could be used in federal elections , that is , its own tribal funds , as opposed to a fund solely comprised of contributions that are subject to limitations and source restrictions .

this advantage , however , may be somewhat offset by the $5,000 per candidate , per election limit applicable to a pac , which typically qualifies as a "multicandidate committee," compared with the $2,300 per candidate , per election limit applicable to all other persons , including indian tribes .

 ( in one apparent anomaly in feca , a multicandidate committee may only contribute $15,000 per year to the national committee of a political party , whereas any other person , including an indian tribe , may contribute $25,000 , or $28,500 in the 2007-2008 election cycle , adjusted for inflation. ) .

while "soft money" is not expressly defined in federal election law and regulation , strictly speaking , it refers to funds that are not regulated by feca ( i.e. , hard money ) .

it may refer to corporate and labor treasury funds that cannot legally be used in connection with federal elections , but can be used for other specified purposes .

sometimes referred to as nonfederal funds , prior to the enactment of the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) of 2002 ( p.l .

107-155 ; march 27 , 2002 ) , "soft money" often referred to non - feca funds raised by the national committees of the two major political parties .

bcra put an end to this practice by prohibiting national parties from raising funds not subject to feca , whether from individual citizens , corporations , labor unions , or indian tribes .

even after the enactment of bcra , however , spending on issue advocacy communications remains a prominent soft money activity .

issue advocacy communications are generally paid for by a group , such as a for - profit or nonprofit corporation or labor union , for advertisements ( typically broadcast on radio or television ) that could be interpreted to favor or disfavor certain candidates , while also serving to inform the public about a policy issue .

prior to bcra , issue advocacy communications were generally unregulated by feca .

therefore , indian tribes ( like corporations , labor unions , and individuals ) could spend unlimited amounts of money on such communications .

with the enactment of bcra , certain issue ads are now regulated .

bcra created a new term in federal election law , "electioneering communication," which describes a political ad that "refers" to a clearly identified federal candidate , is broadcast within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election , and if for house and senate elections , is "targeted to the relevant electorate," ( i.e. , is received by 50,000 or more persons in the state or district where the respective house or senate election is occurring ) .

bcra prohibits the financing of such communications with union or certain corporate funds .

furthermore , for permissible "electioneering communications," federal election law requires disclosure of disbursements over $10,000 for such communications , including identification of each donor of $1,000 or more .

therefore , while corporations and labor unions are prohibited from engaging in "electioneering communications," it appears that most indian tribes , as unincorporated entities , may continue to finance such communications , subject to the disclosure requirements .

