over the years , the united states has been concerned about threats to latin american and caribbean nations from various terrorist or insurgent groups that have attempted to influence or overthrow elected governments .

although latin america has not been the focal point in efforts to deter global terrorism , some countries in the region have struggled with domestic terrorism for decades , and international terrorist groups have at times used the region as a battleground to advance their causes .

the state department's annual country report s on terrorism ( hereinafter referred to as the terrorism report ) highlights u.s. concerns about terrorist threats around the world , including in latin america .

according to the 2015 terrorism report ( issued in june 2016 ) , transnational criminal organizations ( such as drug trafficking organizations ) continued to pose a more significant threat to the region than terrorism , and most countries made efforts to investigate possible connections with terrorist organizations .

in terms of latin american countries' abilities to combat terrorism , the state department maintained in the 2015 report that in some countries a lack of significant progress on countering terrorism occurred because of "corruption , weak government institutions , insufficient interagency cooperation , weak or non - existent legislation , and a lack of resources. .

as in recent years , the state department maintained in the 2015 terrorism report that the primary terrorist threats in latin america stemmed from two colombian guerrilla groups — the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) and the national liberation army ( eln ) — responsible for the majority of terrorist attacks in the region .

the colombian government has been involved in peace talks with the farc since 2012 , and it concluded and signed a peace agreement with the farc in september 2016 .

colombian voters rejected the agreement in a national plebiscite in early october 2016 , but the colombian government and the farc reached a new agreement on november 12 , 2016 , which was approved by colombia's congress at the end of that month .

although preliminary talks between the colombian government and the eln were initiated in 2014 , the opening of official talks has stalled .

 ( see " colombia " section , below. ) .

for a number of years , u.s. policymakers have expressed concerns about iran's deepening relations with several latin american countries , especially venezuela , and iran's activities in the region .

a june 2013 state department report to congress pursuant to the countering iran in the western hemisphere act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-220 ) described iranian influence in latin america and the caribbean as "waning. .

many analysts contend that iranian relations with the region have diminished since current iranian president hassan rouhani took office in 2013 .

in presenting the 2016 posture statement of the u.s. southern command ( southcom ) to congress in march 2016 , admiral kurt w. tidd stated that "as a state sponsor of terrorism , iran's nefarious involvement in the western hemisphere is a matter for concern. .

he noted that although iranian engagement has waned in recent years , president rouhani has pledged several times his intent to increase economic , scientific , and cultural ties with latin america .

 ( see " iran's activities in latin america ," below. ) .

one of the main concerns about iran's increasing relations with the region has been iran's ties to hezbollah , the radical lebanon - based islamic group that the department of state designated a foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) in 1997 .

the state department asserted in its 2015 terrorism report that hezbollah "continued to maintain a presence in the region , with members , facilitators , and supporters engaging in activity in support of the organization," including efforts to build the organization's "infrastructure in south america and fundraising , both through licit and illicit means. .

it noted hezbollah fundraising activities in the tri - border area ( tba ) of argentina , brazil , and paraguay and the presence of hezbollah supporters and sympathizers in venezuela .

beyond hezbollah , the report noted that the tba "remained an important regional nexus of arms , narcotics , pirated goods , human smuggling , counterfeiting , and money laundering — all potential funding sources for terrorist organizations. .

the 2015 terrorism report also stated that south america and the caribbean served as areas of financial and ideological support for the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isil ) and other terrorist groups in the middle east and south asia .

it touched on the issue of individuals from south america and the caribbean leaving the region to fight with the islamic state .

in march 2016 , soutchom commander admiral tidd estimated that some 100-150 foreign fighters had traveled from the region to syria and iraq .

by october 2016 , however , admiral tidd noted in a press conference that the outflow of foreign fighters from the region had been "significantly curtailed" because of the significant success in iraq and syria by the u.s. - led coalition .

from 1982 until may 2015 , cuba was on the state department's so - called state sponsors of terrorism list pursuant to section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act ( eaa ) of 1979 and other provisions of law .

as part of president obama's shift on cuba policy announced in december 2014 , the state department conducted a review of cuba's designation on the state sponsors list , and in april 2015 , president obama submitted a report to congress justifying the rescission of cuba's designation .

the president certified that the cuban government "has not provided any support for international terrorism during the preceding 6-month period" and "has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future. .

this ultimately led to the secretary of state rescinding cuba's designation in may 2015 .

 ( see " cuba " section , below. ) .

venezuela currently is on the state department's annual list of countries determined to be not cooperating fully with u.s. antiterrorism efforts pursuant to section 40a of the arms export control act .

the most recent annual determination was made by the secretary of state on may 11 , 2016 .

venezuela has been on the list since 2006 and , as a result , has been subject to a u.s. arms embargo .

 ( cuba had been on the section 40a list since 1997 , when the annual determination was first established , but was taken off the list in 2015. ) .

u.s. officials have expressed concerns over the past decade about venezuela's lack of cooperation on antiterrorism efforts , its relations with iran , and the involvement of senior venezuelan officials in supporting the drug and weapons trafficking activities of the farc .

 ( see " venezuela " section , below. ) .

as in other parts of the world , the united states has assisted latin american and caribbean nations over the years in their struggle against terrorist or insurgent groups indigenous to the region .

for example , in the 1980s , the united states supported the government of el salvador with significant economic and military assistance in its struggle against a leftist guerrilla insurgency .

in recent years , the united states has employed various policy tools to combat terrorism in the latin america and caribbean region , including sanctions , antiterrorism assistance and training , law enforcement cooperation , and multilateral cooperation through the oas .

moreover , given the nexus between terrorism and drug trafficking , one can argue that assistance and sanctions aimed at combating drug trafficking organizations in the andean region have also been a means of combating terrorism by cutting off a source of revenue for terrorist organizations .

the same argument can be made regarding efforts to combat money laundering in the region .

u.s. attention to terrorism issues in latin america increased in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks on new york and washington .

antiterrorism assistance increased along with bilateral and regional cooperation against terrorism .

congress approved the bush administration's request in 2002 to expand the scope of u.s. assistance to colombia beyond a counternarcotics focus to include counterterrorism assistance to the government in its military efforts against drug - financed leftist guerrillas and rightist paramilitaries .

border security with mexico also became a prominent issue in bilateral relations , with attention focused on the potential transit of terrorists through mexico to the united states .

since 2011 , some in congress have focused extensively on concerns regarding the activities of both iran and hezbollah in the region .

several house and senate committee hearings have been held , and most significantly , in december 2012 , congress enacted the countering iran in the western hemisphere act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-220 ) .

as enacted , the measure required the secretary of state to conduct an assessment within 180 days of the "threats posed to the united states by iran's growing presence and activity in the western hemisphere" and to develop a strategy to address these threats .

submitted to congress in june 2013 , the state department report was mostly classified but , as specified in the law , also included an unclassified summary of policy recommendations that included border security and enforcement , diplomacy , sanctions , and intelligence sharing .

the state department maintained in the unclassified portion of the report that "iranian influence in latin america and the caribbean is waning" because of u.s. diplomatic outreach , the strengthening of allies' capacity to disrupt illicit iranian activity , international nonproliferation efforts , a strong sanctions policy , and iran's poor management of its foreign relations .

the report also stated that current u.s. , european union , and u.n. security council sanctions had limited the economic relationship between the region and iran .

over the past several years , congress has introduced legislative initiatives and held oversight hearings pertaining to terrorism issues in the western hemisphere .

iran , hezbollah , and the amia bombing .

with regard to iran , the 111 th congress enacted the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and disinvestment act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-195 ) , which included a provision making gasoline sales to iran subject to u.s. sanctions .

the measure led to the sanctioning of venezuela's state oil company in 2011 for sales to iran .

 ( as noted above , the sanctions were lifted in the aftermath of the 2015 comprehensive nuclear accord negotiated with iran. ) .

the 112 th congress enacted the countering iran in the western hemisphere act of 2012 ( h.r .

3783 , p.l .

112-220 ) , which required the administration to conduct an assessment and present "a strategy to address iran's growing hostile presence and activity in the western hemisphere. .

the law also stated that it shall be the policy of the united states to use a comprehensive government - wide strategy to counter iran's growing hostile presence and activity in the western hemisphere by working together with united states allies and partners in the region to mutually deter threats to united states interests by the government of iran , the iranian islamic revolutionary guards corps ( irgc ) , the irgc's qods force , and hezbollah .

for many years , congress expressed concern about progress in argentina's investigation of the 1994 amia bombing , with the house often passing resolutions on the issue around the time of the anniversary of the bombing in july .

in the 111 th congress , the house approved h.con.res .

156 ( ros - lehtinen ) , which condemned the amia bombing and urged western hemisphere governments to take actions to curb the activities that support hezbollah and other such extremist groups .

in the 114 th congress , two senate resolutions were introduced related to the amia bombing .

s.res .

167 ( rubio ) , introduced in may 2015 , would have called for a swift , transparent , and internationally backed investigation into the tragic death of alberto nisman ( the special prosecutor in the amia investigation ) ; expressed concern about iran's activities in argentina and all of the western hemisphere ; and urged the president to continue to monitor iran's activities in latin america and the caribbean .

s.res .

620 ( coons ) , introduced november 29 , 2016 , would have , among its provisions , encouraged the government of argentina to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the 1994 amia bombing as well as the death of nisman .

cuba .

with regard to cuba , h.r .

274 ( rush ) , introduced in january 2015 , would , among its provisions , have rescinded any determination of the secretary of state that cuba has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism .

as noted above , in may 2015 , president obama rescinded cuba's designation as a state sponsor of terrorism and congress did not take any legislative action to block the administration's action .

as discussed above , for a number of years , the state department had noted in its annual terrorism report cuba's harboring of fugitives wanted in the united states .

the house - passed version of the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) , h.r .

4909 , had a provision that would have prohibited funds in the act for any bilateral military - to - military contact or cooperation pending certification from the secretaries of state and defense that cuba has fulfilled numerous conditions , including cuba's return of u.s. fugitives wanted by the department of justice ; ultimately the language regarding fugitives was not included in the conference report to the fy2017 ndaa ( h.rept .

114-840 to s. 2943 ) .

among other initiatives: h.res .

181 ( king ) , introduced in march 2015 , would have called for the immediate extradition or rendering to the united states of all fugitives from justice who are receiving safe harbor in cuba to escape prosecution or confinement for criminal offenses in the united states ; h.r .

2937 ( nunes ) / s. 1489 ( rubio ) , introduced in june 2015 , included a provision that would have called for the attorney general , in coordination with the secretary of state , to work with interpol to pursue the location and arrest of u.s. fugitives from justice in cuba ; and h.r .

4772 ( pearce ) , introduced in march 2016 , would have prohibited funding to accept commercial flight plans between the united states and cuba until cuba extradited u.s. fugitives from justice .

another bill , h.r .

2189 ( smith , nj ) , would have required a report from the president regarding information on u.s. fugitives from justice abroad ( not just cuba ) and u.s. efforts to secure the return of such fugitives .

mexico .

in april 2016 , the house approved h.r .

4482 ( mcsally ) , which would have required the secretary of homeland security to prepare a southwest border threat analysis and strategic plan , including efforts to detect and prevent terrorists and instruments of terrorism from entering the united states .

oversight hearings .

the 114 th congress continued its oversight of terrorism concerns in latin america and the caribbean .

in march 2015 , two subcommittees of the house committee on foreign affairs — the subcommittee on the middle east and north africa and the subcommittee on the western hemisphere — held an oversight hearing on iran and hezbollah in the western hemisphere with private witnesses .

in june 2015 , the house western hemisphere subcommittee held a hearing on prospects for a peace accord between the colombian government and the farc .

in march 2016 , the house western hemisphere subcommittee held a hearing on border security challenges in latin america and the caribbean .

in june 2016 , the house financial service committee's task force to investigate terrorism financing held a hearing on terrorist funding in south america .

the southcom commander usually testifies before the armed services committees annually .

in presenting the command's 2016 posture statement to congress in march 2016 , admiral kurt tidd testified that "as a state sponsor of terrorism , iran's nefarious involvement in the western hemisphere is a matter for concern. .

he also noted a number of individuals and families leaving the region to join the islamic state in syria or iraq .

