wildfires have made national headlines in recent years , with major fires in the west and south killing firefighters , burning homes , and threatening communities .

with the population and size of the wildland - urban interface ( wui ) expanding , more money is being spent on fire management in these locales .

federal funding for fire protection has increased over the past decade , and administration and congressional leaders have urged additional wildfire protection .

in fy2014 , approximately $3.9 billion was appropriated to protect federal lands and approximately $91.0 million to assist in protecting nonfederal lands .

the u.s. forest service ( usfs ) in the department of agriculture , along with the department of the interior ( doi ) , are responsible for protecting the majority of federal lands from wildfire , including any federal areas that comprise a wui .

wildfire funding accounts for approximately 56% of the usfs budget and roughly 8% of the doi budget in 2014 .

while attention has focused on protecting life , property , and communities in the wui , opinions vary over how to provide protection .

this report describes the growth of the wildland - urban interface , wildfire suppression efforts , post - fire responses , and especially the programs and options for protecting the interface before the next wildfire strikes .

the term wildland - urban interface ( wui ) has been used for more than two decades to suggest an area where structures ( usually homes ) are in or near wildlands ( forests or rangelands ) .

there is no standard wui definition .

however , the definition listed in a 2001 federal register notice is commonly referenced — the urban - wildland interface community exists where humans and their development meet or intermix with wildland fuel .

in this same notice , the usfs and doi identified three types of wui communities: interface , intermix , and occluded .

based on state data , they listed nearly 4,500 interface communities ( with 11 states not providing data ) .

the agencies defined an interface community as one where wildlands abut structures with a clear line of demarcation between residential , business , and public structures and wildland fuels , while an intermix community is where structures are scattered and intermingled with wildlands and fuels .

an occluded community , generally existing within a city , is where structures abut an island of wildland fuels ( eg , park or open space ) .

one source indicates that all states within the contiguous united states contain land classified as wui .

see figure 1 .

furthermore , approximately 10% of all land within the lower 48 states is classified as wui , with a significant concentration along the east coast , although western states have the highest proportions of their homes in the wui .

the area of intermix communities is large and is growing faster than the area of interface communities , based on data from 1990 to 2000 .

nationwide , in 2010 , the interface area was equal to approximately 39 million acres , and the intermix area equal to approximately 152 million acres .

in 2010 , intermix communities in the three pacific coast states totaled 9.3 million acres , almost three times the 3.6 million acres in interface communities in those states .

from 1990 to 2000 , the 10-year growth in area of intermix communities was 14.1% , compared to only 2.5% for interface communities .

however , the study acknowledged that determining the area of wui communities was imprecise: "mapping [the federal register ] definition of the wui using data and operational definitions we developed , we arrived at one possible representation of the wui. .

the intermingled nature of intermix communities poses significant challenges for fire protection efforts .

in most of the united states , wildfires are inevitable .

biomass plus dry conditions equals fuel to burn .

add an ignition source ( eg , lightning or a match ) and a wildfire may ignite .

fire is a self - sustaining chemical reaction that perpetuates itself as long as all three elements of the fire triangle — fuel , heat , and oxygen — remain available .

fire control focuses on removing one of those elements .

there are two principal kinds of wildfire , although an individual wildfire may contain areas of both kinds .

a surface fire burns the needles or leaves , grass , and other small biomass within a foot or so of the ground and quickly moves on .

such fires are relatively easy to control by removing fuel with a fireline , essentially a dirt path wide enough to eliminate the continuous fuels needed to sustain the fire , or by cooling or smothering the flames with water or dirt .

a crown fire burns biomass at all levels , from the surface through the tops of the trees .

crown fires do not consume all the biomass ; rather , a crown fire quickly burns the needles or leaves and small twigs and limbs on the surface and throughout the crown of the trees .

because the needles and leaves in the crown are green , they require more energy to burn than dry fuels on the surface .

furthermore , because of the green fuels and the often discontinuous biomass of the canopy , wind is usually needed to sustain a crown fire .

once burning vigorously , a crown fire can create its own wind — the strong upward convection of the heated air can draw in cooler air from surrounding areas , thus creating a wind that feeds the fire .

the strong upward convection can also lift burning biomass ( firebrands ) and send it soaring ahead of the fire , creating spot fires and accelerating the spread of the wildfire .

thus , crown fires are difficult , if not impossible , to control .

firelines are often ineffective , especially if winds are causing spot fires .

water or fire retardant ( slurry ) dropped from helicopters or airplanes can sometimes knock a crown fire down ( back to a surface fire ) if the area burning and the winds are not too great .

often , however , crown fires burn until they run out of fuel or the weather changes ( the wind dies or it rains or snows ) .

fires burn structures in one of three ways: through direct contact with fire ( the fire burning right up to the structure ) ; through radiation ( heating from exposure to flames ) ; and through firebrands landing on a flammable roof .

surface fires generally only burn houses through direct contact , and protection is a relatively simple matter of a break in the continuous burnable material .

in observing houses that burned in los alamos in 2000 , one researcher stated "in several cases , a scratch line that removed [pine] needles from the base of a wood wall kept the house from igniting. .

crown fires , however , can burn houses in any of the three ways .

the opportunity and ability to prevent structures from burning during a crown fire is small .

occasionally , water or some other wetting agent sprayed on walls or roofs can prevent ignition or extinguish firebrands from an advancing wildfire , but the firefighters could die of heat exposure or smoke inhalation from the approaching fire .

recovery and efforts to support recovery after a severe wildfire vary , depending on the nature of the damages .

for burned structures , insurance payment is the standard means for homeowners to pay for recovery — repair , if that is possible , or replacement , depending on the insurance policy .

in a severe event , a presidential declaration of an emergency ( in response to a request from a governor ) initiates a process for federal assistance to state and local governments and to families and individuals to help with recovery .

the nature and extent of the assistance depends on several factors , such as the nature and severity of damages and the insurance coverage of the affected parties .

for burned areas , site rehabilitation is sometimes warranted .

in many temperate ecosystems , wildfires ( including crown fires ) are natural events , and the ecosystems are adapted to recover from the fire .

often , in severely burned areas , grass seed is spread to try to accelerate growth of ground cover and slow erosion , but grass often inhibits tree seed germination and growth , and thus may slow forest recovery .

rehabilitation efforts commonly focus on the firelines created to try to control the fire , since firelines consist of exposed bare earth and often run uphill , and thus can readily erode into gullies if left untreated .

some severely burned areas , particularly in coastal southern california , are susceptible to landslides during the subsequent rainy season .

monitoring can provide a warning to homeowners to evacuate an area prior to a landslide , but little can be done to prevent landslides in such situations .

various efforts can protect structures and wildlands from some of the damages of wildfires .

at least 4.1 million acres are reported to have burned in 2013 .

while there have been slightly fewer total fires in recent years as compared to a peak experienced in 2006 and 2007 , more than 9.3 million acres burned in 2012 , which was the third - largest acreage burned annually since 1960 .

thus , people are still at risk from wildfires when they occur in the wui .

the national interagency fire center ( nifc ) reports that 2,135 structures burned in 2013 .

congress faces increasing pressures for wildfire protection .

congress decides what programs to authorize and fund to protect the wui from wildfires .

many programs exist , and other options are possible .

suppression has usually received the majority of wildfire management funding , ranging from $786.5 million to $1.4 billion annually ( not including emergency supplemental funds ) since fy2008 .

further , a significant portion of emergency wildfire supplemental funds — which can be hundreds of millions of dollars — are directed towards wildfire suppression efforts .

the public and policymakers expect the agencies to clearly demonstrate that they are doing what they can to stop threatening and damaging fires , and this often involves large sums of money .

however , given the difficulty of suppressing crown fires , and the difficulty and cost associated with measuring what has burned and what was suppressed , some may question the effectiveness of continued increases in suppression funding .

to date , congress has mostly addressed wildfire prevention and suppression by increasing funding .

it is difficult to gauge if the funding amounts provided by congress each year are adequate .

national data on what transpired during the year are hard to locate and are disjointed when available .

more comprehensive and accurate national performance measures ( eg , number of fires that started on federal lands , number of structures burned due to wildfires ) could give better insight into the effectiveness of wildfire prevention and suppression efforts .

national wildland fire data collection and analysis could start with congress explicitly requesting the numerous fire reporting agencies to work together to provide annual statistics and performance measures .

such a directive could require more resources than are available at the moment .

given the current economic climate , better national data could provide insight as to whether or not other options to address wildfire management ( eg , a reduction in funding or a do - nothing approach ) should receive more careful consideration .

federal programs to protect homes are currently limited to information for homeowners on how to protect their homes , primarily provided through the nfpa firewise communities program .

programs could be expanded to educate homeowners , state and local governments , and the insurance industry about the ways to protect homes through actions , planning , and zoning and building regulations .

congress could create and fund new programs to assist homeowners in renovations to make their homes fire - safe and to create defensible space around their structures , through direct federal assistance or through the states .

congress could also consider expanding protection for defensible space beyond the home ignition zone to a community protection zone .

hfra authorizes an expedited review process for activities on federal lands in the wui .

perhaps other changes could further accelerate action .

funding for fuel reduction in the wui could also be expanded .

appropriations for fuel reduction have averaged $502.9 million annually since fy2008 , but only a portion is used in the wui , and funding is far below the estimated amount needed to treat the lands at risk .

state fire assistance funding through the forest service could be used for fuel reduction in the wui , at the discretion of the states , but funding has averaged $138.7 million annually from fy2008 to fy2014 and the states have many wildfire priorities .

additional funding through the states for fuel reduction on private lands in the wui is a possibility that congress could contemplate .

in addition , congress might debate choices for compensating homeowners for property losses due to wildfires .

one option might be to restrict compensation to those who had acted to protect their homes , but got burned anyway .

another option might be to require that compensation for rebuilding be used only for fire - safe building designs and materials .

alternatively , congress could establish a national wildfire insurance program , with premiums based on fire threats , the fire - safety of the structures , and the defensible space being maintained .

finally , congress could consider compensation for landowners that suffer resource losses from wildfires .

an emergency reforestation assistance program has existed for many years , although it has not been funded since fy1993 .

in the 2008 farm bill , congress included forest restoration assistance in an existing emergency conservation program .

these programs can provide assistance in recovery from a wildfire disaster , but do not compensate landowners for losses in the way that homeowners are compensated for the loss of their homes .

congress might consider such additional compensation .

the 113 th congress has proposed legislation that would address some of the issues stated above .

for example , the house passed h.r .

1526 , which could allow states a more pronounced role in designating high - risk areas for emergency hazardous fuel reduction projects , and could expedite the implementation process for both hazardous fuel reduction projects and forest health projects , among other things .

in the 112 th congress , h.r .

1485 would have , in part , authorized an expedited review process by the fs and doi for fuel reduction and forest restoration projects in the wui .

and in the 112 th congress , some measures were introduced that would have reduced wildfire program funding , such as h.amdt .

764 to h.r .

2584 , which sought to reduce funding for the wildfire suppression program by $50 million and to increase funding for the forest legacy program by a similar amount .

