china's policy of intervention to limit the appreciation of its currency , the renminbi ( rmb ) against the dollar and other currencies has become a major source of tension with many of its trading partners , especially the united states .

some analysts contend that china deliberately "manipulates" its currency in order to gain unfair trade advantages over its trading partners .

they further argue that china's undervalued currency has been a major factor in the large annual u.s. trade deficits with china and has contributed to widespread job losses in the united states , especially in manufacturing .

president obama stated in february 2010 that china's undervalued currency puts u.s. firms at a "huge competitive disadvantage," and he pledged to make addressing china's currency policy a top priority .

at a news conference in november 2011 , president obama stated that china needed to "go ahead and move towards a market - based system for their currency" and that the united states and other countries felt that "enough is enough. .

legislation to address china's currency policy has been introduced in every session of congress since 2003 .

the house passed currency legislation in 2010 and the senate did so in 2011 , although none became law .

on march 20 , 2013 , representative sander levin introduced h.r .

1276 to "clarify that u.s. countervailing duties may be imposed to address subsidies relating to a fundamentally undervalued currency of any foreign country. .

on june 7 , 2013 , senator sherrod brown introduced s. 1114 , which would require action against certain misaligned currencies .

in recent years , congressional concerns over misaligned ( or undervalued currencies ) have extended to other countries as well , leading some members to propose that currency provisions be included in future u.s. trade agreements .

china began to gradually reform its currency policy in july 2005 , and between then and the end of june 2013 , the rmb has appreciated by 34% on a nominal basis ( and 42% on an inflation - adjusted basis ) against the u.s. dollar .

in addition , china's trade surpluses have fallen sharply in recent years and its accumulation of foreign exchange reserves has slowed .

these factors have led some analysts to conclude that the rmb exchange rate with the dollar may be approaching market levels , or is , at best , only modestly undervalued .

however , other analysts contend that the rmb remains significantly undervalued against the dollar and complain that the rmb has appreciated little against the dollar since the end of 2011 .

thus , they argue that continued pressure must be applied until the chinese government adopts a market - based exchange rate .

although economists differ as to the economic effects an undervalued rmb might have on the united states ( many cite both positive and negative effects ) , most agree that greater currency flexibility by china would be one of several reforms that would help reduce global imbalances , which are believed to have been a major factor that sparked the global financial crisis and economic slowdown .

they further contend that currency reform is in china's own long - term interests because it would boost economic efficiency .

china's government has pledged to continue to make its currency policy more flexible , but has maintained that appreciating the rmb too quickly could cause significant job losses ( especially in china's export sectors ) , which could disrupt the economy .

some economists question whether rmb appreciation would produce significant net benefits for the u.s. economy .

they argue that prices for chinese products would rise , which would hurt u.s. consumers and u.s. firms that use imported chinese components in their production .

in addition , an appreciating rmb might lessen the chinese government's need to purchase u.s. treasury securities , which could cause u.s. interest rates to rise .

it is further argued that an appreciating currency would do little to shift manufacturing done by foreign - invested firms ( including u.s. firms ) in china to the united states ; instead , such firms would likely shift production to other low - cost east asian countries .

finally , it is argued that an appreciating rmb might boost some u.s. exports to china , but the effects of lower prices for u.s. products in china could be negated to a large extent by china's restrictive trade and investment barriers .

such analysts view currency reform as part of a broad set of goals that u.s. trade policy should pursue .

these goals include inducing china to rebalance its economy by making consumer demand , rather than exports and fixed investment , the main sources of china's economic growth ; eliminate industrial policies that seek to promote and protect chinese firms ( especially state - owned firms ) ; reduce trade and investment barriers ; and improve protection of u.s. intellectual property rights .

this report provides an overview of the economic issues surrounding the current debate over china's currency policy .

it identifies the economic costs and benefits of china's currency policy for both china and the united states , and possible implications if china were to allow its currency to significantly appreciate or to float freely .

it also examines legislative proposals that seek to address china's ( and other countries' ) currency policy .

prior to 1994 , china maintained a dual exchange rate system .

this consisted of an official fixed exchange rate system ( which was used by the government ) , and a relatively market - based exchange rate system that was used by importers and exporters in "swap markets," although access to foreign exchange was highly restricted in order to limit imports , resulting in a large black market for foreign exchange .

the two exchange rates differed significantly .

the official exchange rate with the dollar in 1993 was 5.77 yuan versus 8.70 yuan in the swap markets .

china's dual exchange rate system was criticized by the united states because of the restrictions it ( and other policies ) placed on foreign imports .

in 1994 , the chinese government unified the two exchange rate systems at an initial rate of 8.70 yuan to the dollar , which eventually was allowed to rise to 8.28 by 1997 and was then kept relatively constant until july 2005 .

the rmb became largely convertible on a current account ( trade ) basis , but not on a capital account basis , meaning that foreign exchange in china is not regularly obtainable for investment purposes .

from 1994 until july 2005 , china maintained a policy of pegging the rmb to the u.s. dollar at an exchange rate of roughly 8.28 yuan to the dollar .

the peg appears to have been largely intended to promote a relatively stable environment for foreign trade and investment in china ( since such a policy prevents large swings in exchange rates ) — a policy utilized by many developing countries in their early development stages .

the chinese central bank maintained this peg by buying ( or selling ) as many dollar - denominated assets in exchange for newly printed yuan as needed to eliminate excess demand ( supply ) for the yuan .

as a result , the exchange rate between the rmb and the dollar varied little , despite changing economic factors which could have otherwise caused the yuan to appreciate ( or depreciate ) relative to the dollar .

under a floating exchange rate system , the relative demand for the two countries' goods and assets would determine the exchange rate of the rmb to the dollar .

this section examines a number of issues pertaining to the effects of china's undervalued currency on the u.s. economy .

the economic effects on the chinese economy of an undervalued currency are examined later in the report .

chinese officials argue that their currency policy is not meant to favor exports over imports , but instead to foster economic stability through currency stability .

the policy reflects the government's goals of using exports as a way of providing jobs to chinese workers and to attract fdi in order to gain access to technology and know - how .

the chinese government has stated on a number of occasions that currency reform is a long - term goal which will be implemented gradually .

officials have strongly condemned international pressure to induce china to appreciate the currency , arguing that it interferes with china's "sovereignty" to implement its own domestic economic policies .

in 2009 , ( then ) chinese premier wen jiabao was reported by chinese media as complaining that "some countries demand the yuan's appreciation , while practicing various trade protectionism against china .

it's unfair and actually limits china's development. .

despite the chinese government's numerous pledges on currency reform , it has moved somewhat cautiously .

chinese officials view economic growth as critical to sustaining political stability , and thus appear very reluctant to implement policies that might disrupt the economy and cause widespread unemployment , which could cause worker unrest .

in addition , chinese officials reject assertions by some economists that china's currency policy undermines the global economy or that a sharp appreciation of the rmb is needed to boost global economic recovery .

instead , they contend , promoting rapid domestic growth is the most significant policy china can undertake to promote global economic recovery .

they note that chinese imports rose by 38.8% in 2010 ( over the previous year ) and by 23.9% in 2011 , which contributed to global economic recovery in those years .

they further note that export growth in 2012 and the first half of 2013 was significantly below historic rates ( see figure 10 ) .

in addition , they note , china's merchandise trade surplus fell each year from 2009 to 2011 .

in june 2013 , xinhua claimed that the yuan was nearing equilibrium against the dollar .

if the chinese were to allow their currency to float , it would be determined by private actors in the market based on the supply and demand for chinese goods and assets relative to u.s. goods and assets .

if the rmb appreciated as a result , this would boost u.s. exports and the output of u.s. producers who compete with the chinese .

the u.s. bilateral trade deficit would likely decline ( but not necessarily disappear ) .

at the same time , the chinese central bank would no longer purchase u.s. assets to maintain the peg .

u.s. borrowers , including the federal government , would now need to find new lenders to finance their borrowing , and interest rates in the united states would rise .

this would reduce spending on interest - sensitive purchases , such as capital investment , housing ( residential investment ) , and consumer durables .

the reduction in investment spending would reduce the long - run size of the u.s. capital stock , and thereby the u.s. economy .

in the present context of a large u.s. budget deficit , some analysts fear that a sudden decline in chinese demand for u.s. assets ( because china was no longer purchasing assets to influence the exchange rate ) could lead to a drop in the value of the dollar that could potentially destabilize the u.s. economy .

if the relative demand for chinese goods and assets were to fall at some point in the future , the floating exchange rate would depreciate , and the effects would be reversed .

floating exchange rates fluctuate in value frequently and significantly .

a move to a floating exchange rate is typically accompanied by the elimination of capital controls that limit a country's private citizens from freely purchasing and selling foreign currency .

the chinese government maintains capital controls ( and arguably one of the major reasons china opposes a floating exchange rate ) because it fears a large private capital outflow would result if such controls were removed .

this might occur because chinese citizens fear that their deposits in the potentially insolvent state banking system are unsafe .

if the capital outflow were large enough , a banking crisis in china could result and could cause the floating exchange rate to depreciate rather than appreciate .

if this occurred , the output of u.s. exporters and import - competing firms would be reduced below the prevailing level , and the u.s. bilateral trade deficit would likely expand .

in other words , the united states would still borrow heavily from china , but it would now be private citizens buying u.s. assets instead of the chinese central bank .

china could attempt to float its exchange rate while maintaining its capital controls , at least temporarily .

this solution would eliminate the possibility that the currency would depreciate because of a private capital outflow .

while this would be unusual , it might be possible .

it would likely make it more difficult to impose effective capital controls , however , since the fluctuating currency would offer a much greater profit incentive for evasion .

another possibility is for china to maintain the status quo .

even without adjustment to the nominal exchange rate , over time the real rate would adjust as inflation rates in the two countries diverged .

the chinese central bank acquires foreign reserves by printing yuan to finance its trade surplus .

as the central bank exchanged newly printed yuan for u.s. assets , prices in china would rise along with the money supply until the real exchange rate was brought back into line with the market rate .

this would cause the u.s. bilateral trade deficit to decline and expand the output of u.s. exporters and import - competing firms .

this real exchange rate adjustment would only occur over time , however , and pressures on the u.s. trade sector would persist in the meantime .

none of the solutions guarantee that the bilateral trade deficit would be eliminated .

china is a country with a high saving rate , and the united states is a country with a low saving rate ; it is not surprising that their overall trade balances would be in surplus and deficit , respectively .

as the appendix discusses , many economists believe that these trade imbalances will persist as long as underlying macroeconomic imbalances persist .

at the bilateral level , it is not unusual for two countries to run persistently imbalanced trade , even with a floating exchange rate .

if china can continue its combination of low - cost labor and rapid productivity gains , which have been reducing export prices in yuan terms , its exports to the united states are likely to continue to grow regardless of the exchange rate regime , as evidenced by the 21% appreciation of the rmb from 2005 to 2008 , which did not lead to any reduction in the trade deficit over that period .

conclusion congressional concerns over china's currency policy date back to at least 2003 .

since that time , the rmb has appreciated significantly against the dollar: 34% on a nominal basis and 42% on a real basis through june 2013 .

china's current account surplus as a percent of gdp , in dollar terms and as a percent of gdp , has sharply declined significantly in recent years .

in 2011 , the imf evaluated the rmb to be substantially undervalued , but in 2012 and 2013 , the rmb was estimated to be moderately undervalued .

these factors appear to have somewhat diminished the importance of china's currency policy as a priority trade issue for some in congress .

in addition , china has become viewed by some members as one of several countries that are intervening to hold down the value of their currencies .

for example , recent japanese monetary policies to boost the economy have led some members and u.s. business groups to accuse japan of manipulating its currency .

finally in recent years , a number of other chinese economic policies and practices have been identified by some members as posing significant threats to u.s. economic interests .

these include chinese cyber - enabled theft of u.s. trade secrets and business confidential information , extensive economic losses incurred by u.s. intellectual property - intensive firms from chinese infringement of u.s. intellectual property rights , and china's widespread use of industrial policies to subsidize priority domestic firms , while imposing trade and investment barriers to limit foreign market access in china .

the lingering effects of the global economic slowdown ( especially in europe and the united states ) have suppressed global demand for chinese products .

the world bank , imf , and other global economic institutions have warned china that the policies it has employed to promote high levels of gross fixed investment , financed largely by easy credit policies , are not sustainable and may ultimately seriously weaken china's financial sector by significantly increasing the level of non - performing loans .

they have urged china to implement policies to make private consumption the main source of china's economic growth and to eliminate policies that prevent markets from determining the most efficient allocation of resources ( such as capital ) in the economy in order to ensure that healthy economic growth is sustained over the long term .

reform of the financial sector , including the adoption of a market - determined exchange rate system , would likely play a critical role in this process .

chinese officials have acknowledged the need to make such reforms and have announced a number of policies to that end .

for example , during the july 2013 s&ed , chinese officials stated that that they would continue to implement policies to boost private consumption , such as raising social security and employment spending by two percentage points of total fiscal spending by the end of 2015 .

the implementation of comprehensive economic reforms and a rebalancing of the chinese economy , if achieved , would likely lead to a significant improvement in u.s. - china commercial relations .

for example , as long as the chinese government continues to maintain a managed currency peg , then the rmb would be assumed by many analysts to be undervalued , regardless of current economic conditions .

if the rmb were allowed to be traded freely , without intervention by the chinese government , then the exchange rate of the rmb against the dollar and other currencies would more likely be viewed as being determined by market forces and hence not undervalued .

the issue of rebalancing economic growth by both the united states and china has been a central focus of the u.s. - china strategic and economic dialogue ( s&ed ) talks over the past two years .

a joint statement issued at the may 2011 s&ed meeting noted that since the second meeting of the strategic and economic dialogue in may 2010 , the economic recoveries in the united states and china have strengthened due to continued forceful stimulus measures undertaken by both countries , contributing to an improving outlook for the global economy .

the two countries have also made progress on their commitments to promote more sustainable and balanced growth .

to secure these gains and address potential challenges to the global outlook , we pledge to enhance macroeconomic cooperation to ensure that the global recovery is durable and promotes steady job growth , and to firmly establish strong , sustainable , and balanced growth .

the global financial crisis and subsequent gdp decline among many countries have resulted in new scrutiny by many economists of "global imbalances," namely the disparities in savings and investment levels among various countries ( i.e. , some countries save too little and some too much relative to their investment needs ) , and subsequent current account imbalances that have resulted ( i.e. , countries where domestic savings exceed investment run trade surpluses , and countries where domestic investment exceeds saving run current account deficits ) .

china and the united states are not unique in having these imbalances — japan , germany , and other east asian countries are other examples of high savers , while southern and eastern european countries are other examples of high borrowers .

nevertheless , the united states and china have come under particular scrutiny because of their relative overall size ( they are the world's two largest economies ) and the relative size of their saving , investment , and trade imbalances .

some analysts also claim that china's exchange rate policy is preventing other east asian countries from adjusting , because those countries are unwilling to allow their currencies to appreciate and lose export market share to china unless the rmb appreciates too .

many economists contend such imbalances were a major cause of the current global economic slowdown .

for example , high savers , such as china , loaned their money to low savers , such as the united states , which helped keep real u.s. interest rates low and contributed to the bubble in the u.s. housing market and subsequent financial crisis .

many of the high savings countries ( especially those in asia ) heavily relied on exporting as a source of their economic growth and thus were significantly impacted when global demand for imports sharply fell .

as a result , many economists have called for economic restructuring among many of the world's major economies , especially the united states and china .

fundamental restructuring of this sort would take time , and if not well coordinated , could deepen the global output gap in the short run .

for example , if low saving countries attempt to increase their saving rate ( eg , by reducing their government budget deficits ) at a time of high unemployment , and high saving countries do not simultaneously increase their consumption , then worldwide demand could decline and cause unemployment to rise further in the short run .

this section provides an overview of some of the unique differences between the economies of the united states and china that have played a role in global imbalances and examines if there has been any rebalancing by the u.s. and chinese economies in recent years .

the level of u.s. gross savings is far below total u.s. investment , indicating that the united states must borrow capital abroad to meet its investment needs .

by definition , domestic savings minus gross investment ( from domestic and foreign sources ) equals the current account balance .

nations that do not save enough to meet domestic investment needs run current account deficits and those that save more than they need for domestic investment run current account surpluses .

in 2012 , the ratio of u.s. gross domestic savings to gross investment was 77.3% , the lowest among the world's major economies .

on the other hand , the ratio for china was 105.7% ( see table a - 1 ) .

in nominal dollar terms , the united states had the world's largest current account deficit in 2012 at $475 billion , while china had the largest current account surplus at $192 billion ( see figure a - 1 ) .

these balances were also significant as a share of gdp: - 3.0% for the united states and 2.3% for china ( see figure a - 2 ) .

some "rebalancing" has taken place during and after the global recession .

the u.s. current account deficit has declined from its peak 6.0% in 2006 because domestic investment spending has fallen and the private savings has risen .

in addition , the u.s. federal budget deficit as a percent of gdp fell from 10.1% in fy2009 to 7.0% in fy2012 , and is projected to decline to 4.0% in fy2013 , according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

what remains to be seen is how much of this rebalancing is cyclical , and will be reversed when the u.s. economy returns to full employment , and how much of it is permanent .

the imf projects china's current account balance as a percent of gdp will increase over the next six years to 4.3% in 2018 , but still significantly lower than its historical high of 10.1% in 2007 .

the u.s. current account deficit as a percent of gdp is projected by the imf to grow to 3.5% of gdp in 2018 , also much lower than its historic peak of 6.0% in 2006 .

despite the rebalancing that has already taken place , some economists would not consider either country to have reached a position that is sustainable in the long run .

before the late 1990s , the united states had never had a current account deficit of 3% of gdp .

and even with china's reduced current account surplus and the diminished u.s. current account deficit over the past few years , china's net holdings of foreign assets and the u.s. net foreign debt continue to grow .

likewise , the decline in china's current account surplus was caused by a more rapid decline in china's exports than imports during the worldwide economic downturn — when worldwide growth picks up again and reaches pre - crisis levels , that trend could reverse .

gross saving is the total level of domestic saving , including private , corporate , and government .

saving represents income that is not consumed .

physical investment spending on plant and equipment can be financed from domestic or foreign saving .

over the past several years , the united states has maintained one of the lowest gross saving rates ( i.e. , total national saving as a percent of gdp ) among developed countries , while china has maintained one of the world's highest national saving rates .

from 1990 to 2009 , u.s. gross national saving as a percent of gdp declined from 13.5% to 8.4% , while china's rose from 37.8% to 52.3% ( see figure a - 3 ) .

u.s. gross saving as a percent of gdp increased over the next three years , reaching 10.4% in 2012 .

chinese gross savings levels have declined over the next three years , reaching 50.4% in 2012 .

as indicated in figure a - 4 , china's gross investment as a percent of gdp rose from 25.0% in 1990 to 44.9% in 2009 — the highest of any major economy ( in comparison , the u.s. rate was 12.2% — the lowest among the major economies ) .

china's investment as a percent of gdp rose to 46.1% in 2012 .

china's private consumption as a percent of gdp dropped from 48.8% in 1990 to 35.4% in 2009 — the lowest among any major economy ( while the u.s. rate in 2009 was 70.5% , which was the highest among the major economies ) .

chinese private consumption as a percent of gdp was 35.7% in 2012 .

although private consumption has been a much smaller share of china's gdp than other countries , the growth rate of china's private consumption has been significant .

from 2001 to 2012 , chinese private consumption grew at an average annual rate of 8.4% , which was much faster than the growth in real u.s. private consumption , but slower than the overall growth rate of the chinese economy ( see figure a - 5 ) .

many analysts contend that , although chinese labor productivity has risen rapidly over the past several years , workers' wages have not kept pace with those productivity gains , largely due to the lack of worker rights in china , especially for migrant workers who tend to seek work in labor - intensive , export oriented , manufacturing .

rather , it is argued , the gains from productivity have largely accrued to chinese firms .

in addition , because the chinese government maintains tight controls on capital outflows , chinese households are limited in terms of where they can invest their savings .

most choose to deposit their savings in a chinese bank .

however , bank interest rates are set by the central government , and oftentimes , the rates of return on savings deposits are below the rate of inflation ( see figure a - 7 ) .

chinese depositors faced negative real interest rates in 2004 , 2007 , 2008 , 2010 , and 2011 .

many economists contend that this policy represents an effort by the central government to keep the cost of credit low for chinese firms ( in order to boost fixed investment ) , but that this comes at the expense of chinese households whose savings deposits can actually lose value , thus forcing them to save more of their income to cover the costs of health care , retirement , and other large expenses .

some have concluded that chinese controls on bank interest rates have dampened the level of household spending / consumption that would have been expected , given the rapid rate of china's economic growth .

as indicated in figure a - 6 , china's personal disposable income as a percent of gdp declined from 56.5% in 2002 to 48.9% in 2009 , indicating that chinese households did not benefit as much from china's economic growth as other sectors of the economy .

that rate fell to 48.5% in 2010 , but increased to 49.4% in 2011 and to 51.6% in 2012 .

many economists contend that the goal of rebalancing the chinese economy toward greater reliance on personal consumption cannot be achieved until the central government eliminates distortive economic policies that favor firms over households .

once such policy relates to the government's control over much of the country's banking system .

the sources of china's real gdp growth from 2006-2012 are shown in figure a - 8 .

gross fixed investment ( some of which is linked to tradable sectors ) was the largest contributor to its real gdp growth over much of this period .

the sharp growth in fixed investment in 2009 appears to reflect the results of the chinese government's $586 billion stimulus package and its monetary easing policy that encouraged banks to expand lending — a significant amount of which is believed to have gone to infrastructure projects .

in 2009 , changes to net exports in china were a drag on the chinese economy , while in 2010 they provided a modest contribution to gdp growth .

in 2012 , private consumption was the largest contributor to china's gdp growth .

the next few years could be a critical period for china's economic policymakers .

a number of economists have questioned the quality of china's massive investment efforts over the past two years and the ability of local government to repay the loans they took out to fund major investment projects .

thus , the importance of fixed investment to china's economic growth over the next few years could decline .

the chinese government's 12 th five year plan ( 2011-2015 ) states that rebalancing the economy , promoting consumer demand , boosting rural incomes , addressing income disparity ( such as boosting wages ) , promoting the development of the services sector , and expanding social welfare programs ( such as education , social security , and health care ) will be major priorities .

such policies , if implemented , could provide a significant boost to consumer spending .

based on china's historical economic model , it will likely take several years for a significant rebalancing of the chinese economy to occur .

in addition , many economists have raised concerns that , as china's major trading partners , such as the united states and europe , begin to experience more rapid economic growth , their demand for chinese products will increase , which could discourage china's government from following through on economic reforms necessary to promote a rebalancing of the economy .

