the environmental , economic , and societal impacts of the surface mining practice termed mountaintop removal mining have attracted considerable attention .

this type of surface mining occurs in an area of approximately 12 million acres located in portions of kentucky , west virginia , virginia , tennessee , pennsylvania , and ohio .

as its name suggests , mountaintop removal mining involves removing the top of a mountain in order to recover the coal seams contained in the mountain .

explosives are used to break the mountain's rock , and massive earth - moving equipment , often including equipment called draglines , removes the spoil ( i.e. , the dirt and rock that composed the mountaintop over or between the coal seams ) .

while federal law calls for excess spoil to be placed back in the mined areas — returning the lands to their approximate original contour ( aoc ) — that result ordinarily cannot be accomplished with mountaintop removal mining because broken rock takes up more volume than did the rock prior to mining and because there are stability concerns with the spoil pile .

mountaintop removal creates an immense quantity of excess spoil , which is typically placed in valley fills on the sides of the former mountains .

one consequence is that streams flowing through the valleys are buried .

all types of surface and underground coal mining in appalachia generate excess spoil fills due to the increased volume of broken rock , limitations on the steepness and height to which broken rock may be placed to achieve a stable slope , and the steep topography of the region .

large mines may be surrounded by several valley fills .

depending on the local topography and the profile of those valleys , a single fill may be over 1,000 feet wide and over a mile long .

while mountaintop removal mining has been practiced in some form since the 1960s , it became a prevalent coal mining technique in parts of central appalachia during the 1990s for several reasons .

first , as the demand for electricity increased , so has the demand for the relatively clean - burning , low - sulfur coal found in appalachia .

second , coal supplies near the surface have been significantly depleted .

third is the development of large surface mining equipment ( draglines ) capable of moving over 100 cubic yards of earth in a single scoop .

data from the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) indicate that the amount of coal produced at mines with mountaintop removal mining permits in central appalachia has decreased by 62% since 2008 , declining from about 53.2 million short tons in 2008 to approximately 20.2 million short tons in 2014 .

the number of mountaintop removal permits has decreased by 37% , from 51 active permits in 2008 to 32 in 2014 .

analysis of the eia data shows different trends in different states .

mountaintop removal coal mining declined in west virginia and kentucky by 60% and 75% , respectively , during the 2008-2014 period , while production at mountaintop removal mines in virginia increased by 24% .

for many years , excess spoil from coal mining was generally placed in the extreme headwaters of streams , affecting primarily ephemeral streams that flow intermittently only in direct response to precipitation in the immediate watershed .

because smaller upstream disposal sites are exhausted and because of the increase in mountaintop removal mining activity , today the volume of a single stream fill can be as much as 250 million cubic yards .

as a result , streams are eliminated , stream chemistry is harmed by pollutants in the mining overburden , and downstream aquatic life is impaired .

epa estimated that from 1992 to 2010 almost 1,200 miles of appalachian streams were buried by surface coal mining practices .

the cumulative effects of such surface coal mining operations include deforestation , which has been linked to harm in aquatic communities ; accelerated sediment and nutrient transport ; and increased algal production , as well as possible human health impacts .

because of the increase in valley fill disposal of mountaintop removal mining overburden in areas of appalachia , the practice has drawn public attention and criticism .

critics say that , as a result of valley fills , streams and the aquatic and wildlife habitat that they support are destroyed by tons of rocks and dirt .

flow regimes are altered , increasing the likelihood and severity of floods , and the water quality downstream from fills also is significantly degraded .

in addition , mountaintop removal can crack the walls and foundations of nearby homes ; cause dust , noise , and vibration from blasting ; collapse drinking water wells ; and destroy nearby streams for fishing , hiking , swimming , or aesthetic pleasure .

it also has forced the relocation of whole communities .

environmental groups argue that the practice of authorizing valley fills under section 404 is unlawful because mining overburden is waste material which pollutes and destroys waterways , and impacts are far more than minimal , which is the standard for coverage by a nationwide permit .

the mining industry argues that mountaintop removal mining is essential to conducting surface coal mining in appalachia .

the poor stability of the soil surrounding coal deposits in this region makes it impossible to mine the coal using underground mining techniques .

waste disposal in valley fills is a necessary part of that activity because of the steep topography of the region , and they assert that mountaintop removal mining would not be economic or feasible if producers were restricted from using valleys for the disposal of mining overburden .

requiring section 402 permits for these activities would effectively prohibit a broad range of mining which has been allowed by long - standing practice , they say .

critics have been using litigation to challenge the practice .

in a number of cases discussed here , environmental groups have been successful at the federal district court level in challenging issuance of permits for mountaintop removal mining projects , but each has been later overturned on appeal .

nonetheless , the criticisms also have prompted some regulatory changes , also discussed below .

in 1998 , a west virginia citizen group sued the state of west virginia and the corps for failure to prevent or enforce against environmental violations caused by mountaintop removal practices .

the principal claim under smcra was that the state was failing to enforce osm's 1983 buffer zone rule , which protects intermittent and perennial streams from disturbance by coal mining activities .

in addition , the lawsuit asserted that the corps had been granting permits that allowed disposal of waste in waters of the united states through permits under the nationwide permit program that have greater than minimal adverse effects , individually and cumulatively , which plaintiffs argued is contrary to the cwa .

some of the claims were settled when the federal agencies agreed to complete a programmatic environmental impact statement ( peis ) on the effects of mountaintop removal mining .

the corps also agreed that proposed valley fills in west virginia in watersheds of at least 250 acres must be permitted by individual , not nationwide , permits .

the remaining claims were addressed in a 1999 ruling which held that disposal of mining spoil in valley streams violates federal and state mining rules and the cwa .

under the ruling , mining spoil was reclassified from "dredge and fill material," requiring a cwa section 404 permit , to "waste material" that is subject to cwa section 402 permit requirements , thus raising the regulatory hurdles for disposing of mining waste .

upon appeal , the district court ruling was overturned in a decision that dealt with jurisdiction and state sovereignty issues .

the court held that the stream buffer regulation at issue was , in fact , a matter of state law , not federal law and , thus , the case should not have been brought in federal court .

the clinton administration had sided with the industry by appealing the district court's finding that mountaintop removal mining must be regulated under cwa section 402 , but it concurred with the related finding , supported by environmental groups , that the activity violates stream buffer zone requirements under smcra .

in 2002 , the supreme court declined to hear a challenge to the fourth circuit decision .

in 2005 , the corps , epa , and other federal agencies released a final peis on the impacts of mountaintop removal mining and valley fills , as promised in the 1999 partial settlement of bragg .

it identified three alternatives for improving coordination of regulatory efforts to limit the negative impacts of mountaintop removal mining .

under the preferred alternative , osm , the corps , epa , and state agencies would determine the size , number , and location of valley fills for a proposed operation , under a joint permit application integrating the cwa and smcra programs .

the corps would make case - by - case determinations whether a project would be covered under nwp 21 or under an individual section 404 permit .

more than 70,000 public comments were submitted on the draft peis .

industry groups favored continued use of general permit authorizations , while environmental groups said that the preferred alternative failed to place adequate limits on mountaintop removal mining and valley filling .

a number of comments were critical that all of the alternatives were process alternatives , and none would minimize the environmental impacts from valley fills .

the agencies responded that the alternatives were appropriate for a programmatic eis and that they would provide increased environmental protection .

the agencies also said that a number of changes to agency rules , policy , and guidelines would follow .

the obama administration joined the debate over mountaintop removal mining .

early in 2009 , epa began reviewing cwa section 404 permit applications for surface coal mining operations in the appalachian states , many of which had been on hold for months in light of the litigation on which the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit ruled in february 2009 , ohio valley environmental coalition v. aracoma coal ( see above , " other litigation " ) .

following that ruling , epa administrator lisa jackson announced that , under its cwa authority to comment on 404 permit applications pending at the corps and its authority to oversee issuance of section 402 permits by states , epa would review pending surface coal mining permit requests in appalachia to ensure protection of the environment .

on june 11 , 2009 , officials of epa , the corps , and the department of the interior signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) and interagency action plan ( iap ) outlining a series of administrative actions to reduce the harmful environmental impacts of surface coal mining in appalachia .

the plan includes a series of near - term and longer - term actions that emphasize specific steps , improved coordination , and greater transparency of decisions .

many of the administration's actions have been highly controversial , resulting in substantial congressional criticism .

some have been challenged successfully in court by industry companies and groups , and other legal challenges continue .

congressional interest in these issues also has been evident and has increased substantially recently .

bills dealing with several of the topics discussed above — the regulatory definition of "fill material," epa's veto of a surface coal mine project , osm's stream buffer rule , and mountaintop removal mining generally — have been introduced , and hearings have been held .

in the 113 th congress ( as in several prior congresses ) , legislation to reverse the 2002 revised regulations that define "fill material," discussed previously , was introduced ( h.r .

1837 , the clean water protection act ) .

this bill would sharply restrict mountaintop removal mining by excluding from the definition of "fill material" any pollutant that is discharged into water primarily for the purpose of disposing of waste .

this provision would allow pollutant discharges that replace portions of the waters of the united states with dry land or which change the bottom elevation of a water body for any purpose to be considered fill material .

but it rejects the view reflected in the 2002 regulations that some discharges for purposes of waste disposal ( including mine overburden ) should be allowable within the definition of fill .

separate legislation that would codify the current regulatory definition of fill material was approved by a house committee in july 2014 ( h.r .

5077 ) .

the 113 th congress also twice included a provision barring the corps from developing or implementing revised regulations concerning definitions of "fill material" or "discharge of fill material" in appropriations legislation , although the corps has not begun work on revisions or indicated any intention to do so .

the provision was included as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) and also the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) and the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

on several occasions , proposals have been considered in appropriations bills to restrict epa's and the corps' activities concerning mountaintop removal mining .

however , none of these provisions has been enacted .

as noted above , epa's 2011 veto of a section 404 permit for the spruce no .

1 mine in west virginia has been very controversial , including in congress .

in the 111 th and 112 th congresses , legislation was introduced to delete section 404 ( c ) from the cwa , thus removing epa's authority to veto permits for projects .

in addition , other bills were introduced that were intended to address the veto of the spruce no .

1 mine project , including proposals to bar epa from using the 404 ( c ) authority "after the fact," that is , after the corps has issued a 404 permit ; to set deadlines for epa's 404 ( c ) authority ; and to clarify procedures for elevating 404 permitting decisions to higher level agency and department officials .

following the court of appeals ruling in 2013 that upheld epa's authority to retroactively veto a 404 permit ( discussed above ) , legislation was introduced in the 113 th congress to prohibit epa from vetoing a project retroactively , that is , from using the 404 ( c ) authority after the corps has issued a permit ( h.r .

524 and s. 830 ) .

a third bill that would limit 404 ( c ) actions also was introduced ( s. 2156 ) ; it would bar epa from issuing retroactive vetoes and also would invalidate any previous veto that occurred after a permit issuance , such as that of the spruce no .

1 mine .

a fourth bill ( h.r .

4854 ) was essentially a companion bill to h.r .

524 ; it would prohibit epa from issuing preemptive vetoes , before the corps has rendered a permit decision .

epa recently initiated administrative steps to preemptively veto a copper mine site in alaska , the pebble deposit , but has not reached a final decision to do so ; h.r .

4854 was considered a response to epa's pending actions in that case .

the house transportation and infrastructure committee approved h.r .

524 in april 2014 and approved h.r .

4854 in july 2014 .

no further action occurred .

in the 114 th congress , bills were introduced seeking to clarify or restrict epa's 404 ( c ) veto authority , including limiting vetoes to up to the time of permit issuance by the corps ( i.e. , bar retroactive vetoes ) .

these bills were s. 55 / s. 234 , h.r .

896 , and h.r .

1203 .

the house transportation subcommittee on water resources and environment held oversight hearings on these issues in 2011 , and the house oversight and government reform subcommittee on regulatory affairs held similar hearings in 2011 and 2012 .

osm's efforts to revise the 2008 stream buffer zone rule also have been controversial .

the house natural resources committee held a number of hearings since the 112 th congress to air concerns that the expected rewrite of the rule would have harmful job impacts on surface coal mining .

committee leaders criticized osm's lengthy efforts to revise the 2008 rule as costly and wasteful .

in 2014 , the house passed legislation ( h.r .

2824 ) to limit the authority of the secretary of the interior to issue a revised rule for at least five years and to require states to implement the 2008 stream buffer zone rule — now withdrawn by osm — thus seeking to preempt any states that have adopted separate stream buffer protection requirements .

legislation in the 114 th congress , h.r .

1644 / s. 1458 , would prevent osm from releasing a revised stream buffer rule pending a study by the national research council on economic and scientific data in the rule .

the house passed h.r .

1644 in january 2016 , but there was no further action .

also in the 114 th congress , legislation intended to put a partial moratorium on mountaintop removal mining , pending health effects studies , was introduced ( h.r .

912 ) .

this bill would require the department of health and human services to investigate links between mountaintop removal mining and human health impacts .

until completion of such research and a determination that mountaintop removal mining does not present health risk to residents in nearby communities , there would be a moratorium on new mountaintop removal mining permits issued by the corps , epa , or the secretary of the interior , as well as expansion of existing permits .

similar legislation was introduced in the 113 th congress .

the obama administration did not present formal views on legislation in the 114 th congress that would have affected cwa permitting or smcra , but the administration did issue a statement of opposition to one appropriations bill , h.r .

2822 , expressing concerns with restrictions in that bill on several epa and osm initiatives .

