rs21664 - - the wto cancún ministerial november 6 , 200 .

the new round of trade negotiations , the doha development agenda ( dda ) , was launched at the 4th wto ministerial at doha , qatar in november 2001 .

it isknown as the doha development agenda because of its emphasis on integrating developing countries into theworld trading system .

many developingcountries believed they have received little or no benefit from those trade negotiations over the years .

the workprogram for dda folded in continuing talks ( the built - in agenda ) on agriculture and services .

other negotiations were launched on the reduction or eliminationof non - agricultural ( industrial ) tariffs,clarification and improvement of disciplines for existing wto agreements on antidumping and subsidies , and topicsrelating to special and differential ( s&d ) treatment for developing countries and assistance to developing countries with the implementation of existing wtocommitments .

trade ministers at dohaagreed to continue discussions on whether to launch negotiations "by explicit consensus" on the "singapore issues"at the 5th ministerial at cancún .

the dohaministerial declaration also directed negotiators to resolve a dispute related to the ability of least developed countriesto access generic medicines for hiv / aidsand other epidemics .

trade ministers at doha directed that the negotiations conclude not later than january 1 , 2005with a mid - term review at the 5thministerial .

negotiations proceeded at a slow pace .

several deadlines for agreement on negotiating modalities ( i.e. , methodologies by which negotiations are conducted ) were missed in the agriculture and industrial market access talks .

without agreement , negotiators looked towardthe cancún ministerial to resolve themodalities .

in the weeks before cancún , negotiating documents to achieve this resolution were criticizedby all sides , and expectations of the ministerial werereduced to achieving an agreement on the framework for the modalities to be used in future negotiations .

access to medicines .

negotiators did resolve the access to medicines dispute just prior to the beginning ofthe ministerial .

on august 30 , 2003 , the trade related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) councilagreed on a mechanism to allow poordeveloping countries to issue a compulsory license to a third - country producer to manufacture generic drugs tocombat hiv / aids , malaria , tuberculosis , andother epidemics .

while the agreement contained several restrictions to protect the patent rights of pharmaceuticalmanufacturers , the agreement was designedin part to reaffirm the importance of developing country issues to the wto in time for cancún .

 ( 1 ) at the cancún ministerial , negotiators became embroiled in disputes over agriculture and the singapore issues .

the negotiations were characterized by theemergence of the g - 20+ , an informal group of developing countries ( 2 ) which demanded substantial concessions from developed countries in the agriculturenegotiations .

some developing countries also refused to countenance the beginning of negotiations over thesingapore issues , which had been championed bythe european union ( eu ) .

in the end , the singapore issues broke up the talks before agriculture issues were evenformally discussed .

reaction .

subsequent to the collapse of the talks , u.s. and eu negotiators criticized both the substance andtactics of the g - 20+ group .

a u.s. negotiator claimed that developing country rhetoric was more suited to the unitednations , while others claimed that theg - 20+ lacked a negotiating strategy other than making demands on developed countries .

however , one g - 20+ trademinister has suggested that the position ofthe g - 20+ merely represented the paramount interest of its members in breaking down the agricultural barriers andsubsidies in the united states and the eu .

u.s. reaction to the collapse of the talks has been to give increased emphasis to the negotiation of bilateral and regional free trade agreements ( fta ) .

u.s. traderepresentative robert zoellick said that the united states would negotiate with what he called "can - do" countriesrather than "won't - do" countries .

 ( 3 ) therewere also calls by some members of congress to oppose bilateral or regional negotiations with countries of theg - 20+ , leading some g - 20+ participantsnegotiating ftas with the united states , including guatemala , costa rica , peru , colombia , and thailand , todissociate themselves from their g - 20+activities .

 ( 4 ) the european union has undertaken a review of its policy towards the wto and multilateral trade negotiations .

one issue that may be discussed in this reviewis the future emphasis that the eu places on the singapore issues .

while eu negotiators agreed to drop demandsthat negotiations proceed on all but the tradefacilitation issue at cancún , the lack of agreement on that agenda may result in renewed eu insistence onthe full singapore agenda .

the eu may also decide toplay the regional card by placing renewed emphasis on ongoing negotiations with mercosur or with former coloniesin the african , caribbean and pacificgroup .

eu officials have also made public statements on the need to reform various aspects of the wto'sdecision - making process .

 ( 5 ) some participants from g - 20+ countries returned from cancún claiming the outcome was a victory for developing countries .

to them , the lack of agreementwas evidence that they had successfully defended their national interests in demanding changes in the agriculturalpolicies of developed countries .

however,many of these countries have subsequently expressed an interest in returning to wto negotiations .

some g - 20+members , possibly under pressure from theunited states , have announced that they will no longer attend g - 20+ meetings .

these defections have called intoquestion the future of this group as anegotiating entity , as well as underlying differences between the trade policies of some of its members , most notablybrazil and india .

the derbez draft .

during the course of the cancún ministerial , a draft declaration ( 6 ) was written by theministerial chairman , luis ernesto derbez , the mexican foreign minister .

crafted as a framework for futurenegotiations to which all parties could agree , itwas criticized by most parties and was not adopted at the ministerial .

the derbez text principally modified theagricultural language of a draft negotiating textcirculated , and widely criticized , prior to the negotiations .

it did call for the start of negotiations on two of thesingapore issues , trade facilitation andgovernment procurement , while relegating the issues of investment and competition policy to further "clarification. .

in the aftermath of the conference,however , the derbez text has reemerged as a possible negotiation vehicle to restart the negotiations .

it has beenendorsed by leaders of the asia - pacificeconomic cooperation ( apec ) nations , including the united states , canada and japan .

brazil has also indicatedthat it could work from the text , although itdisagrees with certain language in the draft .

the european union has not taken a formal position on the derbezdraft , although eu trade representative pascallamy wondered in a recent speech in london , "what magic dust has been shaken over a text so roundly rejected inseptember , to find it so roundly endorsed innovember. .

 ( 7 ) only india has rejected the textoutright as a basis for negotiation .

 ( 8 ) while the derbez draft provides the advantage of a ready - made template to restart the negotiations , this approach also has potential shortcomings .

as acompromise text that essentially revised a previous compromise text , the language is highly general , and in manyrespects represents a lowest commondenominator of agreement .

many of the previous disagreements could reemerge if negotiations commence basedon this text .

the derbez text also reflects thejoint negotiating positions worked out between the united states and the eu in agriculture and industrial marketaccess .

post - cancún , some u.s. commentatorshave suggested that these positions do not serve u.s. interests , and that the united states would be better servedby reverting to its previous , more ambitious,negotiating proposals .

agriculture .

 ( 9 ) agriculture negotiations are part of the ongoing negotiations , a built - in agenda of talks thatwere incorporated into the launch of the doha round .

the negotiations involve the "three pillars" of agriculturesupport: market access ( tariffs ) , exportsubsidies , and production subsidies .

the emphasis of the u.s. negotiating position has been market access .

theinitial u.s. agriculture proposal includedsignificant tariff reduction based on a non - linear formula that would cap individual tariff lines at 25% .

the proposalalso called for a complete elimination ofexport subsidies and a harmonization of trade - distorting domestic support to 5% of a country's total agriculturalproduct .

the initial european union proposal adopted a linear formula approach to tariff reductions and subsidies used in the uruguay round .

the linear approachwould reduce tariffs and subsidies by a fixed percentage cut , thus leaving the relative subsidy and tariff ratesunchanged between trading partners .

the eu alsosought to trade concessions on export subsidies , which it heavily utilizes , for concessions on export credit and foodaid programs , which are utilized by theunited states .

in june 2003 , the eu announced a series of reforms to its common agricultural policy ( cap ) including the partial decoupling of mostproduction from subsidies by 2007 .

however , the eu did not revise its agriculture offer based on these reforms .

in august 2003 , the united states and the eu adopted a joint negotiating framework to spur negotiations in the lead - up to the cancún ministerial .

thecompromise text blended various aspects of the u.s. and eu proposals .

it provides for a combination of harmonizedand linear tariff reduction formulas .

trade - distorting domestic support would be reduced by a percentage formula , and production - limited support wouldbe allowed up to 5% of the value of the country's total agricultural production .

export subsidies would be phased out for products of interest to developingcountries , and wto disciplines would bedeveloped for state trading enterprises , export credits , and food aid programs .

special and differential treatment ( s&d ) was recognized for developingcountries , but not necessarily for developing countries that are net food exporters .

some observers have criticizedthe united states for moving away from itsinitial trade liberalizing stance to compromise with the eu , claiming that the initial u.s. position had been morecompatible with certain developing countryproposals .

 ( 10 ) however , others contend that acoherent u.s. - eu position would help facilitate negotiations .

in response to the u.s. - eu proposal , the g - 20+ group advocated a proposal to cut u.s. and eu domestic subsidies more drastically than the u.s. - eu proposal,to eliminate export subsidies , and to provide s&d treatment for all developing countries in terms of tariffreduction and other market access .

in addition , agroup of four african nations , benin , burkina faso , chad , and mali proposed the elimination of trade - distortingdomestic support and export subsidies forcotton coupled with a transitional compensation mechanism for cotton exporters affected by the subsidies .

inresponse , the united states proposed a wtosectoral initiative to examine trade distortions for cotton , man - made fibers , and textile and apparel with multilateralassistance to help these countries diversifytheir economies away from cotton .

african countries refused to negotiate on this basis .

the derbez draft tried to reconcile these different positions by advocating deeper cuts in trade - distorting domestic subsidies , bringing under reviewnon - trade - distorting subsidies , and by negotiating a date for the elimination of export subsidies , positions that reflectprevious developing country negotiatingpositions .

it followed the u.s. - eu tariff formula , which blended harmonized and linear tariffs , but alloweddeveloping countries to identify items for minimaltariff cuts .

it also largely adopted the u.s. position paper on the cotton issue .

singapore issues .

the singapore issues refer to four issues ( investment , competition policy , tradefacilitation , and government procurement ) that were offered for the negotiating agenda of the wto by theeuropean union at the 1st ministerial , held insingapore in 1996 .

the 2001 doha ministerial declaration called for a decision on negotiating the issues "by explicitconsensus" at the 5th ministerial .

the 5thministerial at cancún did not provide explicit consensus to negotiate these items .

according to reports , itwas an impasse over these issues that finally causedthe talks to collapse .

the european union , along with japan , south korea , and taiwan , have been the principal proponents of the singapore issues .

tactically , it is generallyaccepted that for them , negotiation of the singapore issues would be a quid pro quo for substantive negotiation ontheir agriculture policies .

the united stateshas been ambivalent about the singapore issues , recently supporting the inclusion of government procurement andtrade facilitation primarily to move thenegotiations along .

generally , the developing countries have been opposed to the negotiation of the singapore issuesfor two reasons .

first , they foresee theimplementation of multilateral rules on these issues as an infringement of their sovereignty .

second , manydeveloping countries claim not to have theinstitutional capacity or resources to undertake the negotiation of additional issues , whatever the merits .

thederbez text proposed the inclusion of tradefacilitation and government procurement .

in the final outcome , the eu was willing to drop all the issues save tradefacilitation , the consideration of which wasthen vetoed by botswana backed by several other african states .

before the talks broke , however , south koreaindicated that it would accept nothing less thannegotiations on all four issues .

industrial market access .

the united states has favored an aggressive tariff - cutting negotiating strategy inthe industrial market access talks .

in december 2002 , the united states proposed the complete elimination of tariffsby 2015 .

this proposal would haveeliminated "nuisance" tariffs ( tariffs below 5% ) and certain industrial sector tariffs by 2010 , and would haveremoved remaining tariffs in 5 equal increments by2015 .

the initial eu tariff reduction proposal relied on a "compression formula," one in which all tariffs arecompressed in four bands with the highest bandbeing 15% .

like the u.s. position , this proposal applied to all countries and did not contain s&d language .

the united states generally has been opposed toweakening the concept of tariff reciprocity , maintaining that it is in the developing countries' own interest to lowertariffs , not least to promote trade betweendeveloping countries .

a paper jointly proposed by the united states , canada , and the european union proposeda harmonization ( i.e .

non - linear ) formula fortariff reduction .

this joint paper did contain s&d language for developing countries in the form of creditsawarded for further liberalization activity .

 ( 11 ) industrial market access did not receive the attention paid to agriculture or singapore issues .

because there was no agreement on modalities prior to theministerial , the derbez text only reaffirmed the use of an unspecified non - linear formula applied line - by - line thatprovides flexibilities for developingcountries .

the text also supported the concept of sectoral tariff elimination as a complementary modality for tariffreduction on goods of particular exportinterest to developing countries , but it advanced no concrete proposal .

next steps .

following the collapse of the cancún talks , all negotiating group meetings were cancelled .

thewto general council chairman perez del castillo has entered into discussion with national trade ministers andtheir geneva representatives to try to establisha consensus on the way forward in the negotiations .

to date , the united states and the eu have declined to takea leadership role in these discussions .

thegeneral council , the wto's highest decision - making body , is scheduled to meet on december 15 , 2003 , to assessany progress resulting from these discussionand recommend further steps .

