the 1995 dayton peace agreement ended a 3 ½ - year war that pitted bosnia's muslim , croat , and serb communities against one another .

nato first deployed an implementation force ( ifor ) of nearly 60,000 troops to bosnia to enforce compliance with the military aspects of the dayton accords .

although ifor successfully carried out the military tasks outlined in the dayton agreement , the continued need for an external military presence to provide a secure environment in bosnia led nato to replace ifor with a smaller stabilization force ( sfor , initially with about 32,000 troops ) in december 1996 .

nato extended sfor a second time in june 1998 , this time without a specified end - date .

instead , nato outlined a number of benchmarks to measure progress toward a self - sustaining peace in bosnia .

periodic mission reviews by nato of sfor operations assessed an increasingly stable security situation and prompted gradual reductions in sfor's force strength over time .

the u.n. security council authorized nato's original ifor mission in december 1995 , the follow - on sfor mission one year later , and subsequently renewed its authorization for sfor's operations on an annual basis .

the united states initially contributed close to 20,000 troops to ifor , or about one - third of the total force .

in 1995 , president clinton justified the u.s. contribution as an appropriate response to the suffering and instability caused by the bosnian war and as a demonstration of u.s. leadership in nato , although he pledged at the time that the commitment would not exceed one year .

the bush administration frequently invoked the "in together , out together" policy with the european allies on maintaining transatlantic unity on balkan peacekeeping operations .

as the smaller sfor drew down over the years , so did the u.s. contingent , and its share averaged about 15% of the total force in the final years ( for example , the u.s. contribution was about 1,000 out of a total of 7,000-8,000 troops in sfor in late 2004 ) .

throughout sfor's existence , the united states retained command over the nato force in bosnia ; nato's residual headquarters presence also remains under u.s. command .

about 1,500 u.s. troops currently serve in the nato peacekeeping force in nearby kosovo .

the december 2004 handover ceremony marked an important milestone both for bosnia's future and for the eu's aspirations to assume greater security responsibilities .

eufor is seen as an important precedent for future potential mission handovers from nato to the eu , for example possibly in kosovo ( although peacekeeping functions there remain with nato ) .

eu members have sustained their support for contributing to a safe and secure environment in bosnia , even while the emphasis has shifted from a large military presence to greater political engagement .

eufor has conducted several exercises and operations aimed at collecting illegal weapons , improving coordination with nato , disrupting organized criminal activity , and supporting de - mining programs .

eufor has worked closely with bosnian law enforcement agencies on combating organized crime , including conducting joint anti - crime operations and arrests .

small units of liaison and observation teams ( lot ) have been stationed to increase eufor visibility in local communities .

both eufor and the nato presence remain engaged in the pursuit of war crimes fugitives and in pressuring their support networks , in close cooperation with bosnian authorities and the international war crimes tribunal .

prior to its transition in 2007 , eufor comprised some 6,200 troops from twenty - four eu member states and ten other countries , with germany , italy , france , and the united kingdom leading troop contributions .

the force was divided into three multinational task forces under british , spanish , and finnish regional command , with eufor headquarters in sarajevo .

over a six - month period in 2007 , eufor was downsized and restructured .

its current force of about 2,500 troops from 22 eu and 6 non - eu states serve in a single multinational manouevre battalion based in sarajevo and in small liaison and observation teams ( lots ) throughout bosnia .

germany and italy lead troop contributions ; the u.k. withdrew most of its contingent in 2007 .

eufor's current force commander is gen. ignacio martin villalain of spain .

the eu's political and security committee continues to provide political guidance and strategic direction .

eu officials insist that eufor remains an effective military force , capable of carrying out its enforcement mandate throughout bosnia and of quickly adding reinforcements if necessary .

meanwhile , the ongoing nato presence in bosnia serves to reinforce the transatlantic dimension and bosnia's aspirations to join nato ; bosnia's admittance into nato's partnership for peace program in late 2006 marked the start of expanded engagement with nato .

outside of bosnia but within the region , tensions may increase in conjunction with the anticipated resolution of kosovo's disputed status in 2008 .

on april 26 , 2004 , eu members endorsed a "general concept" for an eu - led mission in bosnia , including a military component of about 7,000 troops .

the concept established the broad strategy for the eu's engagement in bosnia .

it called for the eu military operation to fulfill the military tasks of the dayton peace agreement , have a mandate authorized by the u.n. security council under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , and come under the political authority of the eu council's political and security committee ( psc ) .

at its june 28-29 istanbul summit , nato nations confirmed the decision to conclude sfor by the end of 2004 and agreed that nato's residual military presence would have the "principal task" of providing advice on defense reforms and would also "undertake certain operational supporting tasks , such as counter - terrorism... ; supporting the icty...with regard to the detention of persons indicted for war crimes ; and intelligence sharing with the eu. .

on july 9 , the u.n. security council unanimously passed resolution 1551 which welcomed "the eu's intention to launch an eu mission to bosnia and herzegovina , including a military component , from december 2004. .

on july 12 , eu members adopted a "joint action" on the eu military operation in bosnia , named althea .

it designated the eu operation commander and eu force commander and reaffirmed the eu's comprehensive approach toward bosnia and support for eu integration .

on october 11 , the eu council approved the operational plan for the eufor operation althea .

the u.n. security council passed resolution 1575 on november 22 .

acting under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , it authorized eufor to be the legal successor to sfor and to carry out a peace stabilization role for an initial period of one year .

at a ceremony in sarajevo on december 2 , nato formally concluded the sfor mission and the eu launched operation althea .

on november 21 , 2005 , the u.n. security council passed resolution 1639 , which authorized eufor and the nato headquarters in bosnia for a further twelve months .

on november 21-22 , the eu council took several decisions on the eu's relationship with bosnia including opening stabilization and association agreement negotiations , continuing an eu police mission in bosnia , and keeping an eu military presence in bosnia at basically unchanged force levels for the coming year .

on november 13 , 2006 , eu foreign and defense ministers considered a proposal to reduce eufor's troop strength based on a positive evaluation of the security situation .

however , ministers postponed a decision to cut eufor reportedly in consideration of kosovo's status process and potential for regional unrest .

on november 21 , the u.n. security council further extended eufor's and nato's mandates in bosnia until november 2007 in resolution 1722 .

the eu on february 27 , 2007 , confirmed an earlier decision in principle to reconfigure eufor and reduce its size from 6,500 to 2,500 troops by the end of may .

the reconfiguration was completed by august .

on november 21 , the u.n. security council passed resolution 1785 that further extended eufor's and nato's mandates in bosnia for another year .

on december 10 , the eu welcomed the successful reconfiguration of eufor and agreed to retain a military presence in bosnia for as long as was necessary .

