on september 14 , 2004 , u.s. trade representative robert b. zoellick signed a free trade agreement ( fta ) between bahrain and the united states .

formal negotiations were launched in manama , bahrain on january 26 , 2004 , and were completed on may 27 , 2004 .

the house ways and means committee approved draft legislation implementing the agreement on november 3 , 2005 , with no amendments .

following approval of the draft legislation by the senate finance committee on november 9 , the administration submitted implementing legislation ( s. 2027 / h.r .

4340 ) on november 16 .

formal approval of the implementing legislation was given in separate votes by the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee on november 18 .

the implementing legislation was passed by the house on december 7 and passed by the senate and cleared for the white house on december 13 .

the agreement was signed into law by the president on january 11 , 2006 , as the united states - bahrain free trade agreement implementation act ( p.l .

109-169 ) .

the agreement entered into force on august 1 , 2006 , following the passage of legislation in bahrain providing increased intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection .

according to the bahrain - based gulf daily news , six new ipr laws were passed by both houses of bahrain's parliament .

the agreement entered into force following approval of the new laws by king hamad bin isa al khalifa .

in the united states , the afl / cio provided the only significant opposition to the agreement .

some house democrats expressed labor concerns during the november 3 rd vote but eventually supported the agreement after receiving assurances from the bahraini government that they would make progress on new legislation offering additional labor protections .

the fta is supported by the national association of manufacturers , the bankers' association for finance and trade , the motion picture association of america , and phrma , the association of pharmaceutical manufacturers , among other groups .

there has been some dissent in the middle east region over the u.s. - bahrain fta .

saudi arabia , a member of the gulf co - operation council ( gcc ) , has alleged that gcc countries that sign bilateral trade agreements with the united states violate a gcc economic agreement that members cannot grant greater trade preferences to non - gcc countries .

according to press reports , saudi arabia has threatened imposing a 5% duty on any u.s. goods that are imported into the gcc and then exported to saudi arabia .

according to one source , saudi arabia may be concerned that u.s. agricultural products , especially wheat , may be exported to saudi arabia via other gcc countries such as bahrain .

bahrain officials have argued that saudi arabia has not contested other bilateral ftas that bahrain has signed , and alleges that saudi arabia's complaints are political , not economic , in nature .

domestically , some analysts have raised concern that the u.s. government strategy of completing ftas with countries such as bahrain , whose u.s. trade is relatively small , is not necessarily the best use of ustr's resources .

others argue that the ustr should be investing more resources into potentially more economically significant agreements such as the proposed free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) .

the administration contends that its fta agreements are effective as building blocks to future agreements and increased political and economic reform .

many attribute bahrain's selection as the first u.s. free trade agreement in the persian gulf to ( 1 ) the strong u.s. - bahrain political military relationship , and ( 2 ) political and economic reform in bahrain .

this fta is intended to be a building block for president bush and congress's middle east free trade initiatives .

the fta negotiations included thirteen working groups: services , financial services , telecommunications and e - commerce , sanitary and phytosanitary measures ( sps ) , environment , government procurement , legal , technical barriers to trade ( tbt ) , customs , market access ( both industrial and agricultural products ) , intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , textiles , and labor .

the fta eliminates tariffs on all consumer and industrial products .

for agricultural products , 98% of u.s. exports to bahrain are now duty free , with 10-year phase - outs for the remaining items .

textiles and apparel trade will be duty free immediately if the product contains either u.s. or bahraini yarn .

a temporary transitional allowance would allow duty free trade in products that do not yet meet these standards .

according to the ustr , the agreement provides u.s. firms among the highest degree of access to service markets of any u.s. fta to date .

key services sectors covered by the agreement include audiovisual , express delivery , telecommunications , computer and related services , distribution , healthcare , services incidental to mining , construction , architecture and engineering .

u.s. financial service suppliers will have the right to establish subsidiaries , branches , and joint ventures in bahrain and enjoy the benefits of strong regulatory transparency , including prior notice and comment and license approval within 120 days .

for life and medical insurance , bahrain agreed to allow access upon entry into force of the agreement , and for non - life insurance will allow access within six months after entry into force of the agreement .

bahrain has agreed that in revising its insurance laws and regulations , it will not discriminate against u.s. insurance suppliers and will allow existing insurance suppliers to continue current business activities .

the agreement underscores bahrain's open and developed financial sector , which includes both conventional and islamic financial services .

bahrain will allow u.s. - based firms to offer services cross - border to bahrainis in areas such as financial information and data processing , and financial advisory services .

bahrain will also allow u.s. - based asset managers ( including insurance companies ) to manage the portfolios of collective investment schemes established in bahrain .

under the fta , each government agreed that users of the telecom network will have reasonable and nondiscriminatory access to the network , preventing local firms from having preferential or "first right" of access to telecom networks .

u.s. phone companies will have the right to interconnect with former monopoly networks in bahrain at nondiscriminatory , cost - based rates , and will be able to build a physical network in bahrain with nondiscriminatory access to key facilities , such as telephone switches and submarine cable landing stations .

the agreement requires each government to criminalize end - user piracy , providing strong deterrence against piracy and counterfeiting .

each government commits to having and maintaining authority to seize , forfeit , and destroy counterfeit and pirated goods and the equipment used to produce them .

ipr laws will be enforced against goods - in - transit , to deter violators from using u.s. or bahraini ports or free - trade zones to traffic in pirated products .

ex officio action may be taken in border and criminal ipr cases , thus providing more effective enforcement .

the agreement mandates both statutory and actual damages under bahraini law for ipr violations , which will deter piracy .

under these provisions , monetary damages can be awarded even if actual economic harm ( retail value , profits made by violators ) cannot be determined .

according to both countries , the intellectual property chapter does not "affect the ability of either party to take necessary measures to protect public health by promoting access to medicines for all , in particular concerning cases such as hiv / aids , tuberculosis , malaria , and other epidemics as well as circumstances of extreme urgency or national emergency. .

the fta also expressly states that it will not prevent effective utilization of the 2003 wto consensus allowing developing countries that lack pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity to import drugs under compulsory licenses .

according to the bush administration , the agreement fully meets the labor objectives set out by the congress .

labor obligations are part of the core text of the agreement .

each government commits to strive to ensure that its laws provide for labor standards consistent with internationally recognized labor rights .

the agreement includes a cooperative mechanism to promote respect for the principles embodied in the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work , and compliance with ilo convention 182 on the worst forms of child labor .

the labor ministries , together with other appropriate agencies , agree to establish priorities and develop specific cooperative activities .

labor rights have been arguably the only major area of contention .

several members of congress and the afl - cio have criticized bahrain for not making enough advances in reforming its labor laws .

issues of concern include a ban on workers in the same company forming more than one union , laws regarding penalties for anti - union discrimination , the ability of companies to withhold foreign workers' salaries for up to three months , and restrictions on unions calling strikes .

however , bahrain has introduced reforms and recently agreed to apply international labor organization ( ilo ) and to introduce labor law changes to make its laws fully ilo - consistent .

