t he economic effects of the coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic has led congress to consider general fiscal stimulus in the form of tax cuts .

additional stimulus proposals are under consideration .

this report discusses tax cuts proposed or enacted during the great recession , current enacted provisions , and potential ones , and their potential effectiveness .

several tax cuts were discussed during consideration of fiscal stimulus in response to the great recession , and the specific proposal ( the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , p.l .

111-5 ) .

this stimulus as enacted included individual tax cuts directed at lower - and middle - income individuals and also included business tax cuts .

an earlier fiscal stimulus ( p.l .

110 - 185 ) adopted in february 2008 included rebates and accelerated depreciation ( bonus depreciation ) for businesses .

some of these types of provisions were included in stimulus tax cut legislation in 2001-2003 and some of the debate centered on the effectiveness of alternatives .

among the tax cuts discussed in 2001 were tax rebates targeted toward lower - income individuals , a speed - up of tax rate reductions for higher - income individuals , a temporary sales tax holiday , a temporary payroll tax holiday , a temporary investment stimulus , corporate tax cuts ( primarily repealing the alternative minimum tax ) , and dividend reductions .

the 2001 tax cut included a rebate and the final version of the 2002 tax cut bill included a temporary investment stimulus .

president bush proposed accelerated rate cuts and dividend relief in his stimulus package for 2003 .

proposals such as rebates were made by democratic leaders .

although the economy recovered from the recession , issues of fiscal stimulus arose again in the 109 th congress in the wake of hurricane katrina .

the tax stimulus enacted in response included rebates for both low - and middle - income individuals and temporary bonus depreciation for businesses .

in february of 2009 , congress passed a much larger package ( p.l .

111-5 ) , which included spending and tax cuts .

among tax cuts the single largest provision was a two - year refundable earnings credit , the making - work - pay credit , with a dollar cap that was provided through a change in withholding rather than a rebate .

other tax components targeted lower - income individuals and businesses .

the business provisions included a bonus depreciation extension and a carryback of net operating losses .

the legislation also extended the alternative minimum tax , which tends to go to higher - income individuals .

in december of 2010 , along with extending expiring tax cuts ( which tended to benefit middle - and higher - income individuals ) and unemployment benefits , p.l .

111-312 adopted a temporary two - percentage - point reduction in the payroll tax .

as with the making - work - pay credit , its benefits were received in paychecks over time .

unlike the rebate or making - work - pay credit , the payroll tax reduction was not targeted to lower - and middle - income families .

many , but not all , tax cuts that were expiring after 2012 were extended permanently .

the payroll tax reduction was not extended , and bonus depreciation was extended for a year .

congress has enacted four measures relating to the coronavirus .

the first was an appropriations bill , the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-123 ) , which provided $8.3 billion in emergency funding for federal agencies to respond to the coronavirus .

this measure was followed by two relief measures that contained tax provisions .

the families first coronavirus response act ( p.l .

116-127 ) provided refundable employer tax credits against payroll taxes to compensate for family and medical leave mandated in the bill .

the estimated cost is $95 billion in revenue loss along with $10 billion in outlays because the credit is refundable .

the bill also had spending provisions that increased the total cost to $191 billion .

the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security ( cares ) act ( p.l .

116-136 ) had much larger revenue effects , including a refundable rebate , phased out at high - income levels , of $393 billion ( $142 billion in revenue loss and $151 billion in outlays ) , $229 billion in business tax provisions ( primarily increasing the use of net operating losses but including a tax credit for retaining employees costing $55 billion ) , and a number of minor individual tax provisions costing $11 billion .

the bill also provided a delay in the payment of payroll taxes , increasing cash flow by $352 billion in the first two years , which were subsequently offset by later payments .

the cares act also included another relief provision , the paycheck protection program ( ppp ) , which was structured as a loan for small business that could be forgiven if the business retained workers .

the ppp was estimated to cost $377 billion , and it also contained a provision excluding the forgiven loan from being included in income ( which the tax law otherwise would have counted as income ) .

the exclusion may be negated by irs guidance disallowing the deduction of expenses .

although structured as a loan forgiveness , such a program has a similar effect as the employee retention tax credit .

the ppp can also be considered as an alternative to unemployment benefits because loan forgiveness is contingent on retaining and paying employees .

the cares act also had direct spending , transfers , and other deferrals or loans that increased its overall cost to $1.7 trillion ; the largest of these provisions in dollar terms was an expansion in unemployment benefits that cost $268 billion .

the final bill , the paycheck protection program and health care enhancement act ( p.l .

116-139 ) did not include tax provisions .

it would add $321 billion to the ppp , $62 billion in additional small business loan authority , and $100 billion in health - related spending ( $75 billion for health providers and $25 billion for covid - 19 testing ) .

additional stimulus legislation may be considered , which might include aid to state and local governments and additional funds for the ppp .

effectiveness of a tax cut for short run stimulus purposes is judged by the extent to which the tax cut increases private demand ( either consumption or investment spending ) .

a tax cut that is saved will have no short term stimulative economic effect ( or long term one , if the cut is financed by a deficit , since increased private saving would be offset by decreased government saving ) .

thus , in general , tax cuts received by individuals will not be successful as a short - run stimulus if they lead to additional saving , and tax cuts received by firms will not be successful unless they lead to spending on investment ( or lead quickly to spending on consumption by shareholders ) .

because part of a tax cut is saved , no tax cut will be as stimulative as government spending .

the following four propositions can generally be supported by economic theory and empirical evidence: ( 1 ) individual income tax cuts directed at lower - income individuals will likely have a larger effect than cuts directed at higher income individuals , other things equal .

this distributional effect suggests that the most effective tax cut would be a rebate which is not only a flat amount but specifically directed at lower - income individuals ( who did not have tax liability ) .

while payroll and sales taxes are more concentrated among lower - and moderate - income individuals than the normal income tax , they are largely proportional taxes and the bulk of them will still go to middle - and higher - income individuals .

most income tax cuts actually exclude the bottom 44% of the population who do not pay income tax unless they are refundable ( as with the february 2008 cut ) .

similarly , payroll tax cuts exclude 16% of the population who do not pay payroll taxes .

tax reductions enacted in 2001 were concentrated among the upper part of the income distribution as are dividend and capital gains tax reduction .

a flat dollar reduction , if refundable , would be more concentrated on lower and middle incomes than tax cuts that reduce rates or allow deductions .

 ( 2 ) there is weak empirical evidence and even weaker theoretical basis that a lump sum tax cut is less likely to be spent than one received in small increments ( e.g .

through withholding ) .

this effect could make a rebate less effective than alternative individual tax cuts if it were not for the distributional evidence .

however , the distributional effect is more solidly grounded in economic theory , and is based on more concrete and extensive empirical evidence .

 ( 3 ) certain types of temporary tax cuts are likely to be more effective than permanent ones while , in other cases , they are less effective .

the most important illustration of this effect is a temporary investment subsidy , but it could also apply to a temporary sales tax holiday or any design where spending is required to obtain the subsidy and is for a limited duration .

otherwise , temporary cuts are likely to be less effective than permanent ones .

 ( 4 ) corporate tax cuts that do not make new investments more profitable are unlikely to have much effect on investment or consumer spending , especially when the economy is in a recession , and the effect of corporate rate cuts is likely small .

the remainder of this report provides a summary of the evidence and economic reasoning supporting these propositions , followed by a brief discussion of current policies .

before discussing these propositions , however , it is important to note the differences between a model where individuals consume based primarily on current income compared to those where individuals consume primarily out of permanent ( lifetime ) income , because much of the empirical analysis focuses on this issue .

optimal lifetime consumption models imply that consumption is based on permanent income and suggest very little will be spent out of transitory income ( because it has little effect on permanent income ) .

thus , a temporary tax cut , which is the normal mode of a fiscal stimulus , would be ineffective .

extensive empirical investigation has rejected this permanent income model in its pure form and suggests that consumption responds to permanent and current income .

proposition 1: a tax cut directed at lower - income individuals should have a larger effect on spending than one directed at higher - income individuals .

data show that the fraction of income saved rises as income rises .

one study found that the savings rate for the top 1% was at least 300 times the average .

arraying families by wealth , another study found that the top 1% saved 37% , the next 9% saved 15% , and the bottom 90% saved 0% .

this pattern is far too pronounced to be accounted for by business cycle reasons and cannot be explained by life - cycle patterns and thus implies a departure from the permanent income model of consumption .

a saving rate that rises across incomes could be expected even in a permanent income model if each individual has the same permanent saving rate .

at any time , some individuals may be earning lower than average amounts and others higher than average amounts .

thus the transitory income would understate permanent income in some cases and overstate it in others .

since more individuals with unusually low incomes would fall into the lower groups ( and more with higher incomes into the high groups ) , some pattern of rising saving rates is expected .

but empirically the effect is far too large to be explained by this phenomenon ( which can be examined by looking at variations over time for an individual ) .

a rising saving share with income could also arise from life - cycle reasons .

typically income is low in the early years of life , rises during the working career and falls at retirement .

if individuals want consumption to be smoother than income , they will save less when they are young and old and have lower incomes , and save more in the middle when they have higher incomes .

however , when examining the data , age does very little to explain saving behavior and the patterns of rising saving rates with income persist within age groups .

aside from these empirical observations , there are theoretical reasons to expect that lower - income individuals are likely to spend more of an additional dollar of income than do higher - income individuals , especially in the case of a temporary tax cut , which is the kind of cut normally associated with fiscal stimulus .

they may have a lower - lifetime saving rate because social welfare programs are likely to have a higher wage replacement rate during instances of bad luck ( eg , disability ) or old age and because they are less likely to wish to leave bequests .

indeed , for some means - tested programs , assets can disqualify an individual from coverage .

they may have less information with which to optimize over time and , if they save at all , simply have a target amount ( at least in the short run ) , so that additional income is spent ( including temporary income increases ) .

finally , they are more likely to be subject to liquidity constraints ; that is , to prefer to spend more than their earnings and not be able to because they cannot borrow and have no assets .

indeed , permanent income theories suggest that temporary tax cuts for non - liquidity constrained individuals may have virtually no effect , while tax cuts for liquidity constrained individuals will be largely spent .

proposition 2 .

a tax cut provided through a lump sum payment may be less likely to be spent than one which shows up in withholding , but the evidence is weak .

this differential effect ( which would not occur in a permanent income model ) was pointed out by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) in its studies of the effectiveness of alternative tax cuts .

cbo referred to a comparison of results from two studies that examined the effect of income tax refunds , and of expected rate cuts from pre - announced tax cuts of the early 1980s .

both studies rejected the permanent income model ( suggesting some spending effects from a transitory tax cut ) , but larger effects were found for the rate reductions .

there are , however , two reservations about comparing these two events to gain insight into the effects of lump - sum tax cuts versus tax cuts reflected in paychecks over time .

first , to the extent that individuals use over - withholding as a means of forcing themselves to save , one would not expect spending to rise when the refund is received , even though it might rise when an unplanned rebate is received .

thus , finding a smaller amount of spending out of a refund than out of tax cuts reflected in paychecks may not be very meaningful .

secondly , the model assumes that individuals were certain that the later phases of the reagan tax cuts would be received .

if there was some uncertainty , however , the fact that spending did not increase until the tax cut was actually received may partially reflect not the failure of the permanent income model , but the lack of certainty about receipt of the cut .

if a differential does indeed exist , this effect could make the payroll tax cut ( and sales tax holidays ) more effective than a rebate .

however , these "lump sum" effects would have to be offset by the distributional effects discussed in proposition i and supported by considerable empirical evidence .

for that reason , it would be difficult to conclude that a payroll tax holiday would be more effective than a rebate directed at low - income individuals .

in addition , some evidence on the 2001 and 2008 tax rebates suggested that a large fraction of that rebate was spent .

evidence on the payroll tax cut in 2011 found a smaller share of that tax cut spent than the rebate , but that difference may reflect methodological and distributional differences or differences in economic conditions .

proposition 3 .

certain types of temporary tax cuts may be more effective than permanentâ ones .

in general , the permanent income modeling of consumption , even when it does not hold in a pure form , suggests that temporary tax cuts will be less effective than permanent ones , presenting something of a dilemma because tax cuts motivated for fiscal policy reasons need to be temporary ( if they are not to hamper long - term growth ) .

however , temporary tax cuts that depend on spending ( rather than receiving income ) are likely to be more effective in the short run than permanent ones .

during a period of slack employment , a payroll or individual income tax cut is simply a temporary windfall which can be spent at any time without any further consequence for the size of the tax cut .

but if the tax benefit is triggered by spending , a temporary tax cut will be more effective ( just as a temporary sale tends to induce a large response ) .

the most common example is the investment tax credit or a similar subsidy , such as temporary partial expensing of investment , but the same would be true of a temporary sales tax holiday .

although expensing of equipment is no longer an option ( as 100% is currently allowed following the 2017 tax cut ) , investment credits would still be a possible investment incentive .

note that while this feature may make a temporary tax cut more effective than a permanent one , it does not mean that the stimulus is more effective than other alternatives when all factors are considered .

most evidence suggests that investment subsidies have a small effect on investment and that the temporary investment subsidy enacted in 2006 was not very effective .

and , it may be particularly difficult to induce investment ( even with a temporary subsidy ) when excess capacity exists .

while firms benefit from the temporary subsidy , they lose the benefit of delaying cash outlays .

if investment is insensitive to these cost effects , a subsidy directed at increasing consumption may be more effective even if the latter is not the type where the temporary nature provides a benefit .

in the case of the sales tax holiday versus other individual cuts , there may be a substantial implementation lag in arranging the sales tax holiday since sales taxes are imposed by the states , and fiscal stimulus may be applied at the wrong time .

moreover , the anticipation of the holiday should be contractionary .

that is , a pre - announced future temporary spending subsidy is initially contractionary .

proposition 4 .

corporate tax cuts that do not make new investments more profitable would not have much effect ; corporate rate cuts are less effective than investment subsidies .

one proposal considered in the past was a repeal of the corporate alternative minimum tax with a refund of existing credits .

such a change does not necessarily make new investment more profitable ; indeed , it is possible that new investment may be subject to higher tax burdens under the regular rates than under the lower rates in the amt .

the corporate amt was permanently repealed after the 2017 tax cut , but other measures of a similar nature might be considered .

an extension of net operating loss ( nol ) carrybacks was proposed in the 2009 stimulus package and would likely not make investments more profitable although a temporary restoration of nol carrybacks ( which were eliminated in the 2017 tax cut ) , as well as additional measures to allow benefits of losses was included in proposals to aid businesses severely affected by covid - 19 .

economic theory suggests that the investment decision should be driven by its expected profitability .

a tax decrease not associated with that profitability should have no effect on investment .

rather , a tax decrease ( which increases a firm's cash flow ) is more likely to be spent on reducing debt , or paying out dividends .

both choices would not expand aggregate demand .

similarly , a corporate rate reduction , which largely benefits existing capital , would have modest effect compared to a stimulus directed at new investment .

there is a potential constraint , however: if the firm does not have access to outside capital or finds outside capital excessively costly , cash flow might have an effect on investment .

this effect would be likely , however , to be focused on small firms .

there is some empirical evidence of a positive relationship between firm investment and cash flow .

however , interpreting this evidence with respect to the effectiveness of a corporate cash flow as a stimulus to investment spending during an economic contraction is hampered by two important reservations .

first , in most cases , cash flow is correlated with the productivity of investment and investment growth , and investment may be responding not to cash flow but to investment outlook .

secondly , even if there is some independent effect of cash flow in normal circumstances , then whether an increase in cash flow would induce a firm to make new investments during periods of excess capacity is doubtful .

in any case , a choice that is more focused on investment ( such as an investment subsidy ) would have a more pronounced effect than one that is not .

during the period of tight credit now being experienced a net operating loss carryback may have more effect because distressed firms are finding it more difficult to borrow .

general corporate rate cuts are less likely to be effective than investment subsidies because they have a smaller "bang - for - the - buck" because much of their cost is a windfall that only affects cash flow and not the return to new investment .

since even temporary investment subsidies do not appear to have worked effectively , a corporate rate cut or other provision that primarily affects cash flow would be expected to have a small effect .

this evidence on the effectiveness of alternative stimulus methods is reflected in multipliers .

a multiplier indicates how much additional output is produced by a given amount of revenue loss or spending increases .

for example , a multiplier of 0.5 estimates that a dollar of revenue loss produces $0.50 of additional output , whereas a multiplier of 1.5 indicates that a dollar of revenue loss will produce $1.50 of additional output .

multipliers differ among policies and also depend on how close the economy is to full employment .

during the great recession , multipliers for a refundable rebate ( constituting most of the individual tax relief in the cares act ) were estimated in a range of 0.4 to 1.22 by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and at 1.22 by a private forecaster ( moody's ) .

net operating loss benefits ( constituting most of the business provisions in the cares act ) were estimated at 0 to 0.4 by cbo and 0.25 by moody's .

non - tax options , such as direct transfers to individuals and aid to state and local governments had multipliers similar to , or larger than , refundable rebates .

cbo estimated multipliers of between 0.4 and 2.1 for direct transfers ( such as unemployment ) whereas moody's estimated multipliers between 1.55 and 1.71 .

aid to state and local governments has multipliers estimated at 0.4 to 1.8 by cbo and 1.34 by moody's .

the larger multipliers for these options reflected the greater share of the benefit spent .

it is possible that standard multipliers do not apply in this recession when consumers face supply constraints that inhibit spending due to the closure of businesses .

by contrast , employment has declined very rapidly since march .

some families receiving tax rebates include workers who have lost their jobs or otherwise seen their incomes diminish due to covid - 19 .

although only a subset of the population , their rate of spending may be higher than the standard multiplier would suggest .

penn - wharton budget model researchers estimate that the effects of the cares act implies a multiplier of 0.4 for the rebates and 0.2 for business provisions .

this study assigned similar multipliers of around 0.4 to the ppp and most other provisions but estimated higher multipliers for spending on health and disaster ( 0.8 ) and aid to state and local governments ( 0.7 ) .

even if the cares act and other measures enacted to address the effects of the coronavirus are not very effective as stimulus measures , the measures could also be thought of as relief measures more than stimulus measures .

for example , if individuals and businesses use payments to pay debt , these payments do not increase spending , but they may help individuals to avoid credit problems and businesses to survive .

they may also make it easier for individual and businesses to comply with social distancing measures to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus .

