the united arab emirates ( uae ) is a federation of seven emirates ( principalities ) : abu dhabi , the oil - rich federation capital ; dubai , a large commercial hub ; and the five smaller and less wealthy emirates of sharjah , ajman , fujayrah , umm al - qaywayn , and ras al - khaymah .

sharjah and ras al - khaymah have a common ruling family — leaders of the al qawasim tribe .

after britain announced in 1968 that it would no longer ensure security in the gulf , six "trucial states" formed the uae federation in december 1971 ; ras al - khaymah joined in 1972 .

the federation's last major leadership transition occurred in november 2004 , upon the death of the first uae president and ruler of abu dhabi , shaykh zayid bin sultan al nuhayyan .

shaykh zayid's eldest son , shaykh khalifa bin zayid al - nuhayyan , born in 1948 , was elevated from crown prince to ruler of abu dhabi upon zayid's death .

in keeping with a long - standing agreement among the seven emirates , khalifa was subsequently selected as uae president by the leaders of all the emirates , who collectively comprise the "federal supreme council. .

the ruler of dubai traditionally serves concurrently as vice president and prime minister of the uae ; that position has been held by shaykh mohammad bin rashid al maktum , architect of dubai's modernization drive , since the death of his elder brother shaykh maktum bin rashid al maktum in january 2006 .

the federal supreme council meets four times per year to establish general policy guidelines , although the leaders of the emirates consult frequently with each other .

uae leadership posts almost always change only in the event of death of an incumbent .

the leadership of the uae was put into doubt by shaykh khalifa's stroke on january 24 , 2014 .

he has not appeared publicly since and reportedly is incapacitated , but , in order not to cause turmoil within ruling circles , there is unlikely to be a formal succession as long as he remains alive .

his younger brother and the third son of shaykh zayid , crown prince shaykh mohammad bin zayid al - nuhayyan ( born in 1961 ) , is almost certain to succeed him in all posts .

shaykh mohammad had been assuming day - to - day governing responsibilities prior to khalifa's stroke and has been de facto leader since .

he and shaykh mohammad bin rashid of dubai have long been considered the key strategists of uae foreign and defense policy .

several senior uae officials are also brothers of shaykh mohammad bin zayid , including foreign minister abdullah bin zayid , deputy prime minister mansur bin zayid , deputy prime minister and minister of interior sayf bin zayid , and national security advisor shaykh tahnoun bin zayid .

in 2017 , shaykh mohammad appointed his son , khalid bin mohammad , as deputy national security adviser .

as shown in the table above , each emirate has its own leader .

the five smaller emirates , often called the "northern emirates," tend to be more politically and religiously conservative and homogenous than are abu dhabi and dubai , which are urban amalgams populated by many arab , south asian , and european expatriates .

despite its small population and territorial size , the uae is increasingly attempting to influence regional outcomes .

its assertiveness has been enhanced by the training , arms , and advice the country has received from its close security partnership with the united states , forged during the 1980-1988 iran - iraq war and strengthened after the 1990 iraqi invasion of kuwait .

the uae and the five other members of the gulf cooperation council ( gcc: saudi arabia , kuwait , qatar , bahrain , and oman ) also have close defense ties to the united states .

the alliance was formed in late 1981 in response to the iran - iraq war , during which the gcc states gave extensive financial and political backing to iraq .

the uae and saudi arabia are closely aligned , particularly in their assertion that islamist movements including the muslim brotherhood pose a significant threat .

uae leaders have publicly defended saudi crown prince mohammad bin salman al saud against criticism caused by the saudi killing of u.s. - based saudi journalist jamal kashoggi at the saudi consulate in istanbul on october 2 , 2018 .

the saudi - uae alliance has contributed to a fracturing of the gcc since the june 5 , 2017 , move by the two , joined by bahrain , egypt , and a few other muslim states , to isolate qatar by denying it land , sea , and air access to their territories .

the uae and saudi arabia asserted that qatar supports iran and muslim brotherhood - related movements , although many experts assert that saudi arabia and the uae sought primarily to limit qatar's foreign policy independence .

the rift has , to date , defied mediation efforts by u.s. officials and caused repeated postponements of a u.s. - gcc summit — first planned for may 2018 — that is to formally unveil a u.s. - led "middle east strategic alliance" ( mesa ) to counter iran .

some press accounts refer to the mesa as an "arab nato," which was to consist of the gcc states , jordan , and egypt .

however , the plan suffered a setback in april 2019 when egypt said it would not join a mesa , possibly as a protest of the administration's strong support for israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu .

among other consequences of the intra - gcc rift , in december 2017 , saudi arabia and the uae announced the formation of a "joint cooperation committee" as a subgroup of the gcc .

the rift has scuttled long - standing gcc plans to establish a joint military command and joint naval force to be based in bahrain , supported by an abu dhabi - based "gulf academy for strategic and security studies. .

saudi arabia , possibly as an overture , formally invited the amir of qatar to the gcc summit of december 7-9 , 2018 , but the amir did not attend .

yet , the uae and saudi arabia have allowed qatari commanders to participate in joint gcc security meetings , suggesting that the uae and saudi arabia do not want the trump administration to assess them as harming u.s. security interests in the gulf .

the broader issues dividing qatar and some of its neighbors had caused rifts in the past , although not as extended as the current crisis .

in march 2014 , the uae , saudi arabia , and bahrain recalled their ambassadors from qatar , but that dispute was resolved in november 2014 following an agreement that the gcc countries will not undermine each other's interests .

despite its strategic alliance with saudi arabia , the uae has had border disputes and other disagreements with the kingdom .

a 1974 "treaty of jeddah" with saudi arabia formalized saudi access to the persian gulf via a corridor running through uae , in return for uae gaining formal control of villages in the buraymi oasis area .

in march 2011 , the uae contributed 500 police officers to a saudi - led gcc military intervention in bahrain to support the al khalifa regime against a shia - led uprising .

at least some of the uae force remained after that time , and one uae police officer was killed in a bombing in manama in march 2014 .

the uae announced in 2008 that it would acquire its first nuclear power reactors to satisfy projected increases in domestic electricity demand .

as a condition of receiving u.s. nuclear technology , the united states and the uae reached an agreement that commits the uae officials to strict standards that ensure that its nuclear program can only be used for peaceful purposes .

among those commitments is to refrain from domestic uranium enrichment or reprocessing spent nuclear reactor fuel — both processes could produce fissile material for nuclear weapons .

the obama administration signed an agreement for the united states to assist the program , subject to conditions specified in section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 [42 u.s.c .

2153 ( b ) ] , on may 21 , 2009 ( and submitted to congress that day ) .

some in congress expressed concerns about the potential for leakage of technology to iran as well as the potential for regional proliferation of nuclear technology , but several congressional resolutions approving the agreement ( s.j.res .

18 and h.j.res .

60 ) were introduced , as was one disapproving ( h.j.res .

55 ) .

no measure blocking the agreement was enacted within 90 days of the submission of the agreement to congress , and the "1-2-3 agreement" entered into force on december 17 , 2009 .

the international atomic energy agency announced in december 2011 that a group of experts that reviewed the uae's regulatory framework for the program found "noted good practices" and provided suggestions to the federal authority for nuclear regulation , the uae's nuclear regulatory authority .

still , reflecting the fact that a saudi nuclear program might not be bound by the same restrictions that the uae committed to , uae officials reportedly told u.s. officials in october 2015 that they no longer consider themselves bound by the pledge that the country would not enrich uranium .

a number of u.s. and european firms have secured administrative and financial advisory contracts with the program .

in january 2010 , the emirates nuclear energy corporation ( enec ) , the institution that is administering the program , announced that it had chosen the korea electric power corporation ( kepco of south korea ) to construct the first of four apr1400 nuclear reactors that would sell electricity to the abu dhabi water and electricity authority .

the first plant is undergoing preoperational testing .

the other three are to be operational by 2020 .

the united states gives the uae small amounts of assistance to help safeguard its nuclear program and prevent illicit exports of technology from it .

for fy2015 , the department of energy provided the country with about $370,000 for such purposes , and for fy2016 , about $220,000 was provided for those programs .

on other technology issues , in july 2014 the uae announced it will form a "uae space agency" that , by 2021 , is to launch an unmanned spaceship that will probe mars .

the government plans to send its first astronaut to the international space station in april 2019 .

the uae , a member of the world trade organization ( wto ) , has developed a free market economy , but its financial institutions are weakly regulated .

as have the other gcc states that have long depended on exports of hydrocarbons , the uae has announced plans and policies ( "vision 2021" ) to try to further diversify its economy to a "post - oil" era .

dubai emirate , in particular , has long pursued an economic strategy based on attracting investors to construct luxurious and sometimes futuristic projects that provide jobs and attract tourism and publicity .

the country is also accepting investment by china under that country's "belt and road initiative" ( bri ) intended to better connect china economically to other parts of asia , central asia , the middle east , and africa.in april 2019 , the uae and china signed deals worth $3.4 billion , most of which will be invested to store and ship chinese products from the uae port of jebel ali .

to help it weather the effect of the sharp drop in oil prices since mid - 2014 , the government cut some subsidies and raised capital on international markets , including an april 2016 bond offering of $5 billion and an october 2017 bond offering of about $10 billion .

the government budget was only slightly in deficit 2017 and 2018 , and , coupled with the bond offerings , the uae has been able to avoid drawing down its $600 billion in various sovereign wealth funds overseen by the emirates investment authority ( eia ) .

the key factor in the uae's wealth is that it exports large amounts of crude oil while having a small population that receives benefits and services .

the uae exports nearly as much oil as iraq , while its citizen population is a small fraction of that of iraq .

abu dhabi has 80% of the federation's proven oil reserves of about 100 billion barrels , enough for over 100 years of exports at the current production rate of about 2.9 million barrels per day ( mbd ) .

of that , over 2.2 mbd are exported , and the uae has as much as 500,000 bpd of spare capacity .

uae representatives indicated in late october 2018 that they might increase production to over 3 mbd , but the subsequent sharp drop in world oil prices and opec agreement in november 2018 to cut production has likely forestalled any uae production increase .

the united states imports negligible amounts of uae crude oil ; the largest share of uae oil goes to japan and china .

the uae has vast quantities of natural gas but consumes more than it produces .

it has entered into an arrangement ( dolphin energy ) with neighboring countries under which a pipeline carries natural gas from the large gas exporter , qatar , to the uae and on to oman .

however , the political differences with qatar have contributed to uae evaluation of renewable and other alternatives to relying on qatar - supplied natural gas .

the uae is trying to secure its oil export routes against any threat by iran to close the strategic strait of hormuz , through which the uae and other major oil exporters transport their oil exports .

in july 2012 , the uae loaded its first tanker of oil following completion of the abu dhabi crude oil pipeline ( adcop ) which terminates in the emirate of fujairah , on the gulf of oman .

the line , which cost $3 billion , can transport 1.5 million barrels per day of crude oil — about half of uae production .

the uae is planning a large refinery near that terminal , and possibly a second oil pipeline , to secure its oil exports and value - added petroleum products .

the uae government is also attempting to plan for a time when the developed world is no longer reliant on oil imports .

the government has set a target of using 21% renewable energy sources by 2021 .

it has funded "masdar city" — a planned city , the first phase of which was completed in 2015 , that relies only on renewable energy sources and features driverless taxis .

u.s. trade with the uae is a significant issue because the uae is the largest market for u.s. exports to the middle east .

over 1,000 u.s. companies have offices there and there are over 60,000 americans working in uae .

u.s. exports to the uae in 2017 totaled about $20 billion , about 10% less than in 2016 .

u.s. imports from uae for 2017 totaled about $4.3 billion , about 20% higher than in 2016 .

u.s. exports to the uae were roughly the same as for 2017 ( about $20 billion ) , but imports were somewhat higher ( $5 billion , as compared to $4.2 billion in 2017 ) .

goods sold to uae are mostly commercial aircraft , industrial machinery and materials , and other high - value items .

on november 15 , 2004 , the bush administration notified congress it had begun negotiating a free trade agreement ( fta ) with the uae .

several rounds of talks were held prior to the june 2007 expiration of administration "trade promotion authority. .

the fta talks were later replaced by a u.s. - uae "economic policy dialogue," between major u.s. and uae economic agencies .

the dialogue , consisting of two meetings per year , began in late 2011 and also included discussion of reform of uae export controls .

in addition , as part of the gcc , the uae negotiated with the united states a september 2012 "gcc - u.s .

framework agreement on trade , economic , investment , and technical cooperation" — a gcc - wide trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) .

the agreement was negotiated by the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) .

as noted , because of the uae's relative wealth , it receives only very small amounts of u.s. foreign assistance .

amounts provided for counternarcotics , counterterrorism financing , and nuclear security are broken down in the sections above .

for fy2016 , total u.s. aid to the uae was about $1.15 million .

for fy2015 , u.s. assistance to the uae totaled about $840,000 .

in 2015 , several u.s. airlines asserted that two uae airlines , emirates air ( dubai - based ) and etihad air ( abu dhabi - based ) , as well as qatar airways , had an unfair competitive advantage because of alleged receipt of subsidies from their respective governments .

the u.s. airlines asserted that the "open skies agreement" that the uae and qatar have with the united states should be renegotiated so as to limit the access of the three gulf - based airlines to u.s. routes .

the airlines assert they are not subsidized and instead create substantial numbers of jobs for american workers building and serving their aircraft and operations in the united states .

uae officials assert that the country will not agree to renegotiate the open skies agreement .

the obama administration declined to renegotiate the agreement and president trump , following a february 2017 meeting with u.s. airline executives , did not indicate any change to that stance .

