in april 2013 , envelopes sent to president obama and a u.s .

senator tested positive for ricin , a deadly toxin derived from castor beans .

ricin is often mentioned as a potential bioterror weapon and has been posed a terrorist and criminal threat .

for example , in 2010 , cbs news reported that the department of homeland security had uncovered a credible threat of attacks using poisons , such as ricin , in salad bars and buffets , and historically unknown individuals have sent letters and packages containing ricin to federal officials .

this report provides general information about ricin , identifies historical examples of its use , discusses its potential as a bioterror weapon , and summarizes how its possession is currently regulated .

ricin is a potent plant toxin found in the seeds of the castor plant ( ricinus communis ) .

it works by blocking cell protein synthesis , which results in cell death .

this cell death can lead to organ failure and death .

ricin has been considered for use as a weapon since at least 1918 , when military programs investigated the feasibility of bomb - dissemination of aerosolized ricin .

such a weapon was reportedly developed by the united states and the united kingdom , but never used .

iraq reportedly attempted to weaponize ricin in the 1980s .

in 1978 , ricin was used to assassinate bulgarian dissident georgi markov in london .

a novel , umbrella - based weapon was used to inject a pellet containing ricin into markov .

shortly after this episode , a similar pellet was discovered to be the source of illness of another bulgarian exile , vladimir kostov .

some individuals attempting to possess ricin , generally through its manufacture in makeshift laboratories , have been arrested and subsequently convicted of violations of the biological weapons anti - terrorism act ( p.l .

101-298 ) .

for example , in 2008 , a man in las vegas poisoned himself manufacturing ricin in a hotel room .

he survived the poisoning and was subsequently convicted of possession of a biological toxin .

in other cases , unidentified individuals have sent ricin to government officials .

in october 2003 a letter containing ricin addressed to the department of transportation was intercepted , and in november 2003 , the u.s. secret service reportedly intercepted an envelope containing ricin addressed to the white house .

in february 2004 , ricin was detected in the dirksen senate office building in the mailroom of senator frist .

additionally , trace amounts of ricin were reportedly found in various locales in afghanistan , and an insurgent group in iraq reportedly attempted to acquire ricin .

many experts believe that ricin would be difficult to use as a weapon of mass destruction .

ricin needs to be injected , ingested , or inhaled by the victim to injure .

biological weapons experts estimate that 8 metric tons would be required to cover a 100 km 2 area with enough toxin to kill 50% of the people .

thus , using ricin to cause mass casualties becomes logistically impractical even for a well - funded terrorist organization .

furthermore , some experts have stated that the required preparatory steps to use ricin as a mass casualty weapon also pose significant technical barriers that may preclude such use by non - state actors .

although causing mass casualties would be difficult , many experts agree that ricin could be a formidable weapon if used in small - scale attacks .

the centers for disease control and prevention have listed ricin as a category b agent because it would be moderately easy to disseminate and result in moderate morbidity rates and low mortality rates .

although a string of attacks targeting dozens of victims at a time may not produce mass devastation , they might instill terror in the population , causing local economic disruption .

ricin is considered both a biological and a chemical weapon , and internationally treaties explicitly prohibit its use .

the united states is a party to both the biological weapons convention and the chemical weapons convention .

the biological weapons convention bans the development , production , and stockpiling of biological agents or toxins for non - peaceful purposes .

the chemical weapons convention bans the development , production , stockpiling , transfer , and use of chemical weapons .

the united states has entered into multilateral agreements to prevent the development of both chemical and biological weapons by other nations and terrorist groups .

congress has enacted several statutes to prohibit the misuse of ricin .

the antiterrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-132 ) directed the department of health and human services to establish a list of biological agents and toxins that could threaten public health and safety , procedures for governing the transfer of those agents , and training requirements for entities working with these "select agents. .

the department of health and human services lists ricin as a select agent ( 42 c.f.r .

73 ) , and restricts possession , transfer , and use of ricin under the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 188 ) .

the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107 - 56 ) limits ricin access to select bona fide researchers who must undergo background investigation by the federal bureau of investigation .

also , facilities containing ricin above certain thresholds must register with the department of health and human services and maintain certain security measures .

it is not illegal to possess or transfer castor beans , nor castor bean plants ; only the isolated ricin is regulated .

both castor beans and castor bean plants are openly sold within the united states , and castor bean plants grow naturally in the southwest .

