under u.s. immigration law , foreign nationals are legally admitted into the united states as immigrants to live permanently or as nonimmigrants to stay on a temporary basis .

the terms "immigrant" and "nonimmigrant" are not used in the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

instead , a foreign national , whether in the united states as an immigrant , nonimmigrant or unauthorized ( illegal ) alien , is classified as a resident or nonresident alien for federal tax purposes .

for federal tax purposes , alien individuals are classified as resident or nonresident aliens .

the classification has important consequences for determining whether income is subject to u.s. taxation , what is the appropriate tax rate , and whether an individual is covered by a tax treaty .

in general , an individual is a nonresident alien unless he or she meets the qualifications under either residency test: green card test: the individual is a lawful permanent resident of the united states at any time during the current year , or substantial presence test: the individual is present in the united states for at least 31 days during the current year and at least 183 days during the current year and previous two years .

for computing the 183 days , a formula is used that counts all the qualifying days in the current year , 1 / 3 of the qualifying days in the immediate preceding year , and 1 / 6 of the qualifying days in the second preceding year .

there are several situations in which an individual may be classified as a nonresident alien even though he or she meets the substantial presence test .

for example , an individual will be treated as a nonresident alien if he or she has a closer connection to a foreign country than to the united states , maintains a tax home in the foreign country , and is in the united states for fewer than 183 days during the year .

another example is that an individual in the united states under an f - , j - , m - , or q - visa may be treated as a nonresident alien if he or she has substantially complied with visa requirements .

other individuals that may be treated as nonresident aliens even if they meet the substantial presence test include employees of foreign governments and international organizations , regular commuters from canada or mexico , aliens who are unable to the leave the united states because of a medical condition , foreign vessel crew members , aliens in transit through the united states , and athletes participating in charitable sporting events .

a residency definition in an income tax treaty will override these residency rules .

if an individual is defined as a resident of a foreign country under a treaty , then he or she is a nonresident alien for purposes of determining his or her u.s. tax liability regardless of whether the "green card" or "substantial presence" test is met .

resident aliens are subject to social security and medicare taxes on wages ( fica taxes ) and on self - employment income ( seca taxes ) in the same manner as u.s. citizens .

in general , nonresident aliens are subject to fica taxes on compensation from work within the united states under the rules applicable to u.s. citizens and resident aliens , but are not subject to seca taxes .

a list of exempted services in irc ยง3121 ( b ) is generally applicable to all who work in the united states .

examples include services performed by foreign workers temporarily admitted to the united states to perform agricultural labor and services performed by employees of foreign governments and qualifying international organizations .

also exempted are services performed by individuals with f - , j - , m - , or q - visas that meet the purpose of admittance and services performed in guam by h - 2 visa holders who are residents of the philippines .

the united states has entered into totalization agreements with numerous countries that have social security programs .

the intent of these agreements is to provide individuals who work in two countries with the opportunity to qualify for social security benefits in one country and to avoid double coverage and taxation .

with respect to the issue of double coverage and taxation , agreements generally provide that individuals are only covered by the social security program ( and therefore only subject to the program's taxes ) in the country where they are working , although individuals who are covered in their home country and temporarily assigned by their employer to work in the other country are exempt from coverage in that country .

a self - employed individual generally is covered and pays social security taxes in the country where he or she resides .

the united states has entered into totalization agreements with australia , austria , belgium , canada , chile , czech republic , denmark , finland , france , germany , greece , ireland , italy , japan , luxembourg , the netherlands , norway , poland , portugal , spain , south korea , sweden , switzerland , and the united kingdom .

in 2004 , the united states signed an agreement with mexico , which has been controversial .

it has not yet been transmitted to congress .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 prohibits the social security commissioner or social security administration ( ssa ) from using any of the funds appropriated by the act to pay compensation to ssa employees to administer social security benefit payments under any u.s. - mexico totalization agreement that would not otherwise be payable .

other legislation has been introduced , the loophole elimination and verification enforcement act ( or leave act ) , that would state it is the sense of the house that the u.s. - mexico totalization agreement "is inappropriate public policy and should not take effect. .

another bill introduced in the 112 th congress would address a constitutional issue with the existing totalization agreement process .

under current law , once an agreement is transmitted to congress , it becomes effective at the end of the period during which at least one house has been in session 60 days , unless either house adopts a resolution of disapproval .

this is a legislative veto , and the supreme court held such vetoes to be unconstitutional .

the social security totalization agreement reform act of 2011 ( or star act ) would , among other things , address the legislative veto problem by implementing a new approval process .

