president bush and moroccan king mohammed vi announced at a meeting in washington , d.c. on april 23 , 2002 , that the two countries would seek to negotiate a free trade agreement .

on october 1 , 2002 , u.s. trade representative robert zoellick sent congress formal notification of the administration's intention to begin fta talks with morocco .

in his notification letter , zoellick stated that the completion of an fta with morocco would "support this administration's commitment to promote more tolerant , open and prosperous muslim societies. .

negotiations for the fta were launched on january 21 , 2003 , in washington .

after a total of eight negotiating rounds , u.s. trade representative robert zoellick and moroccan minister taib fassi - fihri reached agreement on march 2 , 2004 on a comprehensive fta .

after the required 90-day congressional notification period expired , the two sides signed the agreement on june 15 , 2004 .

both the senate and house approved implementing legislation in july 2004 , and president bush signed the legislation into law ( p.l .

108-302 ) on august 3 , 2004 .

the moroccan parliament ratified the agreement on january 18 , 2005 , but subsequently had to legislate changes in the country's intellectual property laws to implement its fta obligations .

according to the office of the u.s. trade representative , morocco was chosen as an fta partner for multiple reasons .

first , ustr officials stated that a trade agreement with morocco would further the executive branch's goal of promoting openness , tolerance , and economic growth across the muslim world .

second , morocco has been a strong ally in the war against terrorism .

third , the fta would ensure stronger moroccan support for u.s. positions in wto negotiations .

fourth , ustr officials maintained that an fta would help morocco strengthen its economic and political reforms .

fifth , the agreement is expected to provide u.s. exporters and investors with increased market access .

the moroccan trade pact is now the fourth fta ( after israel , jordan , and bahrain ) the united states has in force with a middle eastern country .

an agreement with oman has been signed , but not yet considered by congress .

each agreement is intended to be an integral part of president bush's strategy to create a middle east free trade area by 2013 .

morocco is a moderate arab state which maintains close relations with europe and the united states .

situated in north africa on a land mass slightly larger than california , morocco borders the north atlantic ocean and mediterranean sea between algeria and western sahara .

approximately 99% of its 30 million people are muslim .

the government of morocco today is a constitutional monarchy .

king mohammed vi , who assumed the throne in july 1999 , is the head of state .

the constitution grants the king extensive powers , including the authority to appoint the prime minister and several key ministers individually , and approve the council of ministers , the power to dismiss the government , the power to dissolve the parliament , and the power to rule by decree .

the king also serves as the supreme commander of the armed forces and serves as morocco's religious leader or "commander of the faithful. .

the king , and not the prime minister , also defines the policy directions and priorities of the government .

on the one hand , there have been some calls from elements of the moroccan press for reform of the constitution to reduce the powers of the king , while enhancing the powers of the parliament .

on the other hand , many analysts believe that king mohammed vi is dedicated to addressing morocco's underlying social problems , while gradually liberalizing the political system further .

following september 2002 parliamentary elections , king mohammed named driss jettou as prime minister and head a six - party center - left coalition government .

mr. jettou is often described as a forceful technocratic leader .

yet morocco's over 20 political parties create a fragmented political system , making it difficult for the government to reach consensus on how best to address its many social and economic problems .

critically , high unemployment that averages over 20% in urban areas , increasing income inequality , and widespread poverty provide fertile ground for increasing support for a fundamentalist islamist movement , al - adl wal - ihsane ( justice and charity ) .

with a per capita income of about $2,000 ( 2002 ) , morocco also faces challenges typical of many poor developing countries .

these include preparing the economy for freer trade , reducing public sector wage rates and bloated ministries , increasing labor market flexibility and skills , restoring a crumbling infrastructure , and reducing dependence on imported energy .

morocco's economy is based on mining , agriculture , fishing , tourism , a growing manufacturing sector , and a deregulated telecommunications sector .

morocco has the world's largest phosphate reserves , and exports of phosphates from state - owned companies account for about 17% of morocco's total exports .

agriculture accounts for between 15-20% of gdp and employs between 40-45% of its workforce ( services employs around 35% and industry around 15% ) .

morocco is a net exporter of fruits and vegetables and a net importer of cereals , oilseeds , and sugar .

severe droughts often hurt morocco's farm production , thereby serving as a drag on economic growth .

the moroccan economy also depends heavily on the inflow of funds from moroccans working abroad .

the illegal production and export of cannabis also plays a role in the economy , particularly in the north .

the european union is its primary trading partner , accounting for nearly 67% of its exports and 55% of its imports in 2002 .

france is morocco's single largest trading partner by a wide margin .

the united states is a relatively small trading partner , accounting for about 5% of morocco's total trade .

the bush administration's decision to negotiate a fta with morocco was a surprise to a number of observers .

a u.s. chamber of commerce official , for example , questioned the decision on the grounds that the united states does not do a lot of business with morocco and that other middle eastern countries , such as egypt and turkey , would be more suitable partners .

the bush administration , backed by a coalition of u.s. companies that support the negotiation , responded that both u.s. economic and political interests ( see below ) will be well served by the proposed fta .

the agreement provides that more than 95% of bilateral trade in consumer and industrial products will become duty - free immediately , and all other remaining tariffs will be eliminated within nine years .

u.s. export sectors such as information technology products , construction equipment , and chemical stand to benefit .

for the import - sensitive textile and apparel sector , trade will be duty - free if imports meet the agreement's rules of origin .

the agreement requires qualifying apparel to contain either u.s. or moroccan yarn and fabric and a limited amount of third country content .

on agriculture , u.s. poultry , beef , and wheat exports will benefit from liberalization of morocco's tariff - rate quotas .

morocco will also provide immediate duty - free access on products such as pecans , frozen potatoes , and breakfast cereals and more graduated duty - free access on other products such as soybeans , sorghum , and grapes .

for its part , the united states will phase - out all agricultural tariffs , most in fifteen years .

morocco will provide u.s. service providers such as audiovisual , express delivery , telecommunications , computer and related services , construction , and engineering with enhanced access to its market .

u.s. banks and insurance companies will have the right to establish subsidiaries and joint ventures in morocco , as well as the right to establish branches , subject to a four year phase - in for most insurance providers .

protections and non - discriminatory treatment are provided for digital products such as u.s. software , music , text , and videos .

protections for u.s. patents , trademarks , and copyrights parallel and in some cases deepen the standards of other u.s. ftas .

in the area of telecommunications , each government commits to that users of the telecom network will have reasonable and non - discriminatory access to the network .

u.s. phone companies will have the right to interconnect with former monopoly networks in morocco at non - discriminatory , cost - based rates .

the agreement provides for anti - corruption measures in government contracting .

u.s. companies are provided access to bidding on a range of moroccan government contracts and procurement .

both countries also commit to enforce their domestic labor and environmental laws , and the agreement includes a cooperative mechanism in both labor and environmental areas .

agricultural producers in the united states welcome the tariff reductions that will be phased in as a result of the fta .

in particular , the american soybean association said that the duty on soybeans for processing will be eliminated immediately , and soybeans imported for other uses and processed soy products will be reduced by 50% in the first year of the agreement and phased out over the next five years .

previous import duties in morocco were 2.5% on soybeans for processing , 25% on soybean meal , and 75.5% for soy products that are used in human food .

the national cattlemen's beef association looks forward to increased market access to morocco's hotel and restaurant industry as morocco opens its market to u.s. beef with a low in - quota tariff that goes to zero quickly .

according the u.s. trade representative's office , producers of poultry , wheat , corn , and sorghum will also gain from the agreement .

most u.s. trade advisory committees endorsed the agreement .

the most senior committee , the advisory committee for trade policy and negotiations , found the agreement "to be strongly in the u.s. interest and to be an incentive for additional bilateral and regional agreements. .

advisory committees on services , goods , and intellectual property also expressed broad support .

however , the labor advisory committee expressed concerns that were echoed by several ways and means committee democrats at the july 7 , 2004 hearing .

these concerns were basically whether the trade agreement goes far enough in encouraging morocco to meet basic international labor standards .

however , the accord generally is credited with influencing significant labor reforms in morocco .

for example , a new labor law that went into effect on june 8 , 2004 ( 1 ) raises the minimum employment age from 12 to 15 to combat child labor ; ( 2 ) reduces the work week from 48 to 44 hours with overtime rates payable for additional hours ; ( 3 ) calls for periodic review of the moroccan minimum wage ; and ( 4 ) guarantees rights of association and collective bargaining and prohibits workers from taking actions against workers because they are union members .

the u.s. department of labor , meanwhile , has created an assistance program with a budget of nearly $9.5 million to improve industrial relations and child labor standards in morocco , and the moroccan government has ratified seven of the eight core international labor ( ilo ) conventions .

