supervised release is the successor to parole in the federal criminal justice system .

in 1984 , congress eliminated parole to create a more determinate federal sentencing structure .

in its place , congress instituted a system of supervised release , which applies to all federal crimes committed after november 1 , 1987 .

both parole and supervised release call for a period of supervision following release from prison and for reincarceration upon a failure to observe designated conditions .

parole ordinarily stands in lieu of a portion of the original term of imprisonment , while supervised release begins only after full service of the original term ( less any "good time" credits ) .

sentencing courts determine the terms and conditions of supervised release at the same time that they determine other components of a defendant's sentence , and "[t]he duration , as well as the conditions of supervised release are components of a sentence. .

sentencing courts are said to have broad discretion when imposing the conditions for supervised release , although such discretion must be understood within the confines established for mandatory conditions , the scope of permissible standard discretionary conditions and special conditions , and the deference that must be afforded the sentencing guidelines .

except in specified drug and domestic violence cases , courts may technically exercise discretion to decline to impose supervised release altogether for a particular defendant .

however , the sentencing guidelines , promulgated by the united states sentencing commission , recommend that sentencing courts impose a term of supervised release in most felony cases .

a term of supervised release begins when a prisoner is actually released , regardless of when he should have been released .

there is a split among the circuits , however , over when the term of supervised release begins for a defendant whose release from federal custody is stayed pending a civil commitment determination .

a court may sentence a defendant to several terms of supervised release for each of several crimes , but the terms are served at the same time rather than consecutively .

this rule applies even where criminal statutes require a defendant to serve the multiple terms of imprisonment consecutively .

section 3583 ( b ) sets the authorized duration for a term of supervised release , subject to exceptions for certain drug , terrorism , and sex offenses .

it authorizes a term of supervised release of not more than five years , when the defendant is convicted of a class a or b felony ( eg , bank fraud ) ; not more than three years , when the defendant is convicted of a class c or d felony ( eg , bank robbery ) ; and not more than one year , when the defendant is convicted of a class e felony or a misdemeanor ( crimes with a maximum penalty of imprisonment of three years or less ) .

the exceptions for various drug , terrorism , and sex offenses permit supervised release terms for any number of years up to life , and often come with mandatory minimums .

while possession with intent to distribute illicit drugs ordinarily permits a sentence of supervised release for any term of years up to life , the accompanying mandatory minimum terms will vary according to the dangerousness of the drug , the volume involved , and whether the defendant is a recidivist .

similar mandatory minimum terms of supervised release apply in the case of kidnaping a child and certain sex offenses .

in those instances , the mandatory minimum is five years , regardless of the triggering offense or the defendant's criminal record .

for federal "crimes of terrorism," that is , those listed in 18 u.s.c .

2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ( b ) , the courts must impose a term of supervised release of any term of years or life .

the obligation applies regardless of whether the offense was committed for terrorist purposes .

in any event , the court may terminate a defendant's term of supervised release at any time after the defendant has served a year on supervised release , based on the defendant's conduct , the interests of justice , and consideration of several of the general sentencing factors .

the circuits are divided over whether the court may dismiss such a petition out of hand or must explain its action .

conversely , a court may extend a defendant's term of supervised release , unless the term has already run or unless the court initially imposed the maximum permissible term .

conditions for supervised release are determined during a federal defendant's initial sentencing , based on the nature of the offense , the defendant's particular history , and other factors .

when determining applicable conditions , courts consider both federal statutory requirements and federal sentencing guidelines .

there are two kinds of conditions for supervised release: mandatory and discretionary .

although a sentencing court's primary role in supervised release occurs at the time of initial sentencing , it retains an important decision - making function , and broad discretion , throughout a defendant's term of supervised release .

in addition to earlier termination of a defendant's term of supervised release , a court may modify supervised release conditions at any time , may revoke a defendant's term of supervised release , require him to return to prison for an addition term of imprisonment , and impose an additional term of supervised release to be served thereafter .

the constitution limits the range of permissible conditions .

even if a condition of supervised release satisfies all statutory requirements , a court will invalidate it if it runs afoul of a defendant's constitutional rights .

on the other hand , a condition which raises constitutional concerns is likely to offend statutory norms as well and can be resolved on those grounds .

the constitution vests the judicial power of the united states in the supreme court and such inferior courts as congress shall ordain and establish .

it cannot be exercised elsewhere .

the issue arises most often in the context of the extent of discretion which a court assigns a probation officer .

in crafting the conditions for a particular defendant , a sentencing court will often delegate initial implementing responsibilities to a probation officer .

the line between permissible and impermissible delegation is not always clear .

in some cases , it is a question of whether the task assigned a probation officer in a condition of supervised release touches upon a defendant's significant liberty interest .

in others , it is a matter of whether the court has declared that a particular condition is to be imposed , even though thereafter the court may have delegated considerable implementing discretion .

yet elsewhere , the issue turns on the level of court oversight of the probation officer when implementing a condition .

the sex offender conditions have generated a number of first amendment challenges , primarily in two areas: overbreadth and freedom of association .

under the first amendment overbreadth doctrine , a condition is overbroad if it sweeps in a substantial amount of constitutionally protected speech along with legitimately targeted unprotected speech .

the courts also recognize a right to intimate or familial relationships as a component of the freedom of association which extends to "personal decisions about marriage , childbirth , raising children , cohabiting with relatives and the like. .

defendants have often contended that a particular condition to which they are subject is overbroad , or improperly intrudes upon their freedom of association .

both doctrines have companions in due process , discussed below .

both challenges are often resolved by recourse to section 3583 ( d ) 's "reasonably related" and "no unnecessary deprivation of liberty" requirements , which can provide the narrow tailoring that the first amendment demands .

in fact , cases that have first amendment implications are often resolved on those statutory grounds .

the fourth amendment guarantees a right "against unreasonable searches and seizures. .

following an individual's criminal conviction , however , the supreme court has used a "general balancing" test , in which it assesses "on the one hand , the degree to which [the government action] intrudes upon an individual's privacy and , on the other , the degree to which it is needed for the promotion of legitimate interests. .

because people on supervised release , like others along the "continuum of punishment," have a "reduced expectation of privacy" under the court's fourth amendment jurisprudence , their privacy interests carry less weight in this balancing test .

section 3583 ( d ) and the corresponding sentencing guideline authorize warrantless , suspicionless search conditions in the case of offenders required to register as sex offenders .

elsewhere , it has been said a search condition must satisfy the "reasonably related" standards .

yet the courts are divided over the question of whether probation officers may conduct a warrantless search in the absence of a specific condition .

the fifth amendment declares that "[n]o person shall ... be deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law.... " due process requires that an individual facing revocation of his supervised release be given a reasonably prompt hearing , and be "given adequate notice , represented at all times , [permitted to] appear[] at the hearing , and ... afforded an opportunity to make a statement and present information in mitigation. .

"the minimum requirements of due process [also] include the right to confront and cross examine adverse witnesses ( unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation ) . .

due process also colors the extent to which a condition of supervised release may bar an individual's access to his own children .

one of the more common due process complaints is that a particular condition of supervised release is constitutionally vague .

"a condition of supervised release is unconstitutionally vague if it would not afford a person of reasonable intelligence with sufficient notice as to the conduct prohibited. .

the popularity of the challenge may have something to do with the fact that the statutory and guideline conditions are worded generally in order to allow sentencing courts to adjust them to the facts before them .

the sixth amendment assures the accused a number of rights during the course of his trial .

as just noted , the fifth amendment assures the defendant of comparable , if more limited , rights at sentencing and during supervised release revocation hearings .

the sixth amendment rights , however , do not apply there .

more specifically , the sixth amendment's right to a speedy trial is not implicated by the passage of time between a defendant's conviction and the revocation hearing triggered by allegations of a violation of the defendant's condition of supervised release .

the sixth amendment right to a jury trial does not apply to such revocation hearings ; neither does the sixth amendment confrontation clause .

the eighth amendment prohibits cruel and unusual punishment .

its proscription encompasses both the inherently barbaric and in rare cases those grossly disproportionate to the crime for which punishment was inflicted .

eighth amendment challenges of a sentence of supervised release are rare , and thus far , even more rarely successful .

