nearly 105,000 horses were slaughtered for human food in 2006 , all in two foreign - owned texas plants and a third foreign plant in illinois , according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

virtually all the meat was for export , the largest markets being france , belgium , switzerland , italy , japan , and mexico .

the united states exported more than 17,000 metric tons of horse meat valued at about $65 million in 2006 .

most of these horses were raised for other purposes , like riding .

dealers collected them for the plants from auctions , boarding facilities , and elsewhere .

although u.s. horse slaughter had been rising since 2002 — before a series of court actions closed the three plants in 2007 — it remained below levels of the 1980s , when more than 300,000 were processed annually in at least 16 u.s. plants .

although u.s. slaughter has ended for the present , advocates continue to support federal legislation to ban it permanently .

they — and those who have opposed a permanent ban — also express concern about the shipment of more u.s. horses to canada and mexico , where plants can still slaughter them for food .

the foods that humans find acceptable to eat , at least under normal conditions , are for the most part culturally determined .

the consumption of "bush meat" in some african societies , bird nests and shark fins in china , canines in parts of indonesia and korea , and kangaroo in australia are practices that seem foreign to most north american residents , but may be normative among many groups in those societies .

the same is generally true for how horse meat is regarded in the united states , while france , belgium , and italy , among other countries , consider horse meat a normal item of consumption .

most u.s. and canadian consumers today view horses as performance and companion animals rather than food animals .

horse protection and animal welfare groups contend that americans overwhelmingly favor an end to horse slaughter for human food , a practice such groups have called cruel and unnecessary .

according to these groups , horses are transported long distances often in deplorable conditions in poorly equipped trucks and trailers , where they are exposed to bad weather and often inadequate rest , food , and water .

however , a veterinary journal article counters: "market demand for horsemeat for human consumption is almost certain to continue and may grow in the foreseeable future .

it is therefore proper and necessary that we continue to work with national and international groups to provide humane care for horses intended for slaughter and maintain as much consensus and practicality on these issues as possible. .

the american veterinary medical association ( avma ) and the american association of equine practitioners actively opposed h.r .

503 .

the avma opposed the bill because it did not provide for the care of unwanted horses , or provide funding for the care and placement of horses seized by the government in accordance with h.r .

503 .

one concern expressed by opponents of a ban on horse slaughter is that "rescued" horses are more likely to become neglected and abused by owners who lack the knowledge , financial resources , and / or interest to care for them .

at the same time , the existing u.s. horse infrastructure cannot absorb the large numbers of animals that would be confiscated or otherwise diverted from slaughter as a result of a slaughter prohibition , opponents of such a ban believe .

the american horse protection association ( ahpa ) is opposed to the slaughter of horses for food but did not endorse the slaughter ban bills in the 108 th congress .

ahpa , which maintains a list of u.s. and foreign horse sanctuaries , had observed that not all sanctuaries may have the means or business skills to take in large numbers of horses , and that no nationwide standard - setting or oversight system exists for them .

a texas rescue group stated: "some equine rescues are large organizations with a system of checks that keep everyone honest .

others may be small one or two person operations .

there are no national oversight organizations that can verify the honesty of a nonprofit equine rescue. .

the national horse protection coalition ( nhpc ) asserted that sanctuary associations have accreditation programs and "strict guidelines," and that state and local animal welfare laws exist to ensure humane animal care .

others counter that such guidelines , if they exist , have not been endorsed or overseen by any nationally recognized authority , and that most state and local laws are anti - cruelty measures , not proactive care standards .

some , including the humane society of the united states ( hsus ) , have observed that equine shelters are less well - established than cat and dog shelters , which often are associated with local governments and humane societies .

citing the "extreme costs" and staff time needed to shelter horses , hsus warned of needing to be aware of "distinctions between sheltering horses and sheltering other companion animals. .

the american association of equine practitioners estimated that the cost of a horse's basic care approximates $1,825 annually , exclusive of veterinary and farrier care .

a more recent study estimated the annual cost of caring for an unwanted horse at $2,340 .

nhpc has argued: "not every horse currently going to slaughter will be rescued by one of these non - profit organizations , but many horses will be kept longer , will be sold directly to a new owner ... or will be humanely euthanized by a licensed veterinarian," among other alternatives .

euthanasia methods — primarily chemical injection and in some emergency situations , gunshots — are considered by the nhpc and others to be more humane than slaughter , which generally involves stunning with a captive bolt to make the animal unconscious before it is killed and bled .

euthanasia averages from $50 to $150 per horse , a "tiny fraction of the cost of keeping a horse as a companion or work animal," nhpc has stated in response to arguments about the high expense of dealing with a horse diverted from slaughter .

opponents of a slaughter ban contend that disposing of many additional horses each year could create environmental problems , such as soil and groundwater contamination .

ban supporters counter that hundreds of thousands of u.s. horses die naturally or are euthanized each year , and are now safely disposed of .

many are not buried but sent to rendering plants , where their remains are used in industrial products and animal feeds .

renderers already handle millions of cattle and hogs that die before slaughter ; another 90,000 horses easily could be absorbed into the existing system , ban supporters maintain .

one issue has been whether the unwanted horses that had been sent to u.s. packing plants are now simply moving into canada and mexico to be slaughtered there — and if so , what if anything should be done to halt the practice .

according to usda , the united states in 2006 exported nearly 26,000 live horses to canada and more than 19,000 to mexico .

in 2007 , the year all three u.s. slaughter plants closed , 47,000 u.s. horses went to canada and 45,000 to mexico .

in 2008 , canada and mexico imported approximately 77,000 and 69,000 u.s. horses , respectively .

in 2010 , nearly 138,000 were transported to mexico and canada for slaughter .

the american veterinary medical association , which generally has opposed the slaughter ban legislation , has asserted that the majority of these horses have been slaughtered for food in those countries , and otherwise would have been transported and slaughtered in the united states under close u.s. regulatory oversight and humane conditions .

supporters of legislation to ban horse slaughter argue that one intention of bills such as h.r .

503 and s. 727 in the 111 th congress was to prevent such exports , by prohibiting the possession , shipment , transport , purchase , sale , delivery , or reception of a horse "with the intent that it is to be slaughtered for human consumption. .

critics have countered that enforcement and oversight are problematic once horses leave the country .

in a june 2011 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) provided evidence of a rise in state and local investigations for horse neglect and more abandoned horses since 2007 .

california , texas , and florida also reported more horses abandoned on private or state land since 2007 .

certain animal welfare organizations , however , questioned the relation of ending slaughter to these problems .

the gao report also noted that with the cessation of domestic horse slaughter , usda now lacks the staff and resources at the borders and foreign slaughtering facilities that it once had in domestic facilities to help identify problems with shipping paperwork or the condition of horses before they are slaughtered .

