the tax rates which determine investment activity are marginal tax rates on new investment .

they are calculated by projecting the path of a new investment and discounting the flow of income and taxes .

they take into account the effects of statutory tax rates , depreciation rules , investment subsidies , and inflation .

the method is to compare the internal rate that discounts the flow to the current value of investment with taxes ( the after - tax return ) and the rate without taxes ( the pre - tax return ) ; the difference between these rates divided by the pre - tax return is the effective tax rate .

table 1 shows the estimated tax rates from 1953 to 2005 .

column 2 presents estimates of the corporate firm - level tax ; if depreciation were allowed at economic rates and there were no subsidies , this rate would equal the corporate statutory tax rate .

column 3 reports estimates of the total rate on corporate investment , accounting for the deductibility of interest at the firm level and the taxation of interest , dividends , and capital gains at the individual level , as well as depreciation and subsidies .

column 4 presents the estimated rates for unincorporated business ( proprietorships and partnerships ) .

these business tax rates reflect investments in equipment , structures , and inventory .

column 5 presents estimated tax rates for owner - occupied housing , which is normally close to zero because of the exclusion of implicit net rent from income .

column 6 provides a weighted economy - wide tax rate .

as shown in table 1 , tax rates for business investment fell from the early 1950s to the mid - 1960s , reflecting more accelerated depreciation , investment credits , and lower statutory tax rates .

rates rose towards the end of the 1960s with the repeal of the investment credit , which was restored in 1971 and led to lower rates .

rates then began to rise in the mid - 1970s as inflation resulted in a smaller value of depreciation deductions by firms ; inflation also caused the penalty for not deducting mortgage interest for non - itemizers to become more severe .

increases in depreciation and lower rates adopted in 1981 , which were followed by more restrictive depreciation but lower corporate and individual rates in 1986 and slowing inflation , led to lower tax rates in the 1980s and 1990s .

the most recent reductions in tax rates arose from the lower tax rates adopted in the 2001-2003 legislation , the adoption of bonus depreciation in 2002 which was expanded in 2003 , and the lower rates on dividends and capital gains adopted in 2003 .

these changes resulted in a historically low tax rate .

the tax rate rose in 2004 due to higher inflation rates , and rose again in 2005 due to the end of bonus depreciation .

lower rates on capital gains are technically temporary ( expiring in 2010 ) , but may be made permanent .

the tax rates in table 1 do not account for the tax benefits to investments through pensions and individual retirement accounts ( where tax rates are generally effectively zero ) ; about half of passive income ( interest , dividends , and capital gains on stock ) is received in tax exempt form .

these provisions affect marginal tax rates only if they affect the return to the marginal saving decision .

many investments in these forms are made up to the maximum contribution limit , many pension plans are not under individual control , and even where investments are not at the limit all marginal investments may still not flow through the tax - favored account .

all of these factors suggest not including these tax benefits in marginal calculations .

however , there is probably some marginal effect , and if the individual income tax rate on these passive forms of income is set to one half of its value to reflect the share of non - taxed investment returns , tax rates would be reduced substantially — by about eight percentage points without the lower rates ( particularly on dividends and capital gains ) enacted recently ; about six percentage points otherwise .

the basic formula for calculating the effective tax rate is , where r is the pre - tax return , or internal discount rate for an investment with no taxes , and r is the after - tax discount rate that discounts all flows to the cost of the investment with taxes .

for a business depreciable investment , the relationship between r and r , with r the firm's discount rate , derived from an investment with geometric depreciation and continuous time , is the standard formula: ( 1 ) where u is the firm's statutory tax rate ( either the individual or corporate rate ) , is the economic depreciation rate , z is the present discounted value of depreciation deductions , k is the investment tax credit , and a is a determinant of the basis adjustment , set at one , 0.5 , and zero if there is a full basis adjustment ( i.e .

depreciation allowed only on cost net of the credit ) , half basis adjustment , or no basis adjustment respectively .

the formula in ( 1 ) is applied to obtain firm - level tax rates ( the firm - level corporate rate in column 2 and the non - corporate rate in column 4 ) , with r a weighted average of the after - tax real interest rate where i is the interest rate and is the inflation rate and the required real return on equity before individual tax .

debt is weighted one - third .

in the case of total corporate tax rates in column 3 , the pre - tax return r is derived from equation ( 1 ) but is compared with the return after personal taxes to individuals ( the same discount rate used for non - corporate business ) , a weighted average of the after - tax real return on debt , where t is the individual tax rate , and the after - tax return on corporate equity ( which is net of taxes on capital gains and dividends ) .

in the case of the firm level corporate tax rate in the second column of table 1 , r is the discount rate of the corporate firm ( before personal level taxes ) .

the tax rate for owner - occupied housing omits the effect of depreciation and taxes on profit — the pre tax return is simply , where f is the debt share , n is the share of investments with individuals who itemize on their tax returns , p is the property tax rate , and r is the after - tax discount rate .

if all mortgage interest deductions were allowed , but no property tax deductions , the tax rate would be zero because there is no tax on the imputed net rent .

a slight positive or negative tax may arise because of the inability to deduct mortgage interest by non - itemizers and the ability to deduct property taxes by itemizers .

the mathematical formulas and assumptions used to calculate tax rates , including depreciation methods and lives , investment credits , inflation rates , and statutory tax rates , as well as the tax rates themselves for 1953-1989 , can be found in [author name scrubbed] , the economic effects of taxing capital income , cambridge: mit press , 1994 , appendix b , pp .

287-301 .

the statutory tax rates , interest and inflation rates for 1953-1989 are in table 2.1 , p. 20 .

tax rates for 1990-2005 incorporate a number of assumptions and tax law changes .

these include the increase in the tax life for structures from 31.5 to 39 years in 1993 , the lowering of the capital gains tax rate to 20% in 1997 , the introduction of bonus depreciation ( expensing of a share of investment ) at 30% for 2002 and 50% for 2003 and 2004 , and the reduction in the tax rate for capital gains and dividends from 20% and the regular tax rate respectively to 15% .

individual and corporate statutory tax rates and inflation and interest rates are reported in table 2 for 1990-2005 .

the pattern of change in individual tax rates is based on the rate reported for the nber simulation model , which can be found at http: / / www.nber.org / ~taxsim / mrates / mrates3.html , visited november 20 , 2003 .

tax rates are assumed to continue at the current year's rate ; slightly lower rates would occur for 2001 and 2002 if the permanent long term rates enacted in 2001 were assumed , although rates might also rise due to real bracket creep as well .

inflation rates are a 1 / 3 weight of the prior year and a two - thirds weight of the current year .

the interest rate is the baa bond rate .

