the higher education amendments ( hea ) of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) added a provision , section 484 ( r ) , to the higher education act of 1965 to suspend eligibility for federal student aid ( grants , loans or work assistance under title iv of the hea ) to students who were convicted for the sale or possession of a controlled substance .

although the provision was not scheduled to go into effect until two years after the reauthorization , debate regarding the implementation of the provision immediately ensued .

many policymakers questioned the appropriateness of denying financial assistance to individuals who had already been convicted of a crime and paid their debt to society .

other policymakers questioned the department of education's ( ed ) interpretation of the bill's language and their subsequent implementation of the policy .

the debate has continued since the last reauthorization of the hea .

campus crimes , including the sale and use of illegal drugs , were among the topics discussed during the debates over the 1998 hea amendments .

during the discussion , studies were introduced that illustrated that , although campus crime rates in general were decreasing , the number of drug - related incidents on campuses was increasing .

in various reauthorization hearings and in committee reports , congress expressed concern about the increasing number of drug and alcohol - related incidents occurring on college campuses .

during the reauthorization discussions , representative souder stated that the country was facing an epidemic of drug abuse , and proposed the provision on student eligibility as an "important first step" in dealing with this epidemic .

congress ultimately added the provision to eliminate student eligibility for financial assistance for those who were convicted of drug - related crimes , as a part of p.l .

105-244 .

it is estimated that more than 180,000 students have been denied federal financial aid or had the receipt of federal aid delayed since the adoption of this provision .

according to data released by the organization students for sensible drug policy , this has represented fewer than .25% of all federal financial aid applicants since the provision was enacted .

however , at least two states , california and texas , have had a large number of students who have been declared ineligible as a result of this provision ( see table 1 ) .

largely in response to the confusion and contention surrounding the provision , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ) ( p.l .

109-171 ) was enacted to change the manner in which the provision was being implemented .

the amended provision specifies that only those convictions for the sale or possession of a controlled substance that occur while the student is enrolled in postsecondary education and receiving title iv student aid would disqualify a student from receiving federal student aid .

the dra did not change the provisions pertaining to the period of ineligibility due to a conviction for the sale or possession of a controlled substance .

it remains that the period of ineligibility depends upon whether the conviction was for the sale or possession of a controlled substance , the recency of the conviction , and the number of prior convictions .

title iv of the hea may be considered in the upcoming reauthorization .

there are several legislative proposals to modify the existing drug conviction provision .

since its initial enactment , issues have continued to arise , including how the provision should be implemented , what types of penalties , if any , should be imposed , who should be penalized , and whether there are other crimes that are more deserving of disqualifying a student from receiving financial aid .

the following section presents a brief analysis of selected issues that may be considered during the reauthorization discussions .

in the discussions surrounding the addition of this provision to the student eligibility requirements during the 1998 reauthorization , the increased incidence of drug usage on college campuses was continually referenced .

many policymakers expressed concern about the growing number of drug - related crimes that were reported each year by institutions across the country .

largely in response to this increasing problem , congress included this provision for eligibility .

however , critics assert that drugs are unfairly being singled out .

representative frank is reported to contend that singling out drugs as the only crime for which a student can lose financial aid eligibility treats drug convictions more harshly than rape , arson or armed robbery .

supporters maintain that robbery , rape and arson are less likely to occur on a college campus than drug - related crimes , thus justifying the focus on drug - related crimes .

the implications of limiting the loss of financial aid eligibility to students convicted of drug - related crimes might be considered during reauthorization .

if it was the intent of congress to deter certain illegal behaviors occurring on college campuses when this provision was included , crimes such as alcohol abuse on college campuses may arise as an issue .

as noted above , the existing provision does not distinguish between a misdemeanor or felony drug - related conviction .

at present all convictions , whether or not the conviction warranted jail or prison time and regardless of the amount of time served , result in a loss of eligibility .

the separate ineligibility periods and the allowable number of convictions for selling versus possession of a controlled substance acknowledges a difference between those who use and those who sell .

similarly , congress may debate the difference between a felony and a misdemeanor drug conviction in relation to suspending eligibility for student aid .

