rs21772 - - agoa iii: amendment to the african growth and opportunity act updated january 19 , 200 .

after two decades of economic stagnation and decline , some african countries began to show signs of renewed economic growth in the early 1990s .

thisgrowth was generally due to better global economic conditions and improved economic management .

however,growth in africa was also threatened by newfactors , such as hiv / aids and high foreign debt levels .

the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) ( p.l.106-200 - title i ) was enacted to encouragetrade as a way to further economic growth in sub - saharan africa and to help integrate the region into the worldeconomy .

agoa provided trade preferencesand other benefits to countries that were making progress in economic , legal , and human rights reforms .

currently,37 of the 48 sub - saharan african countriesare eligible for benefits under agoa .

agoa expands duty - free and quota - free access to the united states as provided under the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) .

 ( 1 ) gsp grantspreferential access into the united states for approximately 4,600 products .

agoa extends preferential access toabout 2,000 additional products by removingcertain product eligibility restrictions of gsp and extends the expiration date of the preferences for beneficiaryafrican countries from 2006 to 2015 .

otherthan articles expressly stipulated , only articles that are determined by the united states as not import - sensitive ( inthe context of imports from agoabeneficiaries ) are eligible for duty - free access under agoa .

beyond trade preferences , agoa directs the president to provide technical assistance and trade capacity support to agoa beneficiary countries .

various u.s.government agencies carry out trade - related technical assistance in sub - saharan africa .

the u.s. agency forinternational development funds three regionaltrade hubs , located in ghana , kenya , and botswana , that provide trade technical assistance .

such assistance includes support for improving africangovernments' trade policy and business development strategies ; capacity to participate in trade agreementnegotiations ; compliance with wto policies and withu.s .

phytosanitary regulations ; and strategies for further benefiting from agoa .

agoa also provides for duty - and quota - free entry into the united states of certain apparel articles , a benefit not extended to other gsp countries .

this hasstimulated job growth and investment in certain countries , such as lesotho and kenya , and has the potential tosimilarly boost the economies of other countries,such as namibia and ghana .

in order to qualify for this provision of agoa , however , beneficiary countries mustdevelop a u.s. - approved visa system toprevent illegal transshipments .

of the 37 agoa - eligible countries , 24 are qualified for duty - freeapparel trade ( wearing - apparel qualified ) .

these countriesmay also benefit from lesser developed country ( ldc ) status .

countries that have ldc status for the purpose ofagoa , and are wearing - apparel qualified,may obtain fabric and yarn for apparel production from outside the agoa region .

as long as the apparel isassembled within the ldc country , they mayexport it duty - free to the united states .

some ldc agoa beneficiaries have used this provision to jump - start theirapparel industries .

this provision was dueto expire on september 30 , 2004 .

the agoa acceleration act extends the ldc provision to september 30 , 2007,with a reduction in the cap on the allowablepercentage of total u.s. apparel imports beginning in october 2006 .

countries that are not designated as ldcs butare wearing apparel qualified must use onlyfabric and yarn from agoa - eligible countries or from the united states .

the only wearing apparel qualifiednon - ldc countries is south africa , althoughmauritius only qualifies for ldc status under agoa for one year ending september 30 , 2005 , per themiscellaneous trade and technical corrections act of2003 ( p.l .

108-429 ) .

agoa was first amended in the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) , which doubled a pre - existing cap set on allowable duty - free apparel imports .

the cap wasonly doubled for apparel imports that meet non - ldc rules of origin ; apparel imports produced with foreign fabricwere still subject to the original cap .

theamendment also clarified certain apparel rules of origin , granted ldc status to namibia and botswana for thepurposes of agoa , and provided that u.s.workers displaced by production shifts due to agoa could be eligible for trade adjustment assistance .

u.s. duty - free imports under agoa ( excluding gsp ) increased dramatically in 2003 - - by about 58% , from $8.36 billion in 2002 to $13.19 billion in 2003- - after a more modest increase of about 10% in 2002 .

 ( 2 ) however , 70% of these imports consisted of energy - related products from nigeria .

excludingnigeria , u.s. imports under agoa increased 30% in 2003 , to $3.84 billion , up from $2.95 billion in 2002 .

theincrease in agoa imports since the law'senactment is impressive , but it must be viewed in the broader context of africa's declining share of u.s. trade overmany years .

agoa has done little to slowor reverse this trend - - the growth in agoa trade can be explained by a greater number of already - traded goodsreceiving duty free treatment under agoa .

one industry has grown substantially under agoa: the textile and apparel industry .

much of the growth in textileand apparel imports has come from thenewly emerging apparel industries in lesotho , kenya , and swaziland .

apart from the apparent success of the emergent apparel industries in some african countries , the potential benefits from agoa have been slowly realized .

there has been little export diversification , with the exception of a few countries whose governments have activelypromoted diversification .

agriculturalproducts are a promising area for african export growth , but african producers have faced difficulties in meetingu.s .

regulatory and market standards .

manycountries have been slow to utilize agoa at all .

others , such as mali , rwanda , and senegal , have implementedagoa - related projects , but have madeinsignificant gains thus far .

in addition to lack of market access , there are substantial obstacles to increased exportgrowth in africa .

key impediments includeinsufficient domestic markets , lack of investment capital , and poor transportation and power infrastructures .

othersignificant challenges include low levels ofhealth and education , protectionist trade policies in africa , and the high cost of doing business in africa due tocorruption and inefficient governmentregulation .

furthermore , the apparel industry in africa now faces a challenge in the dismantled multifibrearrangement quota regime , which ended as ofjanuary 1 , 2005 .

as a result , africa must now compete more directly with asian apparel producers for the u.s.market .

agoa beneficiaries retain theirduty - free advantage , but they have lost their more significant quota - free advantage .

apparel producers havereportedly already left lesotho , with a loss of 7,000jobs .

 ( 3 ) this makes export diversification in africaall the more vital .

agoa iii extends the preference program to 2015 from its previous 2008 deadline .

agoa iii supporters claimed that many agoa beneficiaries had onlyrecently begun to realize gains as a result of agoa , and that extending agoa benefits would improve the stabilityof the investment climate in africa .

agoa iii also provides for apparel rules of origin and product eligibility benefits ; it extends the third - country fabricrule for ldcs , and encourages foreigninvestment and the development of agriculture and physical infrastructures .

extension of lesser developed country provision .

one of the more controversial aspects of agoa iii wasthe extension of the ldc provision .

if the ldc provision had not been extended , ldcs would no longer haveduty - free access to the united states for apparelmade from third - country fabric after september 30 , 2004 .

supporters of the extension claimed that if the ldcprovision was not extended , the apparel industrymay have contracted significantly , causing a loss of many of the gains from agoa , as apparel assembly plants wereshut down .

this might have occurredbecause all agoa beneficiaries would need to source their fabric and yarn from within the agoa region or fromthe united states in order to get duty - freeaccess under agoa , and the regional supply of fabric and yarn would likely be insufficient to meet the demand .

 ( 4 ) sourcing materials from the united stateswould not be a viable option because it would entail greater costs .

some analysts argued for the ldc provision tobe extended to allow more time to develop atextile milling industry to support the needs of the apparel industry in africa , and to prevent the collapse of theemerging apparel industry .

opponents of extending the ldc provision claimed that the expiration of the ldc provision would provide an incentive for further textile milling investmentsin africa .

they argued that the ldc provision has slowed fabric and yarn production investment in africa , becausethese materials could be imported cheaplyfrom asia for use in agoa - eligible apparel with no need for costly investments .

they feared that an extension ofthe ldc provision would provide adisincentive to textile milling investment in africa , because the deadline would lose its credibility as investorsanticipated further extensions .

however,supporters of the extension argued that investment in the textile industry would continue because of its inherentprofitability , despite the availability ofthird - country fabric .

others worried that looser rules of origin under the ldc provision might allow companies touse africa as a transshipment point betweenasia and the united states .

the outlook for the development of a textile industry in sub - saharan africa is clouded by the phase - out of the multifibre arrangement ( mfa ) quota regime injanuary 2005 .

 ( 5 ) now that quotas have beeneliminated , africa will be competing more directly with asia for the u.s. apparel and textile market , though theyremain eligible for tariff preferences .

apparel plants are particularly sensitive to price conditions as they do notrequire large capital investments and can easilyand rapidly be shifted to areas outside africa .

textile plants are more capital - intensive and more costly to move,and are therefore likely to remain in africa inthe long - term .

thus , it is argued that the promotion of vertical integration between apparel , textile , and cottonproducers is necessary to keep apparel plants inafrica , along with the jobs they provide .

vertical integration is a challenging prospect regardless of the ldcprovision extension .

some investment in textilemilling has occurred in africa , but investors have found it difficult to consistently source high quality cotton in largevolumes .

while there is agreement thatvertical integration is the key to a thriving african textile and apparel industry , the question is how to facilitate thisprocess .

 ( 6 ) agricultural products .

the growth of agricultural trade holds potential for improved economic growth inafrica .

most africans rely on agricultural production for their income .

it is estimated that 62% of the labor forcein africa works in agriculture , and in thepoorer countries , that portion is as high as 92% .

 ( 7 ) by exporting to the u.s. market , african agricultural producers could receive higher prices for their goods .

in order for this to occur , the united states may need to further open its market to african agricultural products , andprovide technical assistance to help africanagricultural producers meet the high standards of the u.s. market .

agoa iii seeks to improve african agricultural market access to the united states by providing assistance to african countries to enable them to meet u.s.technical agricultural standards .

african agricultural producers have previously faced difficulties in meeting thesestandards .

the agoa acceleration actcalls for the placement of 20 full - time personnel to at least 10 countries in africa to provide this assistance .

someobservers are skeptical about theeffectiveness of technical assistance without increased market access .

others are concerned that u.s. technicalassistance is hindered by laws restrictingagricultural technical assistance to products that would compete with u.s. farm products .

however , technicalassistance proponents point to the lowinstitutional capacity in africa as the main obstacle to african export - led development .

they feel that u.s. - providedtechnical assistance can be an importantfactor in improving africa's agricultural development and export performance .

table 1 .

provisions from the agoa acceleration act of 200 .

