the farm credit system ( fcs ) was created to provide a permanent , reliable source of credit to u.s. agriculture .

before the federal farm loan act was enacted in 1916 , credit was often unavailable or unaffordable in rural areas .

many lenders avoided farm loans due to the inherent risks of agriculture .

statutory authority is in the farm credit act of 1971 , as amended ( 12 u.s.c .

2001 et seq .

 ) .

comprehensive changes were enacted in the agricultural credit act of 1987 .

the fcs is authorized by statute to lend to farmers , ranchers , and harvesters of aquatic products .

loans may also be made to finance the processing and marketing activities of these borrowers ; for home ownership in rural areas ; certain farm - or ranch - related businesses ; and agricultural , aquatic , and public utility cooperatives .

fcs is a commercial for - profit lender and is not a lender of last resort .

borrowers must meet creditworthiness requirements similar to those of a commercial lender .

fcs has "young , beginning , and small" ( ybs ) farmer lending programs , but they do not have statutory targets or mandates .

the fcs holds nearly 41% of the farm sector's total debt ( about the same as the 42% share by commercial banks ) and has the largest share of farm real estate loans ( 46% ) .

as of march 31 , 2016 , fcs had $238 billion in loans outstanding , of which about 46% was in long - term agricultural real estate loans , 19% in short - and intermediate - term agricultural loans , 15% in loans to agribusinesses , 8% in energy and water / waste water loans , 2% in export financing loans and leases , 3% in rural home loans , and 3% in communications loans ( figure 4 ) .

the fcs provides three types of loans to farm producers: ( 1 ) operating loans for the short - term financing of consumables such as feed , seed , fertilizer , or fuel ; ( 2 ) installment loans for intermediate - term financing of durables such as equipment or breeding livestock ; and ( 3 ) real estate loans for long - term financing ( up to 40 years ) of land , buildings , and homes .

the fcs has a statutory mandate to serve agriculture , certain agribusinesses , and rural homeowners ( eg , 12 u.s.c .

2019 and 2075 ) .

borrowers must meet eligibility and creditworthiness requirements .

types of eligible borrowers and the scope of their financing can be grouped into the following categories ( eg , 12 u.s.c .

2017 , 2075 , and 2129 ) : full - time farmers .

for individuals with over 50% of their assets and income from agriculture , fcs can lend for all agricultural , family , and non - agricultural needs ( including vehicles , education , home improvements , and living expenses ) .

part - time farmers .

for individuals who own farmland or produce agricultural products but earn less than 50% of their income from agriculture , fcs can lend for all agricultural and family needs .

non - agricultural lending is limited .

farming - related businesses .

fcs can lend to businesses that process or market farm , ranch , or aquatic products if more than 50% of the business is owned by farmers who provide at least some of the "throughput. .

fcs can also lend to businesses that provide services to farmers and ranchers , such as crop spraying and cotton ginning .

the extent of financing is based on the amount of the business's farm - related income .

rural homeowners .

fcs can lend for the purchase , construction , improvement , or refinancing of single - family dwellings in rural areas ( 2,500 population limit ) .

farmer - owned cooperatives and certain rural utilities ( electric and telecom ) .

figure 4 illustrates fcs's portfolio of loans outstanding ( $238 billion as of march 31 , 2016 ) .

about 65% of the loan portfolio is in the primary categories of farm real estate and operating loans .

figure 5 presents the loan portfolio by size of loan and the number of borrowers in each size category .

about 74% of borrowers ( 402,000 out of 527,000 ) have loans under $250,000 in size and account for 14% of the loan portfolio .

at the other extreme , 49 borrowers ( 0.009% of 527,000 ) have loans over $250 million and account for 9% of the loan portfolio .

the federal agricultural mortgage company ( farmer mac ) was established in the agricultural credit act of 1987 as a secondary market for agricultural loans .

it purchases and pools qualified loans and may sell them to investors as securities or hold them in its own portfolio .

although farmer mac is statutorily part of the farm credit act and is regulated by fca , it has no liability for the debt of any other fcs institution , and the other fcs institutions have no liability for farmer mac debt .

it is considered a separate gse .

farmer mac is an investor - owned corporation , not a member - owned cooperative .

voting stock may be owned by banks , insurance companies , and fcs institutions .

nonvoting stock may be owned by any investor .

its board of directors has members from the fcs , commercial banks , and the public at large .

farmer mac operates two programs: farmer mac i ( loans not guaranteed by the u.s. department of agriculture [usda] ) and farmer mac ii ( usda - guaranteed loans ) .

a majority of farmer mac i volume comes from the sale of "long - term standby purchase agreements. .

farmer mac promises to purchase specific agricultural mortgages , thus guaranteeing the loans against default risk while the participating lender retains interest rate risk .

under farmer mac ii , the company purchases the portion of individual loans that are guaranteed by usda .

on these purchases , farmer mac accepts the interest rate risk but carries no default risk .

