the lead - based paint poisoning prevention act , as amended ( lbpppa , 42 u.s.c .

4822 ) , is the basis for federal regulation of lbp hazards .

it directs hud to establish procedures to eliminate "as far as practicable" lbp hazards in all public housing and private housing constructed prior to 1978 that receive federal financial assistance .

the act requires periodic risk assessments and interim measures to reduce identified lbp hazards in such housing .

in addition , the act requires inspection for lbp hazards prior to federally funded rehabilitation or renovation .

lbp hazards must be reduced in projects receiving less than $25,000 in federal funds and eliminated if a project receives at least $25,000 in federal funds .

risk assessments , inspections , and interim and permanent measures to reduce or eliminate lbp hazards are eligible rehabilitation expenses for federal funds .

the federal government , acting through hud , pays for the construction and renovation ( including lbp detection and abatement ) of public housing , using funds available through the public housing capital fund grant program to carry out the requirements of the lbpppa .

public housing authorities ( phas ) administer public housing programs locally .

some phas are units of general local government .

in such cases , local government may be responsible for implementing hud's lbp testing and abatement regulations in public housing .

there are no federal mandates related to lbp in privately owned housing unless it receives federal financial assistance in some form .

there are , however , epa ( 40 c.f.r .

part 745 ) and hud ( 24 c.f.r .

part 35 ) rules governing the manner in which home renovations and inspections are conducted by contractors .

these rules require training and certification of contractors and prohibit certain practices ( such as dry scraping or high - temperature heat guns ) that would increase the risk of exposure to lead - based paint .

the residential lead - based paint hazard reduction act of 1992 ( title x of the housing and community development act of 1992 ) authorizes federal grants to state and local governments that choose to establish lbp poisoning prevention programs targeted at low - income residents in private housing .

grants may be used to conduct risk assessments and to remove , immobilize , or otherwise reduce the lbp hazard , with particular attention to hazards to children living in housing constructed prior to 1978 .

congressional authorization for these grants expired september 30 , 1994 , but presidents have continued to request funds , and congress has continued to appropriate them .

for fy2001 through fy2012 , congress appropriated funds for state and local grants to reduce lead - based paint hazards , as shown in figure 1 .

since fy1992 , congress has appropriated more than $1.5 billion for these title x grants to state and local governments to assess and reduce lbp risks in private housing for low - income residents .

in addition , congress has appropriated roughly $400 million , also under title x , for related lbp abatement by nongovernmental organizations and for training , certification , and research programs .

in fy2003 , congress established a third parallel demonstration program for lbp abatement targeted at major urban areas with "the highest lead paint abatement needs" based on "the number of occupied pre - 1940 units of rental housing" and "a disproportionately high number of documented cases of lead - poisoned children. .

congress appropriated between $45 million and $50 million annually through fy2012 for these urban areas .

in the 112 th congress , h.r .

3325 would have required the director of hud's office of healthy homes and lead hazard control to lead a federal initiative to support healthy housing and eradicate housing - related health hazards .

congress did not act on this proposal .

also in the 112 th congress , h.r .

5911 / s. 2148 would have amended provisions of tsca imposing the renovation , repair , and painting requirements , but neither chamber acted on this proposal .

in the 111 th congress , s. 1245 would have provided owners of residential properties built before 1960 with a tax credit for lbp abatement costs .

similar proposals were introduced in previous congresses .

no such legislation has been enacted .

a more general expansion of mandates as well as grant eligibility for housing with lead - based paint was proposed in the 110 th congress .

s. 2244 would have required "a seller or lessor of housing to: ( 1 ) conduct a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of lead - based paint hazards ... ; ( 2 ) disclose to the purchaser or lessee the results of such inspection or assessment and hazard control measures carried out ; ( 3 ) remediate any lead - based paint hazards found ; and ( 4 ) include in any contract for the purchase or lease of housing documentation of any inspection , risk assessment , or hazard control measure. .

in addition , s. 2244 would have authorized grant expenditures for lead hazard reduction in housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities and for dwellings with no bedrooms , housing categories that currently are excluded from the lead hazard reduction grant program .

finally , the bill would have directed the department of energy ( doe ) to require the conduct of lead hazard control measures during weatherization projects .

none of these provisions was enacted .

