in the early 1980s , u.s. satellites tracked a growing indigenous nuclear program in north korea .

a small nuclear reactor at yongbyon ( 5mwe ) , capable of producing about 6kg of plutonium per year , began operating in 1986 .

later that year , u.s. satellites detected high explosives testing and a new plant to separate plutonium .

in addition , construction of two larger reactors ( 50mwe at yongbyon and 200mwe at taechon ) added to evidence of a serious clandestine effort .

although north korea had joined the nuclear nonproliferation treaty in 1985 , the safeguards inspections that began only in 1992 raised questions about how much plutonium north korea had produced covertly .

in 1994 , north korea pledged , under the agreed framework with the united states , to freeze its plutonium programs and eventually dismantle them in return for several kinds of assistance .

at that time , western intelligence agencies estimated that north korea had separated enough plutonium for one or two bombs ; other sources estimated four to five bombs .

acquiring fissile material—plutonium - 239 or highly enriched uranium ( heu ) —is the key hurdle in nuclear weapons development .

producing these two materials is technically challenging ; in comparison , many experts believe weaponization to be relatively easy .

north korea has industrial - scale uranium mining , and plants for milling , refining , and converting uranium ; it also has a fuel fabrication plant , a nuclear reactor , and a reprocessing plant—in short , everything needed to produce pu - 239 .

in its nuclear reactor , north korea uses magnox fuel—natural uranium ( > 99%u - 238 ) metal , wrapped in magnesium - alloy cladding .

about 8000 fuel rods constitute a fuel core for the reactor .

when irradiated in a reactor , natural uranium fuel absorbs a neutron and then decays into plutonium ( pu - 239 ) .

fuel that remains in the reactor for a long time becomes contaminated by the isotope pu - 240 , which can "poison" the functioning of a nuclear weapon .

spent or irradiated fuel , which poses radiological hazards , must cool after removal from the reactor .

the cooling phase , estimated by some at five months , is proportional to the fuel burn - up .

reprocessing to separate plutonium from waste products and uranium is the next step .

north korea uses a purex separation process , like the united states .

after shearing off the fuel cladding , the fuel is dissolved in nitric acid .

components ( plutonium , uranium , waste ) of the fuel are separated into different streams using organic solvents .

in small quantities , separation can be done in hot cells , but larger quantities require significant shielding to prevent deadly exposure to radiation .

north korea appears to have mastered the engineering requirements of plutonium production .

its 5mwe nuclear reactor operated from 1986 to 1994 , restarting in january 2003 .

north korean officials claimed to have separated plutonium in hot cells and tested the reprocessing plant in 1990 , and to have reprocessed all 8000 fuel rods from the 5mwe reactor between january and june 2003 .

the january 2004 unofficial u.s. delegation reported that "all indications from the display in the control room are that the reactor is operating smoothly now....however , we have no way of assessing independently how well the reactor has operated during the past year. .

the same delegation reported that the reprocessing "facility appeared in good repair," in contrast to a 1992 iaea assessment of the reprocessing plant as "extremely primitive. .

in the end , however , significant growth in north korea's arsenal depends on the completion of the two larger reactors and progress in the reported uranium enrichment program .

in january 2004 , north korean officials showed an unofficial u.s. delegation alloyed "scrap" from a plutonium ( pu ) casting operation .

alloying plutonium with other materials is "common in plutonium metallurgy to retain the delta - phase of plutonium , which makes it easier to cast and shape" ( two steps in weapons production ) .

dr. siegfried hecker , a delegation member , assessed that the stated density of the material was consistent with plutonium alloyed with gallium or aluminum .

if so , this could indicate a certain sophistication in north korea's handling of pu metal , but without testing the material , hecker could not confirm that the metal was plutonium or that it was alloyed , or that it was from the most recent reprocessing campaign .

there is no reliable information on north korean nuclear weapons design .

although the u.s. director of national intelligence confirmed that a nuclear test was conducted on october 9 , 2006 in the vicinity of p'unggye , the sub - kiloton yield of the test suggests that the weapon design or manufacturing process likely needs improvement .

environmental clues suggest that the device used plutonium .

by comparison , a simple plutonium implosion device normally would produce a larger blast , perhaps 5 to 20 kilotons .

the first nuclear tests conducted by other states range from 9 kt ( pakistan ) to 60kt , but tests by the united states , china , britain and russia were in the 20kt - range .

implosion devices , which use sophisticated lenses of high explosives to compress fissile material , are generally thought to require testing , although the cia suggested in 2003 that north korea could validate its weapons design using extensive high explosives testing .

it is possible that pakistani scientist a.q .

khan may have provided north korea the same chinese - origin nuclear weapon design he provided to libya .

if so , this might help north korea develop a reliable warhead for ballistic missiles—small , light and robust enough to tolerate the extreme conditions encountered through a ballistic trajectory .

although former dia director jacoby told the senate armed services committee in april 2005 that north korea had the capability to arm a missile with a nuclear device , pentagon officials later backtracked from that assessment .

most estimates of nuclear weapon stockpiles are based on estimated fissile material production .

factors in plutonium production include the average power level of the reactor ; days of operation ; how much of the fuel is reprocessed and how quickly , and how much plutonium is lost in production processes .

according to north korea , the 5mwe reactor performed poorly early on , unevenly irradiating the rods .

there is no data on the reactor's current performance or the reprocessing facility's efficiency .

north korea told the iaea that during the 1990 "hot test," it lost almost 30% of the plutonium in the waste streams .

a key consideration is whether or not the reprocessing plant can run continuously , since frequent shutdowns can lead to plutonium losses .

according to north korean officials in january 2004 , the plant annual throughput is 110 tons of spent fuel , about twice the fuel load of the 5mwe reactor .

a final factor in assessing how many weapons north korea can produce is whether north korea's technical sophistication enables it to use more or less material than the international standards of 8kg of pu and 25kg for heu per weapon .

north korea's abilities here are unknown .

secretary of state powell stated in december 2002 that "we now believe they [north koreans] have a couple of nuclear weapons and have had them for years. .

on february 10 , 2005 , north korea announced that it had manufactured "nukes" for self - defense and that it would bolster its nuclear weapons arsenal .

in june 2005 , vice foreign minister kim gye gwan told abc news that "we have enough nuclear bombs to defend against a u.s. attack .

as for specifically how many we have , that is a secret. .

kim also said north korea was building more bombs and when asked about delivery systems , said "our scientists have the knowledge , comparable to other scientists around the world. .

some members of congress interpreted then - cia director porter goss' statements in march 2005 on a "range" of nuclear weapon estimates to confirm that north korea's arsenal has multiplied .

in december 2005 , the north korean foreign ministry stated that it would "increase [its] self - reliant national defense capacity , including nuclear deterrent. .

in october 2006 , north korea's foreign ministry said that "nuclear weapons will serve as [a] reliable war deterrent. .

information about north korea's nuclear weapons production has depended on remote monitoring and defector information , with mixed results .

satellite images correctly indicated the start - up of the 5mwe reactor , but gave no details about its operations .

satellites also detected trucks at yongbyon in late january 2003 , but could not confirm the movement of spent fuel to the reprocessing plant ; imagery reportedly detected activity at the reprocessing plant in april 2003 , but could not confirm large - scale reprocessing ; and , satellite imagery could not peer into an empty spent fuel pond , which was shown to u.s. visitors in january 2004 .

even u.s. scientists visiting pyongyang in january 2004 could not confirm north korean claims of having reprocessed the spent fuel or that the material shown was in fact plutonium .

verifying those claims would require greater access to the material and north korean cooperation .

this is particularly true in the case of uranium enrichment ; u.s. intelligence officials have said they do not know where the uranium program is and more recently , have shown less confidence about what the scope of the program might be .

although seismographs registered the october 9 th detonation , and environmental sampling confirmed radioactivity , there is still no information on what north korea intended to accomplish with the test , from technical , security , political , and diplomatic perspectives .

more data is necessary to project what this "new" capability might mean for north korea , the region , and the united states .

