married federal employees who retire under either csrs or fers automatically receive a joint and survivor annuity unless both husband and wife decline it in writing , in which case the worker will receive a single - life annuity .

under csrs , if a worker receives a joint and survivor annuity , the annual benefit is reduced by an amount equal to 2.5% of the first $3,600 plus 10% of the annuity above that amount .

in return for this reduction , the worker's spouse is entitled to a survivor annuity equal to 55% of the worker's full annuity before the reduction is taken into account .

alternatively , a worker retiring under csrs and his or her spouse can elect a smaller survivor annuity , in which case the worker's annuity is reduced by 2.5% of the first $3,600 and 10% of the annuity above this amount , up to the limit that he or she specifies as the base upon which the survivor benefit is to be calculated .

under fers , if a worker receives a joint and survivor annuity , the retiree's annual benefit is reduced by an amount equal to 10% of the annuity that would otherwise be paid .

in return for this reduction , the worker's spouse is entitled to a survivor annuity equal to 50% of the worker's full annuity before the reduction is taken into account .

alternatively , the couple may elect that the survivor benefit is to be based on one - half of the retiree's annuity , in which case the retired worker's annuity is reduced by 5% and the survivor benefit would be equal to 25% of the retiree's unreduced annuity .

the reduction in the benefits of workers who elect a joint and survivor annuity is sufficient to cover only about half of the cost of the fers survivor annuity and less than half of the cost of the csrs survivor annuity .

consequently , survivor benefits under both csrs and fers are partially subsidized by the federal government .

if the marriage of a retiree who had elected a joint and survivor annuity ends , his or her annuity is increased to the full amount payable under a single - life annuity .

if the retired worker marries or remarries after retirement , he or she has a maximum of two years during which to elect survivor coverage for a new spouse , and the retiree's annuity is reduced accordingly .

the election for a joint and survivor annuity must be made within two years of the date of marriage .

to elect survivor coverage for a spouse married after the date of retirement , a lump - sum payment ( plus 6% interest ) must be made to cover the period preceding the post - retirement marriage during which no survivor reduction was in effect .

this payment is necessary to preserve equity between couples who are married continuously throughout retirement and those who marry after retiring , because in both cases the survivor benefit is the same percentage of the retired worker's annuity .

under both csrs and fers , survivor benefits are paid to children of deceased federal retirees in the same amounts and under the same eligibility criteria as apply to the children of deceased federal employees .

retired workers who are the parents of unmarried dependent children who might qualify for child survivor benefits are not required to take a reduction in their retirement annuities .

a widow or widower of a deceased retiree who is eligible for a survivor annuity under either csrs or fers and who was covered under the fehbp at the time of the retiree's death can continue to participate in the program at the same cost as applies to workers and retirees .

the survivor is eligible even if the amount of the survivor annuity is less than the monthly fehbp premium , in which case the individual must remit the difference directly to opm .

a retiree who marries or remarries after retirement can assure that his or her surviving spouse will be eligible for fehbp coverage by electing a minimal survivor annuity .

if a retired federal employee has a former spouse to whom a full survivor annuity was awarded through a state court order , the worker can at retirement ( or at the time of remarriage , if later ) entitle his or her current spouse to continue participating in the fehbp after the retiree's death by electing survivor coverage for that spouse even though the current spouse might receive no survivor annuity as long as the former spouse is living and receiving the survivor annuity .

unmarried dependent children of a deceased retiree can continue to participate in the fehbp until age 22 , regardless of student status , provided that they were covered as family members by the retiree .

in certain cases , coverage can continue for up to 36 months beyond the child's 22 nd birthday .

both csrs and fers allow a retiring employee to provide survivor benefits to an individual who has an "insurable interest" in the retiree .

an insurable interest exists if the person may reasonably expect to benefit financially from the retiree continuing to live .

for example , a former spouse or a current spouse can be named as having an insurable interest if a spouse survivor benefit has been provided for one or the other .

a retiree who provides survivor benefits for someone with an insurable interest has his or her annuity reduced by 10% plus 5% for each full five years by which the named beneficiary is younger than the retiree .

the total reduction may not exceed 40% .

under both csrs and fers , the survivor benefit paid to the named beneficiary is 55% of the retiree's reduced annuity , payable upon the death of the retiree .

federal employees are fully "vested" in ( entitled to ) a retirement annuity after completing five years of service .

vested employees who resign from federal employment before they are eligible to retire can defer receipt of their benefits until they reach the age of eligibility .

under csrs , a deferred annuity can begin no earlier than the age of 62 .

under fers , an unreduced deferred annuity can start at the age of 62 for those with 5 to 19 years of service , at 60 for those with 20 to 29 years of service , or at 56 ( increasing to 57 for employees born in 1970 or later ) for those with 30 or more years of service .

a reduced deferred fers annuity is available at the age of 55 for those with 10 or more years of service .

if the former employee dies after having begun to receive a retirement annuity , the surviving spouse is eligible for a survivor annuity under the rules applicable to csrs or fers , as described above .

if a former employee who had been covered under csrs dies before reaching the age of 62 and commencing his or her deferred annuity , no survivor benefit is paid .

instead , the surviving spouse receives a refund of the employee's contributions to the civil service retirement and disability fund .

if the former employee was covered under fers , the surviving spouse may elect to receive an annuity or a lump - sum payment .

if a former employee dies before having begun to receive a deferred annuity , no child survivor benefits are payable ( although they may be payable under social security ) .

if the employee dies after beginning to receive a deferred annuity , the surviving dependent children are eligible for survivor benefits under csrs or fers , as described above .

a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) is made once each year in january to benefits paid under csrs and fers .

under csrs , the cola is equal to the percentage change in the consumer price index in the calendar quarter ending in the previous september compared with the same quarter one year earlier .

under fers , however , colas are limited any time that the annual increase in the cpi exceeds 2.0% .

if the cpi rises by 2% or less , the fers cola is equal to the increase in the cpi .

if the cpi rises by 2% to 3% , the fers cola is 2% .

if the cpi rises by more than 3% , the fers cola is equal to the increase in the cpi minus one percentage point .

by filing form tsp - 3 , a participant in the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) can designate a beneficiary or beneficiaries to whom the balance in his or her account will be distributed in the event of the employee's death .

if no form tsp - 3 has been filed , the account balance will be distributed in order of precedence to ( 1 ) to a widow or widower , ( 2 ) to a child or children , ( 3 ) to a grandchild or grandchildren , ( 4 ) to surviving parents , ( 5 ) to an executor previously appointed by the employee , and finally to the next of kin according to the laws of the state in which the employee resided .

division b , title i , section 109 of p.l .

111-31 provides that , subject to certain limitations , the surviving spouse of a deceased thrift savings plan participant can maintain in the tsp the portion of the decedent's account to which the surviving spouse is entitled .

