insider trading in securities may occur when a person in possession of material nonpublic information about a company trades in the company's securities and makes a profit or avoids a loss .

federal statutes have provisions that either specifically forbid insider trading or have been interpreted by courts to prohibit insider trading .

this report discusses some of the key statutes as well as regulations issued by the securities and exchange commission ( sec or commission ) to implement the statutes .

the report also discusses some of the most pertinent court decisions on insider trading .

as stated above , sec rule 10b - 5 , which implements section 10 ( b ) of the securities exchange act , is apparently the most frequently used sec rule in lawsuits that charge violations of insider trading prohibitions .

however , other sec rules , some of which specifically target insider trading , are also important .

rule 10b5-1 prohibits trading "on the basis of" material nonpublic information .

this rule states that one of the proscribed activities under section 10 ( b ) and rule 10b - 5 is securities trading "on the basis of material nonpublic information about that security or issuer , in breach of a duty of trust or confidence that is owed" to the issuer of the security , shareholders of the issuer , or another who is the source of the inside information .

the regulation defines "on the basis of" to have a kind of knowledge requirement: [a] purchase or sale of a security of an issuer is "on the basis of" material nonpublic information about that security or issuer if the person making the purchase or sale was aware of the material nonpublic information when the person made the purchase or sale .

various affirmative defenses are allowed under the rule , such as the alleged violator's demonstrating that he had entered into a binding contract to buy or sell the security , had instructed another person to buy or sell the security for his account , or had adopted a written plan for trading securities before becoming aware of the material nonpublic information .

rule 10b5-2 sets out duties of trust or confidence in insider trading cases based on the misappropriation of inside information .

the misappropriation theory of insider trading is a fairly recent development in securities law .

under the classical theory of insider trading , a corporate insider is prohibited from trading that corporation's securities if the trade is based on inside information and the trader has a fiduciary duty to the corporation's shareholders .

in contrast to classical insider trading , the misappropriation theory may hold liable a person who is not actually a corporate insider but has instead been provided inside information in confidence and who breaches a fiduciary duty to the source of the information in order to gain profit or avoid loss in the securities market .

rule 10b5-2 sets out examples of what is meant by "duties of trust or confidence. .

such duties include a person's agreement to maintain the disclosed information in confidence ; a person's history with the discloser of the inside information indicating an expectation that the recipient of the information will keep the information in confidence ; and a person's receiving information from a spouse or close relative , unless the recipient can show that he neither knew nor should have reasonably known or agreed that he would keep the information confidential .

regulation fd is another sec rule that could prohibit insider trading .

regulation fd addresses selective disclosure .

it provides that , when an issuer or any person acting on behalf of an issuer discloses material nonpublic information to certain enumerated persons ( typically , securities market professionals and holders of the securities ) , that issuer or person acting on behalf of the issuer must disclose the information to the public .

this disclosure must be made simultaneously with the intentional disclosure to the enumerated persons or as promptly as possible after the disclosure , in the case of a non - intentional disclosure to the enumerated persons .

there are numerous cases and administrative proceedings in which section 10 ( b ) and rule 10b - 5 have been used to prosecute insider trading violations .

the following is a brief discussion of some of the most notable of these cases and proceedings .

no bills concerning insider trading appear to have been introduced , to date , in the 115 th congress .

however , before the supreme court's salman decision , at least three bills were introduced in the 114 th congress in an attempt to prevent the type of securities trading that would appear to have been allowed under the newman decision .

two of the bills would have amended section 10 , the general antifraud provision of the securities exchange act , and one of the bills would have added a new provision , section 16a , to the securities exchange act .

h.r .

1173 , 114 th congress , referred to the house committee on financial services , would have added a new subsection ( d ) to section 10 .

this new subsection would have held a person liable for violating the insider trading prohibition laid out in section 2 ( a ) of the bill if the person intentionally disclosed "without a legitimate business purpose" information he knew or should have known is material information and inside information .

the bill would have defined "should know" to include various factors , such as the person's financial sophistication , knowledge of and experience in financial matters , position in the company , and assets under management .

h.r .

1625 , 114 th congress , also referred to the house committee on financial services , would have added a new section 16a to the securities exchange act .

this section would have prohibited the trading of securities if a person had material nonpublic information about the securities or knew or recklessly disregarded that the information was wrongfully obtained or that the securities transaction would involve a wrongful use of the information .

the section would also have prohibited a person from communicating material nonpublic information about securities to others if: ( 1 ) others engaged in securities transactions based on the communication and ( 2 ) the securities transactions were reasonably foreseeable .

the standard for the wrongfulness of a communication is based on information that has been obtained by activities such as theft , breach of a fiduciary duty , or violation of a federal law protecting computer data .

specific knowledge of how the information was obtained is not necessary for a violation so long as the person trading was aware or recklessly disregarded that the information was wrongfully obtained or communicated .

the bill would also have authorized the sec to provide exemptions from these prohibitions by rule if the exemptions were not inconsistent with the purposes of the section .

s. 702 , 114 th congress , referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , would have added a new subsection ( d ) to section 10 of the securities exchange act .

this new subsection would have prohibited securities transactions on the basis of material information that a person knew or had reason to know was not publicly available .

it also would have prohibited knowingly or recklessly communicating information that was not publicly available if it was reasonably foreseeable that the communication was likely to result in a securities transaction .

"not publicly available" would have been defined in such a way that it would not have included information that a person had independently developed from publicly available sources .

the sec would also have been authorized to provide for exemptions by regulations if it determined that such regulations were necessary or appropriate in the public interest and consistent with the protection of investors .

the supreme court's decision in salman may accomplish at least part of the goals of the legislation proposed in the 114 th congress .

however , the salman decision does not appear to go as far as the bills in prohibiting the act of trading in securities with inside information and disclosing inside information .

salman addressed the issue of whether it is necessary for a tipper to receive something of a tangible nature when providing inside information to a trading relative or friend .

however , the bills are not limited to relatives and friends ; instead , they appear to prohibit in a broad way the trading of securities by any person who knows or should know that he possesses inside information .

