congress established ota in 1972 with passage of p.l .

92-484 .

it was mandated to assess the consequences of applying technology by preparing comprehensive reports that discussed the pros and cons of policy options about an issue .

the law effectively augmented existing congressional resources by creating a support agency dedicated to providing congress with objective and authoritative analysis of complex scientific and technical issues to aid in policymaking .

it was intended to facilitate congressional access to expertise and permit legislators to consider objectively information presented by the executive branch , interest groups , and other stakeholders to controversial policy questions .

from 1973 until 1995 , ota conducted technology assessments , requested by committee chairmen for themselves , ranking minority members , or a majority of the committee , by the technology assessment board ( a body which was composed of equal numbers of house and senate members and of members from both parties ) , or by the ota director in consultation with the board .

ota had authority to hire staff and to contract for personnel and studies .

peak funding in the early 1990s totaled over $20 million annually , with about 140 hired staff plus additional contractors .

ota was effectively eliminated when congress did not appropriate funds for fy1996 for its continued operation and appropriated funds to close down the office .

its archived reports are available via the internet at http: / / www.wws.princeton.edu / ~ota / .

several reasons were given for terminating ota's funding and numerous studies have been written about the rise and fall of the agency .

critics of ota cited such factors as difficulty in completing reports in time to meet congressional schedules , lack of utility to congressional decisionmaking , alleged bias toward "liberal" solutions , or partisan politics .

some say that congress can turn to and fund studies by the national academies , composed of the national academy of sciences ( nas ) , the national academy of engineering , the institute of medicine , and the national research council ( nrc ) , or utilize the services of gao and the congressional research service ( crs ) for information and analysis on science and technology issues .

others disagree and cite the utility of ota studies to decisionmaking and the need for congress to maintain its own support agency devoted to assessing technology .

some former ota staff members and science policy analysts have called for resumption of funding for ota or creation of a legislative organization to perform ota - like functions or to contract with outside groups to perform such functions .

some members of congress and others have said that if the ota were still operating it might have provided congress with information required to make important program and policy decisions relating to technological issues .

in the 107 th congress , representative rush holt introduced h.r .

2148 , the ota re - establishment act .

it would have authorized funding ota at $20 million annually for fy2002 to fy2007 .

no further action was taken .

similar legislation , h.r .

125 , was introduced in the 108 th congress .

it proposed to rename the technology assessment act of 1972 as the office of technology assessment reestablishment act of 2003 and to authorize ota appropriations at $20 million annually for fy2004 to fy2009 .

the bill was referred to the house science committee .

representative holt sought , in 2002 , to introduce an amendment to h.r .

5121 , the legislative branch appropriations act fy2003 , to provide $4 million to fund ota for fy2003 .

he made a similar attempt in 2003 to amend the fy2004 legislative branch appropriations bill , h.r .

2657 , to fund ota at $7 million .

both times the rules committee ruled the amendment not in order .

since 2001 proposals have been made to create an ota - like office in the legislative branch to provide technology assessment - related support .

congress has directed gao to conduct technology assessments on a pilot basis ; legislation was introduced to make the program permanent or to authorize an assessment office in gao .

the following issues could be considered when evaluating alternative technology assessment proposals: ( 1 ) analysis of the need for more technology assessment information and advice ; ( 2 ) evidence of political support for enhancing legislative capabilities for technology assessment ; ( 3 ) with respect to augmenting gao's "core capability" to conduct technology assessment , the availability of funds , the timing , and the utility of gao's technology assessments for congressional decisionmaking , and the pros and cons of locating a large assessment center within gao , including its impact on other gao functions , including auditing and evaluation activities ; and ( 4 ) the potential benefits and costs of establishing a more independent legislative technology assessment function , such as in a separate ota - like support activity or in an existing congressional support agency .

