rs21529 - - al qaeda after the iraq conflict may 23 , 200 .

there is a great deal that remains unknown or debatable about the specific nature , size , structure and reach of the organization , despite many years of studyingit .

for example , western experts are not exactly sure how many members it has now or has had in the past .

estimates are often based upon an approximationof how many people trained in al qaeda camps in afghanistan and sudan .

the estimates range as high as60,000 ( 7 ) and as low as 20,000 .

 ( 8 ) these assessmentsare inexact in part because the total number of camps that operated is not firmly agreed .

 ( 9 ) but even if experts knew the correct total number of camps andtrainees , not all the people who took the training necessarily became ( or remained ) actual members of theorganization .

 ( 10 ) the state department estimatesthatal qaeda "probably has several thousand members and associates. .

 ( 11 ) but since these are all estimates , it is not known what proportion of alqaeda membersu.s .

and allied forces have captured or killed .

 ( 12 ) but do operatives even necessarily need to be members ? .

it is apparent from some of those apprehended in failed plots that it is not essential to be formally "in"al qaeda in order to carry out attacks .

operatives seem to vary , from the best - trained , controlled and financedprofessional cadres , such as mohammed atta ( who led the september 11th attacks ) , to less - trained and relatively uncontrolled volunteers , such asahmed ressam ( who intended to blow up los angelesinternational airport ) and richard reid ( who tried to detonate plastic explosives in his shoes aboard an americanairlines transatlantic flight ) .

 ( 13 ) al qaedaeven acts like a foundation at times , reportedly giving grants to existing local terrorist groups who present"promising" plans for attacks that serve theorganization's general goals .

 ( 14 ) unlike manytraditional terrorist groups , al qaeda has no single standard operating procedure , although it does have awell - developed manual for its operations .

benefitting from osama bin laden's considerable experience in business,the organization is said to be structuredlike a modern corporation , reflective of management concepts of the early 1990s , including bottom - up and top - downnetworks , a common "mission statement,"and entrepreneurial thinking even at the lowest levels .

this makes it extraordinarily flexible and , many believe , ableto survive serious blows .

 ( 15 ) al qaeda has also developed strong ties to other terrorist organizations , some new and some long - standing .

 ( 16 ) osama bin laden formed an umbrella group inlate 1998 , "the international islamic front for jihad against jews and crusaders," which included not only alqaeda , but also groups from egypt , algeria,pakistan , and bangladesh .

some argue that al qaeda has been something of a hybrid terrorist organization for sometime .

 ( 17 ) a sampling of groups currentlythought to be connected includes the moro islamic liberation front ( philippines ) , jemaah islamiah ( southeastasia ) , egyptian islamic jihad ( merged with alqaeda in 2001 ) , al - ansar mujahidin ( chechnya ) , al - gamaa al - islamiya ( egypt , and has a worldwide presence ) , abusayyaf ( philippines ) , the islamicmovement of uzbekistan , and harakat ul - mujahidin ( pakistan / kashmir ) .

the list is illustrative , not comprehensive .

some experts see increased reliance onconnections to other groups as a sign of al qaeda's weakness ; others point to enhanced cooperation with othergroups as a worrisome indicator of strength,especially with groups that formerly focused on local issues and now display evidence of convergence on al qaeda'sinternational anti - u.s. , anti - west agenda .

an important question is whether al qaeda might be evolving further into a new form , more like a movement thana formal organization , increasingly diffuseinternationally and less reliant upon its own membership .

clearly al qaeda is in transition .

whether that transition will lead to something more or less dangerous is a point of contention .

on one hand , clear progress inapprehending or killing senior leaders of al qaeda has been evident .

in recent weeks , president bush announcedthat the united states has captured about halfthe senior leadership ; ( 18 ) other sources claim thatabout a third have been captured .

 ( 19 ) many of theseterrorist leaders have been crucial participants in past alqaeda attacks ; the arrests of september 11 plotter and third - in - command khalid shaikh mohammed and operationschief abu zubaydah , for example , arebelieved to have hurt the organization and disrupted its operations .

according to u.s. officials , the organization'sprevious communications network hasapparently been crippled , its leaders are on the run , and its afghanistan base has been largely eliminated .

 ( 20 ) still , al qaeda is not like a state , whose regime you can remove in order to disable it .

counterterrorism officials describe it more as an organic structure thatadapts to changing circumstances , including the loss of some senior leaders .

the two most senior leaders , osamabin laden and ayman al - zawahiri , are widelybelieved to be alive and at large , and terrorism experts argue over the extent to which a succession plan is in effectto replace those who have been captured .

 ( 21 ) during the week before the riyadh attacks , email interviews conducted by the london - based magazine almajalla apparently with al qaeda spokesman thabetbin qais claimed that al qaeda had undertaken a thorough restructuring of its leadership .

 ( 22 ) one of the worrisome aspects of the attack itselfwas the apparentinvolvement of people thought to have been lower - level fighters who may have now stepped into the breach .

forexample , khaled jehani , who was previouslyconsidered a low - level operative , seems to have been involved in the riyadh operation .

 ( 23 ) also mentioned is seif al - adel , one of a number of younger alqaeda members who seem to have gained influence in the absence of former leaders and who may have played arole .

 ( 24 ) many worry that this could illustratean evolution within al qaeda to a new generation .

 ( 25 ) this , as well as other evidence in the attack itself , seems to demonstrate a level of central direction .

finally , some believe that there has been a spike in recruitment to the network as a result of the u.s. militaryoperations in iraq , leading to a worry that , despiteits serious recent losses , al qaeda could grow stronger in future months .

 ( 26 ) .

ultimately , the debate about al qaeda's current status centers on the important question of whether it is growing or declining in strength .

in the wake of theafghanistan and iraq military campaigns , when the predicted terrorist attacks on the united states and its interestsdid not materialize , what is the current levelof threat to the united states ? .

most believe that the denial of safe havens and arrests of senior leaders have seriously crippled the organization when judged by its earlier form .

however , itmay be evolving into something new .

for terrorist groups , periods of evolution can be particularly dangerous .

organizations in transition can be especiallyvulnerable to disruption and destruction , but they can also be less predictable and prone to lash out in order to causeadditional damage , rally flaggingsupporters , and / or prove their continuing viability .

 ( 27 ) with respect to al qaeda , evidence of new sophisticated operations , a possible succession planin action,central coordination of attacks , and growing international ties , all increasingly converging on a commoninternational agenda hostile to the united states and itsallies , may give u.s. officials new reason for concern .

in the short term at least , even successes in counterterroristoperations against a more decentralizedorganization can lead to greater difficulty in collecting reliable intelligence , as the paths of communication areincreasingly unfamiliar , the personalities arechanging , and the locations of operatives are more diffuse .

while the long term trajectory is very difficult to assess,for the time being it seems that al qaeda ( or its successors ) has emerged from a period of inactivity and remains a very serious threat , requiring concentratedattention and vigorous countermeasures onthe part of its prospective targets .

congress may face a number of questions in the coming months .

these include how does u.s. counterterrorism policy need to adapt to match the changingthreat of al qaeda and its associated groups ? .

is there a need for strategic reassessment of the successes and failuresof u.s. counterterrorism policy in thepost - iraq strategic environment , not only in the military and intelligence fields but also in foreign policy , lawenforcement , international cooperation , publicdiplomacy , foreign aid , homeland security , and elsewhere ? .

are there places where u.s. policies in a given area arenow no longer meeting the challenge , arepotentially counterproductive , or where funding is inadequate or misplaced ? .

how will the u.s. occupation of iraqaffect the changing regional terrorist threat ? .

to what degree will regime change in iraq alter the overall international terrorist threat to the united states at homeand abroad ? .

will progress , or the lackthereof , in achieving an israeli - palestinian peace agreement and resolving sensitive issues such as the conflicts inkashmir , southern philippines , chechnya , andelsewhere affect al qaeda's prospects ? .

