rs21332 - - the african union updated april 30 , 200 .

the african union ( au ) has its roots in the organization of african unity ( oau ) and the african economic community ( aec ) treaty of 1991 .

it came into force in 1994 , following ratification by two - thirds of oau member states .

 ( 1 ) the aec treaty set up asix - stage economic integration process leading to the anticipated creation , by 2028 , of a common market and a rangeof commonpolitical and economic institutions .

its lengthy implementation schedule , however , meant that the treaty might yieldfew benefits fordecades .

this factor , along with increasing calls for a basic restructuring of the purposes , priorities , and organizationof the oau,ultimately led to its replacement by the au .

developments in the late 1990s that contributed to the reformmovement included: increasing support by oau member states for good governance and its rejection of undemocratic changes ofpower .

a loosening of the oau's adherence to its long - standing doctrine of non - interference by member statesin theaffairs of their peers , including some marked by human rights abuses and undemocratic transfers ofpower .

the rising importance of economic liberalization , renewed attention to market - driven economic growth,andglobal trends toward regional economic integration .

h.res .

155 , introduced by representative meeks on march 2003 , urges that the united states commend the au'screation and support its diverse economic and political goals .

sirte summit .

in september 1999 , a summit of oau heads of state held in sirte,libya assessed and sought to improve the oau charter .

the meeting , held on the 30th anniversary of libyan leadermuammaral - qadhafi's coup d'état , was seen as an effort to extend libya's growing influence in africa , and to end itsinternational isolation inthe wake of the lockerbie airplane bombing .

 ( 2 ) al - qadhafi hosted the meeting to press for the creation of a united states of africa,loosely modeled on the united states .

such a union , he asserted , was needed to further intra - continental economicdevelopment andintegration , and to enable more organic relations to emerge between nations divided by arbitrary , colonial - eraborders .

he cited theaec treaty as the legal and institutional basis of his proposal , stating that it had fundamentally redefined the oaucharter , andnoting that it allowed for the creation of a range of common , pan - continental institutions .

his proposal , whichechoed 1960s - erapan - africanist ideas , emphasized a need to resolve and prevent africa's conflicts through the establishment ofcommon defenseinstitutions .

summit participants issued the sirte declaration .

explicitly referencing al - qadhafi's ideas , it called forthe revitalizationof the oau and provided for the creation of an african union , which was to conform with the oau charter andthe aec treaty .

italso called for the accelerated implementation of the aec treaty , and set the year 2000 as the projected start - up datefor apan - african parliament .

it tasked the presidents of algeria and south africa , in consultation with the oau contactgroup onafrica's external debt , with seeking a substantial reduction or the total cancellation of africa's foreign debt .

subsequent developments .

in march 2000 , in addis ababa , ethiopia , the oaucouncil of ministers ratified the sirte declaration .

in july 2000 , in lomé , togo , the oau assembly ofheads of state andgovernment adopted an african union draft constitutive act .

it also requested that oau member parliamentariansvet apan - african parliament ( pap ) draft protocol to the aec treaty , prior to its ratification .

the au draft constitutiveact text differedsubstantially from the model proposed by al - qadhafi , and contained no binding provisions or timetables .

in march2001 , againmeeting in libya , an oau / aec summit of heads of state mandated that the au would come into being upon the36th ratification byan oau member state of the au constitutive act - - a benchmark reached in april 2001 , when nigeria depositedits instrument ofratification .

the summit also adopted the pap draft protocol , prior to its approval by oau members .

an oau / aec summit , meeting in july 2001 in lusaka , zambia , charged the oau secretary general , in consultation with oaustates , with determining the modalities necessary for the creation , structuring , and functioning of the organs of theau .

priority wasgiven to the creation of an assembly , executive council , commission , and a permanent representativescommittee .

the sameactors were charged with defining the areas of competence , inter - relationships , and linkages with other externalmultilateral,non - governmental , and professional organizations of the oau's specialized agencies , and processes forreconstituting these as auorgans .

the summit also: determined that regional economic communities would function as key "building blocks" of the au .

 ( 3 ) authorized the oau secretary general to "identify alternative modalities of funding the activities andprograms of the [au] , bearing in mind that the union cannot operate on the basis of assessed contributions frommember statesonly. .

 ( 4 ) mandated that , as provided by the au constitutive act , oau assets , liabilities , and agreements withotherparties would devolve to the au .

in july 2002 in durban , south africa , the final meetings of the oau were held .

they were followed by official inauguration of theafrican union , and meetings of its assembly , executive council , and assembly of heads of state and government .

organization .

the constitutive act of the african union defines the institutionalstructure , organizational principles , and broad policy roles of constituent au organs .

these include the following: an assembly , an executive council , and a commission of the union .

a pan - african parliament and a permanent representatives committee .

court of justice .

peace and security council .

 ( 5 ) specialized technical committees , responsible to the executive council .

these include committeeson:economy and agricultural matters ; monetary and financial affairs ; trade , customs and immigration matters ; industry , science andtechnology , energy , natural resources and environment ; transport , communications and tourism ; health , laborand socialaffairs ; and education , culture and human resources .

economic , social and cultural council .

central financial institutions ( including an african central bank ; and african monetary fund ; andan africaninvestment bank ) .

the precise operational relationships among these organs and with their subsidiary bodies , and their structures , functions , mandates,and powers , are yet to be determined .

african union policy: nepad .

a key au policy vehicle is the new partnershipfor africa's development ( nepad ) , a multi - sector sustainable development and investment planning and advocacyframework .

ithas been endorsed by diverse african leaders and by key multilateral organizations .

 ( 6 ) a core feature of nepad is the voluntary,progress - based african peer review mechanism ( aprm ) .

aprm signatory states will be subject to peerevaluations that will assesstheir degree of adherence to political , economic and corporate governance goals , codes , and standards containedin the nepad declaration on democracy , political , economic and corporate governance .

during the african union inaugural summit in july 2002 , leaders from across africa joined together in a public display ofcontinental unity and pageantry .

the formation of the african union , however , was reportedly the subject ofsignificant , sometimesdivisive debate among african leaders .

the debate arrayed leading political and economic reformers , in particularadvocates ofnepad and of africa's further integration into the global economy , against several leaders who have championedafrican politicalautonomy and nationalist policy agendas .

the latter , including the heads of state of libya , zimbabwe , namibia andgambia,criticized nepad .

they warned that for such a plan to be successful , it would need to be defined , realized , andcontrolled byafricans alone , independent of external influences .

nepad was defined by foreign political and economic models,they asserted,and might subject africa to externally - imposed political conditions in exchange for credit and other assistance .

theyalso assertedthat nepad would create financial dependency on external creditors .

 ( 7 ) libyan and south african leadership roles .

differences over the proposedpurpose and role of the au played out in reported disagreements between president thabo mbeki of south africaand libyan leadermuammar al - qadhafi .

the latter has promoted a range of populist , sometimes radical , proposals .

these reflecttraditionalpan - africanist goals emphasizing a need for greater continental unity and sovereignty vis - a - vis the industrializedworld , and a strongrejection of policy conditionalities in exchange for access to credit .

despite al - qadhafi's early conceptualcontributions to thecreation of the au and his subsequent outreach efforts , the au organization that ultimately emerged reflected broadafricanleadership support for nepad .

the gradual displacement of al - qadhafi's agenda by nepad reportedly gave riseto a leadershipstruggle between him and president mbeki .

during a june 2002 state visit by mbeki to libya , al - qadhafi reportedlycalled nepad aproject of "former colonisers and racists," i.e. , of western governments .

 ( 8 ) he also reportedly attempted to delay the july 2002initiation of the au in durban , south africa in favor of a launch in 2003 in libya , with libya - - not south africa - - as the first auchair .

libya has helped some countries to pay their oau arrears , in an apparent attempt to garner support and toincrease itsinfluence within the oau during the transition to the au .

the president of zambia , which received such assistance,reportedlychampioned the transfer of au headquarters from ethiopia to libya , asserting that such a key role was befitting oflibya , as one ofthe richest au countries .

the libyan and south africa governments have dismissed claims that a rivalry exists between them , and efforts to bridge theirdifferences appear to have been successful , albeit broadly in favor of the south african agenda .

president thabombeki was namedas the first chairperson of the au during its inaugural year , and the first au summit was held in durban , southafrica .

libya hasindicated its acceptance of nepad and its peer review mechanism , and libya is represented on the nepadimplementationcommittee .

some au inauguration summit participants reportedly believe that al - qadhafi's presence in nepadcould jeopardizethe recent endorsement of the plan by the g - 8 countries .

 ( 9 ) .

hiv / aids .

world - wide , africa is the region currently most affected by thehiv / aids epidemic .

in many african countries , it is rapidly decreasing life expectancy rates , reducing current andfuture economicproduction , and leading to enormous human resource losses , including within the educated work force .

some criticsclaim thatnepad fails to substantively and pro - actively address the extreme devastation being engendered by the spread ofaids in manyafrican countries .

war and conflict .

conflicts in sierra leone and angola have recently ended , buthostilities continue in somalia , liberia , burundi , sudan and the democratic republic of the congo ( drc ) .

 ( 10 ) many other countrieshave faced armed insurgencies or periodically high levels of political violence in recent years .

such conflicts posepotent challengesto the au goal of achieving continental peace and security , while upholding the doctrine of member states'non - interference in theinternal affairs of their peers .

in late april 2003 , the au began deploying the first 100 members of a planned3,500-strong combinedsouth african , ethiopian , and mozambican peacekeeping force that will monitor and reinforce a cease - fire andpolitical successionaimed at ending burundi's civil war .

democracy and governance challenges .

the extent of the african union'sdetermination to consolidate democratic institutions and culture , and ensure good governance and adherence to therule of law - - asreflected in the au constitutive act and in multiple nepad texts - - face immediate tests .

in recent years , theconstitutions ofseveral african states have been amended expressly to allow current leaders to renew their terms of office .

suchdevelopmentssuggest that the power of incumbency , rather than the rule of law , effectively governs political power - holding inmany africancountries - - although in several countries , including zambia , malawi , and mozambique , the trend towardentrenched presidentialincumbency has been reversed .

in other cases , the legitimacy of recent local legislative elections administered byruling parties havebeen questioned by opposition groups and outside observers .

key challenges facing the au are disputed polls inmadagascar,zimbabwe ; nigeria also held a widely criticized election .

madagascar .

in the island nation of madagascar , contested presidential elections in late 2001 led to a tense , violent , half year stand - off between the two candidates and their supporters .

after theelection , thechallenger , businessman marc ravalomanana , citing electoral irregularities , declared himself the electoral winnerover didierratsiraka , the longtime incumbent .

the malagasy supreme court later sanctioned his claim .

in june 2002 , theunited states andseveral other powers formally recognized ravalomanana's government , and france soon followed suite .

the au,however , has notrecognized the new government , and has called for new elections .

senegal , which had tried to mediate in crisis , didnot endorse theau decision .

it recognized the new government , as did burkina faso , mauritius , libya and the comoros .

there areindications thatthe au may soon recognize the current malagasy government .

zimbabwe .

in contrast to its madagascar decision , the inaugural au assembly tacitly accepted the highly disputed march 2002 re - election of zimbabwean president robert mugabe , which was precededby extensivepolitical violence and a controversial land redistribution program .

although the au did not directly address theelection , it affirmedearlier oau endorsements of it , mirroring acceptance of the election by sub - regional leaders and sadc .

in contrast,the unitedstates , the european union , and other countries rejected the zimbabwean poll .

leaders of the zimbabweanopposition movementfor democratic change , some of whom were prevented from attending the au inauguration , called upon the auto use the nepadafrican peer review mechanism to sanction the zimbabwean government for abuses of human and political rights .

elitism and popular participation .

civil society activists have long charged thatthe oau was a state - centric forum that upheld the interest of political elites , rather than the public good .

somecritics predict that theau may become subject to similar biases , and assert that without much broader input from african societies atlarge , the au willbecome irrelevant to the needs of the majority of africa's citizens .

still , many critics see positive potential in boththe au andnepad , and leading au architects , such as president mbeki , have recognized their concerns in public statements.mbeki hassponsored forums focusing on au - related policy goals of diverse civil society groups .

structural poverty and financing of nepad .

the au may face difficulties infinancing its ambitious agenda , as did the oau .

the average sub - saharan per capita in 2002 was $470 and wasmuch lower in manynon - oil - producing countries .

in addition , wealth is highly unequally distributed in many african countries ; even inthe wealthiest ofsub - saharan countries , the majority of people are poor .

while nepad is an attempt to improve the economicstanding of africa ingeneral , growth that it may generate is likely to occur over the medium to long - term .

in the short to medium term,funding shortfallsare likely to curtail the ability of the au to meet its planned objectives .

