kuwait's optimism after the 2003 fall of its nemesis , saddam hussein , soured after the january 15 , 2006 , death of amir ( ruler ) jabir ahmad al - jabir al sabah .

from then until 2013 , kuwait underwent repeated political crises that produced economic stagnation .

kuwait was not strategically or politically close to the united states until the iran - iraq war ( 1980-1988 ) , when kuwait — a backer of iraq — sought u.s. help against iranian attacks .

a u.s. consulate opened in kuwait in october 1951 and was elevated to an embassy upon kuwait's independence from britain in 1961 .

kuwait was the first gulf state to establish relations with the soviet union in the 1960s , perhaps reflecting the political strength in kuwait of relatively left - wing figures .

lawrence robert silverman is u.s .

ambassador to kuwait .

after the united states , kuwait's most important alliances are with the other gcc states .

kuwait has tended to act within a gcc consensus and to try to preserve gcc unity .

political infighting and the drop in oil prices since 2014 have affected kuwait's economy , but the country is taking steps to try to reduce its economic vulnerability .

hydrocarbons sales still represent about 90% of government export revenues and about 60% of its gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

because kuwait requires that crude oil sell for about nearly $75 per barrel to balance its budget — well above prices for most of the time since 2014 — kuwait has run budget deficits of about $15 billion per year since 2015 .

kuwait deferred capital infrastructure investment and reduced public sector salaries and subsidies , according to the imf and other observers .

subsidy reductions were contemplated even before the decline in oil prices: in october 2013 , prime minister jabir said the subsidies system — which cost the government about $17.7 billion annually — had produced a "welfare state" and was "unsustainable" and must be reduced .

on the other hand , kuwait still has a large sovereign wealth fund , managed by the kuwait investment authority , with holdings estimated at nearly $600 billion .

kuwait , which produces about 3 million barrels per day of crude oil , agreed to slightly reduce its crude oil production ( by 130,000 barrels per day ) as part of a november 2016 opec production cut agreement that remains in effect .

kuwait and saudi arabia , including during a september 30 , 2018 , visit to kuwait by saudi crown prince mohammad bin salman al saud , discussed jointly increasing production by 500,000 barrels per day by reactivating two closed fields in their joint "neutral zone. .

the khafji field closed in october 2014 due to environmental concerns and the wafra field closed in may 2015 over technical issues .

however , the crown prince's visit did not result in any announced agreement to resume production at the two fields .

using national assembly legislation that took effect in 2010 , the government has moved forward with long - standing plans to privatize some state - owned industries .

however , the privatization of kuwait airways was cancelled , despite the passage of legislation in january 2014 authorizing that privatization , in part because of opposition from the airline's workforce .

political disputes also delayed movement on several major potential drivers of future growth , most notably opening kuwait's northern oil fields to foreign investment to generate about 500,000 barrels per day of extra production .

the assembly blocked the $8.5 billion project for over 15 years because of concerns about kuwait's sovereignty .

however , a fourth oil refinery , estimated to cost $8 billion , is under construction and is scheduled to open in 2019 .

at an investment forum in march 2018 , kuwait announced a vision to attract foreign direct investment through development of a large "northern gateway" economic opportunity zone encompassing five natural islands in northern kuwait .

that project has since been retitled "silk city," after attracting investment from china as part of that country's region - wide belt and road initiative ( bri ) .

the project , which might involve almost $90 billion in total investment , will encompass a new airport , railways , and port facilities .

kuwait and china have formed a $10 billion "kuwait - china silk road fund" to finance initial stages of the expansion .

the development of the northern reaches of kuwait is part of the country's overall "new kuwait 2035" economic strategy .

nuclear power .

like other gulf states , kuwait sees peaceful uses of nuclear energy as important to its economy , although doing so always raises fears among some in the united states , israel , and elsewhere about the ultimate intentions of developing a nuclear program .

in 2012 , kuwait formally abandoned plans announced in 2011 to build up to four nuclear power reactors .

the government delegated any continuing nuclear power research to its kuwait institute for scientific research ( kisr ) .

kuwait is cooperating with the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) to ensure international oversight of any nuclear work in kuwait .

in fy2015 , the united states provided about $38,000 to help train kuwaiti personnel in nuclear security issues , and about $58,000 was provided in fy2016 for this purpose .

in 1994 , kuwait became a founding member of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in february 2004 , the united states and kuwait signed a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) , often viewed as a prelude to a free trade agreement ( fta ) , which kuwait has said it seeks .

in the course of the september 8 , 2017 , u.s. - kuwait strategic dialogue , the u.s. department of commerce finalized a memorandum of understanding with kuwait's direct investment promotion authority to encourage additional investments in both countries .

kuwait gave $500 million worth of oil to u.s. states affected by hurricane katrina .

the united states' imports of oil from kuwait have been declining as u.s. oil imports have declined generally .

the united states imports about 100,000 barrels per day of crude oil from kuwait , as of mid - 2018 .

total u.s. exports to kuwait were about $5.1 billion in 2017 , and total u.s. imports from kuwait in 2017 were about $3 billion .

based on figures through november 2018 , u.s. exports to kuwait in 2018 were only about half of what they were the prior year , and imports from kuwait fell by about 25% in that time period .

u.s. exports to kuwait consist mostly of automobiles , industrial equipment , and foodstuffs .

following his meeting with amir sabah on september 7 , 2017 , president trump stated that kuwait had taken delivery of 10 u.s. - made boeing 777 commercial passenger aircraft in 2017 , which might account for the spike in u.s. export figures to kuwait in 2017 .

because kuwait's per capita gdp is very high , kuwait receives negligible amounts of u.s. foreign assistance .

the assistance kuwait does receive is targeted to achieve selected objectives that benefit u.s. national security , including promoting civil society , and training on nuclear security and counterterrorism financing .

in fy2016 , about $3,000 was provided for counternarcotics programs in kuwait .

