rs21164 - - highway finance: raba's double - edged sword updated may 19 , 2003 summary the debate over a possible reduction in federal highway program spending duringfy2003 has ended .

congress haschosen to overrule provisions of law that would have reduced the fy2003 spending level to $23.2 billion , and hasinstead settled on $31.8 billion , the same asthe fy2002 level .

in early 2002 , it appeared that a major reduction in highway program spending was in the offing.an office of management and budgetcalculation in the president's budget indicated that the raba adjustment for fy2003 would be negative .

theadministration and congress were not proposinga cutback .

rather a complex financing mechanism known as revenue aligned budget authority ( raba ) wasproving the famous law of unintendedconsequences .

predictions made at the time raba was created by the transportation equity act for the21st century as amended ( tea - 21 ) ( p.l .

105-178 & p.l .

105-206 ) saw it as an ever growing source of funding for the highway program , even though raba was createdwith the possibility of a downwardadjustment .

raba provided the highway program with almost $9 billion in additional financing during the yearsfy2000 through fy2002 .

congressionalaction in the 2nd session of the 107th congress precluded this downward adjustment,at least in part , and the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 ( p.l.108-7 ) guaranteed that funding would remain at the fy2002 level .

this report will not be updated .

a little understood feature of tea - 21 became a significant policy issue in the 2nd session of the107th congress .

the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) , state departments of transportation , and localities throughout the united states had become used to theidea that the federal - aid highway programobligation level would increase every year as a result of additional funds provided by raba .

the possibility thatraba could result in a negative adjustmentto the funding level of the highway program had been largely forgotten over the previous 5 years .

in fact , the rabaadjustment for fy2003 , if it had beenapplied in accordance with tea - 21 provisions , would have required a reduction in the federal highway programsguaranteed obligation limitation by $4.369billion , and a year - over - year adjustment from fy2002 of a negative $8.6 billion .

the negative raba adjustment would have resulted in a 27% decline in new highway contracts ( obligations ) in fy2003 when compared with fy2002 .

according to estimates by the highway construction industry this would have translated into a serious reduction inconstruction nationwide with a concomitantloss of some 295,000 jobs .

 ( 1 ) while not all estimatessaw the situation in such negative terms , there was no doubt that an $8.6 billion change in highwayspending would have had far reaching consequences for the industry .

this was a problem that wasn't supposed to occur .

the concept behind raba expected growth and saw a so - called "negative raba" as only a smallpossibility .

a downward adjustment of the obligation limitation and authorizations could also occur , but this is improbablegiven the conservative receipt estimates used to set the guaranteed spending levels set in tea - 21 .

 ( 2 ) faced with the unexpected , congress and the administration had to decide whether to let the raba adjustment stand or whether to modify the raba result insome way .

congress has now considered the issue and decided to overrule the raba adjustment and retainspending at the fy2002 level .

the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) changed the budget framework forthe federal highway and transit programs .

it did this in twoways .

first , by creating new budget categories , and second , by setting statutory limitations on obligations .

the actamended the balanced budget andemergency deficit control act of 1985 to create two new budget categories: highways and mass transit .

the actfurther amended the budget process bycreating a statutory level for the limitation on obligations in each fiscal year from fy1999 to fy2003 .

 ( 3 ) finally , tea - 21 provided a mechanism , raba , toadjust the amounts available in the highway account to correspond with increased or decreased receipts in trust funddedicated tax revenues .

the transit accountwas not included in the raba process .

the net effect of the creation of these budget categories is a predetermined level of funding for core highway programs , which is referred to in tea - 21 as adiscretionary spending guarantee or the guaranteed level .

these categories are separated from the rest of thediscretionary budget in a way that prevents the useof funds assigned to these categories for any other purpose .

these so called "firewalls" are viewed , in the tea - 21context , as guaranteed and / or minimumlevels of funding for highway and transit programs .

additional funds above the firewall level can be made availablethrough the annual appropriations process .

the raba process provides a link between the trust fund dedicated tax revenues that flow into the highway account and highway spending .

this relationshiphas long been sought by advocates of increased highway spending who have contended that highway user feesshould be available only for highway programs .

there were several options for dealing with the raba situation available to congress .

the first of these , andthe one tacitly supported by the bushadministration initially , was to maintain the status quo .

from this perspective the downward raba adjustmentis what congress agreed to allow when itpassed tea21 in 1998 .

raba , in this view , had provided significantly more benefit than expected over time , anda down year should be expected fromtime - to - time .

the budget assumptions contained in the president's fy2003 budget submission were predicated onthe downward raba adjustment .

additional spending for highways could have the effect of raising the overall deficit figure in the president's budget,notwithstanding the separate budgetcategory for the highway trust fund and a significant unobligated balance in the trust fund .

an option pursued by some legislators in the 2nd session of the 107th congress was legislation that restored fy2003 funding to the guaranteed level contained intea - 21 .

h.r .

3694 and s. 1917 , the "highway funding restoration act," were simultaneouslyintroduced on february 7 , 2002 .

these bills were identical .

the bills directed that the limitation on obligations for fy2003 be raised to theguaranteed level .

in other words they raisedspending by $4.369 billion by drawing from the unexpended balance in the highway trust fund .

the bills wereintroduced by the leadership of the housecommittee on transportation and infrastructure and the senate committee on environment and public worksrespectively .

a majority of both the house andsenate signed on as cosponsors of this legislation .

an amended version of h.r .

3694 was reported out of thehouse committee on transportationand infrastructure on may 1st .

s. 1917 as reported to the senate on june 17thallowed for an additional $1.3 billion in spending over the $27.7billion level .

from the perspective of some governors and highway interest groups these bills represented a good start , but didn't make the program whole .

they continue toseek a larger increase in spending , perhaps to the $8.6 billion level that would provide the same level of highwayspending as fy2002 .

congress has nowagreed with this argument .

also at issue for such an increase was the willingness of congress to potentially raisethe overall unified budget deficit .

this issuewas particularly important for the appropriations committees , who must weigh a number of other transportationfunding needs and work them into the annualappropriations process .

also important in this regard was the issue of the intent of raba's authors .

as mentionedearlier , the expectation of raba was that itwould provide additional money to the highway program .

it is not clear that the authors ever considered that peakraba levels should become standard forhighway program funding .

rather , it appears that the authors expected that the highway program should benefitin bonus years , but also feel some pain in downyears .

as a result of a provision included in the second fy2002 emergency supplemental appropriations bill ( p.l .

107-206 ) ( august 2 , 2002 ) the downward rabaadjustment proposed for fy2003 was blocked .

the net effect of this provision was to set the program at itsauthorized $27.7 billion level .

later in the session,the senate committee on appropriations reported s. 2808 which would have increased spending to thefy2002 level .

ultimately congress hasdecided to retain funding at the fy2002 level passing the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 ( p.l.108-7 ) early in the 108th congress .

all of the fixes to the raba adjustment were predicated on spending at least some portion of the unexpended balance in the highway trust fund .

thosesupporting an increase in the fy2003 limitation on obligations all pointed to the $18 billion plus unexpendedbeginning of year balance estimate for the trustfund as the likely source of additional highway funds .

 ( 6 ) while this was the logical place to look for highway funds , not all of this balance is actuallyavailable .

at any given time a significant portion of the fund is reserved to meet future obligations .

a device created earlyin the history of the trust fund , known as the"byrd rule" ( for senator harry byrd , virginia ) requires that the trust fund meet an ongoing fiduciary test .

anyfailure to meet this test requires an immediatereduction in highway spending .

tea - 21 must be reauthorized prior to fy2004 for the program to continue .

many observers are suggesting that the raba debate will alert congress and thehighway industry to the fact that long - standing trust fund revenue sources need to be reviewed .

this is especiallytrue in terms of gasohol .

gasohol use isexpected to increase , but with lower tax levels on gasohol , this actually means that trust fund revenues for the sameamount of fuel use could decrease .

also atissue is the ongoing push for the automobile industry to find alternative fuel sources that are not taxed .

when tea - 21 was signed in late 1998 the highway trust fund had a growing unexpended balance that was expected to exceed $24 billion by the end offy1999 .

one of the principal rationales behind the higher spending levels in tea - 21 and the creation of the rabaspending mechanism was to preventcontinued growth in this balance .

going into 2003 it now appears that the unexpended balance in the trust fund willbe trending downward in size .

should thistrend continue it could create a dynamic in which it could be difficult to find support for significant growth in theprogram during the reauthorization debatewithout new funding sources .

1 .

 ( back ) http: / / www.transportation.org / aash...fd9e86256b4500776347f ? opendocument 2 .

 ( back ) u.s. department of transportation .

transportation equity act for the 21st century: a summary .

1999. p. 3 .

3 .

 ( back ) a limitation on obligations is a restrictionon the amount of federal assistance that may be promised ( obligated ) during a specific time period ( fiscal year ) .

4 .

 ( back ) u.s. government .

budget of theunited states fy2003 , analytical perspectives .

february 2002. p. 241 .

5 .

 ( back ) rothman , heather and ferguson , brett .

governors ask congress , president to spend down highway trust fund .

daily report for executives .

february 26,2002. p. a - 23 .

6 .

 ( back ) the unexpended balance is sometimes andinappropriately referred to as "the surplus" .

