in its discussion of strategies for aviation security , the 9 / 11 commission recommended that: the tsa [transportation security administration] and the congress must give priority attention to improving the ability of screening checkpoints to detect explosives on passengers .

as a start , each individual selected for special screening should be screened for explosives .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) directed the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to place high priority on developing and deploying equipment for passenger explosives screening ; required tsa , part of dhs , to submit a strategic plan for deploying such equipment ; and authorized additional research funding .

it also required that passengers who are selected for additional screening be screened for explosives , as an interim measure until all passengers can be screened for explosives .

congressional interest in this topic continues , particularly as the 110 th congress reexamines implementation of the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations .

the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( h.r .

1 ) would require tsa to issue the strategic plan called for by p.l .

108-458 within seven days of passage and would establish a checkpoint screening security fund , paid for with fees on airline passengers , to develop and deploy equipment for explosives detection at screening checkpoints .

the improving america's security act of 2007 ( s. 4 ) would require dhs to issue the same strategic plan within 90 days of passage and begin its implementation within one year of passage .

the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' health , and iraq accountability act , 2007 ( h.r .

1591 , the fy2007 supplemental appropriations bill ) would provide an additional $45 million for expansion of checkpoint explosives detection pilot systems .

this report discusses the current state of passenger explosives trace detection and related policy issues .

explosives detection for aviation security has been an area of federal concern for many years .

much effort has been focused on direct detection of explosive materials in carry - on and checked luggage , but techniques have also been developed to detect and identify residual traces that may indicate a passenger's recent contact with explosive materials .

these techniques use separation and detection technologies , such as mass spectrometry , gas chromatography , chemical luminescence , or ion mobility spectrometry , to measure the chemical properties of vapor or particulate matter collected from passengers or their carry - on luggage .

several technologies have been developed and deployed on a test or pilot basis .

parallel efforts in explosives vapor detection have employed specially trained animals , usually dogs .

the effectiveness of chemical trace analysis is highly dependent on three distinct steps: ( 1 ) sample collection , ( 2 ) sample analysis , and ( 3 ) comparison of results with known standards .

if any of these steps is suboptimal , the test may fail to detect explosives that are present .

when trace analysis is used for passenger screening , additional goals may include nonintrusive or minimally intrusive sample collection , fast sample analysis and identification , and low cost .

while no universal solution has yet been achieved , ion mobility spectrometry is most often used in currently deployed equipment .

in 2004 , tsa began pilot projects to deploy portal trace detection equipment for operational testing and evaluation .

in the portal approach , passengers pass through a device like a large doorframe that can collect , analyze , and identify explosive residues on the person's body or clothing .

the portal may rely on the passenger's own body heat to volatilize traces of explosive material for detection as a vapor , or it may use puffs of air that can dislodge small particles as an aerosol .

portal deployment is ongoing .

one alternative to portals is to collect the chemical sample using a handheld vacuum "wand" .

another is to test an object handled by the passenger , such as a boarding pass , for residues transferred from the passenger's hands .

in this case , the secondary object is used as the carrier between the passenger and the analyzing equipment .

the olfactory ability of dogs is sensitive enough to detect trace amounts of many compounds , but several factors have inhibited the regular use of canines for passenger screening .

dogs trained in explosives detection can generally only work for brief periods , have significant upkeep costs , are unable to communicate the identity of the detected explosives residue , and require a human handler when performing their detection role .

in addition , direct contact between dogs and airline passengers raises liability concerns .

direct detection of explosives concealed on passengers in bulk quantities has been another area of federal interest .

technology development efforts in this area include portal systems based on techniques such as x - ray backscatter imaging , millimeter wave energy analysis , and terahertz imaging .

as such systems detect only bulk quantities of explosives , they would not raise "nuisance alarms" on passengers who have recently handled explosives for innocuous reasons .

some versions could simultaneously detect other threats , such as nonmetallic weapons .

on the other hand , trace detection techniques are also likely to detect bulk quantities of explosives and may alert screening personnel to security concerns about a passenger who has had contact with explosives but is not actually carrying an explosive device when screened .

current deployments for passenger screening are focused on trace detection , and the remainder of this report does not discuss bulk detection .

however , many of the policy issues discussed below would apply similarly to bulk detection equipment .

any strategy for deploying and operating passenger explosives detection portals must consider a number of challenges .

organizational challenges include deciding where and how detectors are used , projecting costs , and developing technical and regulatory standards .

operational challenges include maximizing passenger throughput , responding to erroneous and innocuous detections , ensuring passenger acceptance of new procedures , minimizing the potential for intentional disruption of the screening process , and providing for research and development into future generations of detection equipment , including techniques for detecting novel explosives .

for security reasons , many technical details of equipment performance are not publicly available , which makes independent analysis of technical performance challenging .

an important component of a deployment strategy is identifying where and how passenger explosives detection equipment will be used .

portals could be deployed widely , so that all locations benefit from them , or they could be used only at selected locations , where they can most effectively address and mitigate risk .

in any given location , portals could be used as a primary screening technology for all passengers , or as a secondary screening technology for selected passengers only .

widespread deployment and use for primary screening might provide more uniform risk reduction , but would require many more portals and thus increase costs .

the total cost of deploying explosives detection equipment for passenger screening is unknown .

according to tsa , the portal systems currently being deployed in u.s. airports cost more than $160,000 each .

document scanning systems are somewhat less expensive ; according to a 2002 gao study , similar tabletop systems used for screening carry - on baggage can cost from $20,000 to $65,000 .

it is possible that technology improvements or bulk purchasing could lower costs .

the number of devices required would depend on throughput rates , device reliability and lifetime , and deployment strategy .

the united states has more than 400 commercial passenger airports ; if equally distributed , several thousand devices might be required , corresponding to a total capital cost for equipment of up to hundreds of millions of dollars .

installation and maintenance costs would be additional .

operating the equipment would require additional screening procedures and might lead to costs for additional screening personnel , or else create indirect costs by increasing passenger wait times .

it is unknown whether the personnel limit for tsa screeners , currently set at 45,000 full time equivalent screeners nationwide ( p.l .

108-90 ) , could accommodate the potential additional staffing requirements .

standards for the performance of passenger explosives trace detection equipment , procedures for evaluation and certification of the equipment , and regulations for its use are all yet to be established .

regulations and screening procedures have been established for explosives trace detection on luggage .

detection on passengers is a more complicated venture , involving possible privacy concerns , greater difficulty in sampling , and potentially different sensitivity requirements .

nevertheless , the current luggage regulations could be a model for future certification criteria for passenger screening .

procedures will also need to be established for the use of the equipment , such as how an operator should resolve detector alarms to distinguish genuine security threats from false positives and innocuous true positives .

when multiplied by the large number of airline passengers each day , even small increases in screening times may be logistically prohibitive .

the tsa goal for passenger wait time at airports is less than 10 minutes , and screening systems reportedly operate at a rate between 7 to 10 passengers per minute ; additional screening that slows passenger throughput and increases passenger wait time may add to airport congestion and have a detrimental economic impact .

a 1996 gao study stated that throughput goals for portal technologies at that time were equivalent to 6 passengers per minute .

according to the same study , non - portal technologies , such as secondary object analysis , had slightly higher throughput goals .

the tsa's pilot deployment of passenger explosives trace detection equipment will likely provide useful information on passenger throughput .

if no appreciable increase in screening times occurs , then passenger explosives screening may involve few additional direct economic costs beyond those of procuring , deploying , operating , and maintaining the equipment .

if passenger throughput is drastically decreased , then alternatives for passenger screening may need to be considered .

in between these extremes , it may be possible to moderate the economic impact by adding screening lanes or by using explosives detection equipment only on those passengers who are selected for secondary screening , as recommended by the 9 / 11 commission as a possible initial step .

a potential complication of explosives trace detection is the accuracy of detector performance .

false positives , false negatives , and innocuous true positives are all challenges .

if the detection system often detects the presence of an explosive when there actually is none ( a false positive ) then there will be a high burden in verifying results through additional procedures .

because of the large volume of air passengers , even small false positive rates may be unacceptable .

conversely , if the system fails to detect the presence of an explosive ( a false negative ) then the potential consequences may be serious .

assuming the system has adequate sensitivity to detect explosives traces in an operational environment , the detection threshold or criteria required for an alarm can generally be adjusted , enabling a tradeoff between false positives and false negatives , but neither can be eliminated entirely ; the appropriate balance may be a matter of debate .

innocuous true positives occur when a passenger has been in contact with explosives , but for legitimate reasons .

examples include individuals who take nitroglycerin for medical purposes or individuals in the mining or construction industry who use explosives in their work .

such passengers would be regularly subject to additional security scrutiny .

similar issues arise from the current use of trace detection equipment on some airline passenger carry - on baggage , and innocuous true positives in such cases are generally handled without incident .

the impact of innocuous true positives will likely depend on their frequency and on the proportion of passengers subject to explosives trace detection .

some passengers may have personal concerns about the addition of passenger explosives trace detection to the screening process .

issues of privacy may be raised by the connection between innocuous true positives and passenger medical status or field of employment .

also , equipment that uses a vacuum "wand" or puffs of air for sample collection may offend some passengers' sense of propriety or modesty .

passenger reluctance could then increase screening times .

allowing alternative forms of screening , such as within privacy enclosures or through different imaging technology , might mitigate passenger concerns in some cases .

another concern is the possibility that a passenger screening regimen that includes explosives trace detection could be exploited to intentionally disrupt the operation of an airport .

the dissemination of trace quantities of an explosive material on commonly touched objects within the airport might lead to many positive detections on passengers .

this would make trace detection less effective or ineffective for security screening , and might disrupt airport operations generally until alternative screening procedures , such as enhanced baggage screening by tsa personnel , could be put in place or the contamination source could be identified and eliminated .

the dhs and its predecessor agencies have historically been the main funders of research on explosives detection for airport use .

 ( most of this research has focused on detecting explosives in baggage rather than on passengers. ) .

several other federal agencies , however , also fund research related to trace explosives detection .

these include the departments of energy and justice , the national institute for standards and technology , and the interagency technical support working group .

much of this research has been dedicated to overcoming technical challenges , such as increasing sensitivity and reducing the time required for sample analysis .

a different research challenge is the detection of novel explosives .

detectors are generally designed to look for specific explosives , both to limit the number of false or innocuous positives and to allow a determination of which explosive has been detected .

as a result , novel explosives are unlikely to be detected until identifying characteristics and reference standards have been developed and incorporated into equipment designs .

unlike imaging techniques for detecting bulk quantities of explosives , trace analysis provides no opportunity for a human operator to identify a suspicious material based on experience or intuition .

liquid explosives are a novel threat that has been of particular interest since august 2006 , when british police disrupted a plot to bomb aircraft using liquids .

the dhs is evaluating technologies to detect liquid explosives .

its efforts are mainly focused on bulk detection , such as scanners to test the contents of bottles .

like solid explosives , however , liquids might be found through trace detection , if the trace detection system is designed to look for them .

