nasa launched the hubble space telescope in 1990 aboard the space shuttle discovery .

unlike other nasa space telescopes , hubble was designed to be serviced regularly by astronauts .

that design proved fortuitous when it was discovered that hubble had a defective mirror that produced blurry images .

astronauts on the first servicing mission in 1993 were able to install corrective optics , allowing years of scientific accomplishments and generating widespread scientific and public support .

additional servicing missions were conducted in 1997 , 1999 , and 2002 to replace aging hardware and install advanced scientific instruments .

two more shuttle missions to hubble were scheduled: a final servicing mission in 2004 ( known as sm - 4 ) and a retrieval mission to bring the telescope back to earth in 2010 .

following the space shuttle columbia accident in february 2003 , however , then - nasa administrator sean o'keefe decided not to proceed with either flight .

current nasa administrator michael griffin revisited that decision once the shuttle returned to regular flight .

a servicing mission is now scheduled for october 8 , 2008 .

no retrieval mission is currently planned .

roughly the size of a school bus , hubble was designed to make astronomical observations of the universe in the visible , ultraviolet , and near - infrared wavelength bands .

although ground - based telescopes can also make visible and infrared observations , hubble's location above earth's atmosphere enhances image clarity , enabling astronomers to look at fainter , more distant objects and further back in time .

hubble is operated for nasa by the space telescope science institute ( ststci ) near baltimore , md .

websites maintained by stsci ( http: / / hubblesite.org / ) and nasa ( http: / / hubble.nasa.gov ) provide information about the telescope and its discoveries .

hubble was designed to operate for 15 years , a milestone that was reached on april 25 , 2005 .

nasa had planned to extend the operational period until 2010 , at which time the space shuttle would bring hubble back to earth to prevent an uncontrolled reentry that could pose a debris risk to populated areas .

funding constraints , however , led some nasa officials to conclude that hubble's operations should be brought to end earlier than 2010 .

the "funding wedge" created by ending the servicing missions would be used to build the new james webb space telescope ( jwst ) , which is being designed for infrared observations .

the jwst mission was "replanned" in 2006 and is now scheduled for launch in 2013 rather than 2011 .

the debate over how long to continue to operate hubble , including the linkage with funding for the jwst , was under way at the time of the columbia accident .

during servicing visits to hubble , shuttle crews repair or replace aging equipment and install updated scientific instruments .

hubble has six gyroscopes for pointing the telescope , but two are now nonfunctional and one has degraded performance .

until august 2005 , three were required to achieve the accuracy needed for scientific observations .

new techniques now allow operation on just two gyroscopes , so that one is kept in reserve .

solar arrays generate electricity for the telescope ; the energy is stored in batteries .

hubble has no propulsion system , relying instead on the space shuttle to boost its orbit so that it does not reenter earth's atmosphere .

the tasks for the sm - 4 mission included replacing all the gyroscopes and batteries and a fine guidance sensor , emplacing new thermal protection blankets , boosting hubble's orbit , and installing two new scientific instruments ( the cosmic origins spectrograph for ultraviolet observations of chemical composition , and the wide field camera 3 for observations from ultraviolet through near - infrared ) .

all these tasks are also included in the planned 2008 servicing mission .

one of hubble's current instruments , the advanced camera for surveys , malfunctioned in january 2007 and lost most of its capabilities .

it was installed in march 2002 and was designed for five years of operation .

astronauts on the 2008 servicing mission will attempt to repair this instrument , even though nasa's plans did not originally call for that because of the difficulty and because the wide field camera 3 will be more capable ( although it will have a somewhat smaller field of view ) .

the mission will also attempt to repair another malfunctioning instrument , the space telescope imaging spectrograph .

on february 1 , 2003 , the space shuttle columbia disintegrated as it returned to earth following a 16-day scientific mission .

all seven astronauts aboard perished .

the shuttle system was immediately grounded .

nasa established the columbia accident investigation board ( caib ) to determine the causes of the accident and recommend corrective actions .

 ( for more on the columbia accident , see crs report rs21408 , nasa ' s space shuttle program: the columbia tragedy , the discovery mission , and the future of the shuttle . ) .

it was quickly apparent that sm - 4 would be delayed .

as the caib deliberated , nasa decided that the 2010 hubble retrieval mission was too risky compared to the benefits .

on january 16 , 2004 , mr. o'keefe informed workers at stsci and nasa's goddard space flight center ( which built hubble and oversees stsci ) that he was canceling sm - 4 .

according to the director of stsci , dr. steven beckwith , mr. o'keefe cited several factors: the shuttle would not have the iss as a safe haven ; the changes required to meet the caib's recommendations regarding non - iss related shuttle missions would not have application beyond the servicing mission , making their expense questionable ; completing iss construction by 2010 will require all the shuttle flights in that time period ; hubble's life would be extended for only a few years ; and astronomers have other ground - and space - based telescopes they could use .

two days before mr. o'keefe announced his decision , president bush directed nasa to embark on a new exploration initiative , requiring a shift in program and funding priorities .

 ( see crs report rs21720 , space exploration: issues concerning the " vision for space exploration " . ) .

funding for the new initiative would come primarily from canceling , deferring , or delaying other nasa programs .

although mr. o'keefe stated that the hubble decision was based primarily on shuttle safety concerns , the timing of his announcement led many commentators to conclude that it was linked to the priority shifts required by the president's initiative .

while some media accounts praised the nasa administrator for making a difficult decision , others called hubble "the first victim" of the president's initiative and chided nasa for putting the new exploration goals ahead of the astronomical research performed with hubble .

initial opposition to the cancellation of sm - 4 focused on attempts to reverse mr. o'keefe's decision and proceed with a shuttle mission .

the debate centered on comparing the risk of a mission to hubble with the risk of a mission to the iss .

shortly after the cancellation decision , nasa's then - chief scientist , dr. john grunsfeld , an astronaut who was a member of the 1999 and 2002 hubble servicing crews , commented that if a shuttle mission to hubble were mounted , it would be necessary to have a second shuttle ready to launch in case the first one encountered difficulties .

nasa has had a backup shuttle available for each of the shuttle launches since the columbia accident , but may not for all future missions if safety modifications continue to work well .

attention soon shifted to robotic servicing options , which dominated the public discussion of hubble's future throughout most of 2004 .

at a senate appropriations va - hud - ia subcommittee hearing on march 11 , 2004 , mr. o'keefe agreed with a request from senator mikulski to ask the national research council ( nrc ) to study options for extending hubble's life , including both shuttle and robotic missions .

in november 2004 , congress passed the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 ) , which provided $291 million for a hubble servicing mission .

the conference report ( h.rept .

108-792 ) stated that "a successful servicing mission to hubble should be one of nasa's highest priorities. .

the report language did not specify whether the servicing mission should involve the space shuttle or a robotic mission .

the final nrc report on servicing options , released on december 8 , 2004 , found it "unlikely that nasa will be able to extend the science life of [hubble] through robotic servicing" and that the risk of a shuttle mission to hubble is similar to the risk of a single shuttle mission to the iss .

the report recommended a shuttle servicing mission , and a robotic mission only for deorbiting the telescope at the end of its useful lifetime .

the robotic servicing option was off the table .

dr. michael griffin was sworn in as nasa administrator , replacing mr. o'keefe , on april 14 , 2005 .

at his senate confirmation hearing on april 12 , 2005 , dr. griffin stated that he would revisit the question of whether to use the shuttle to service hubble after the second successful post - columbia shuttle flight , at which time nasa would be able to assess the risk factors associated with "essentially a new vehicle" .

the nasa authorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-155 ) , enacted in december 2005 , called for a shuttle servicing mission after the shuttle returned to flight successfully "unless such a mission would compromise astronaut safety. .

the second post - columbia flight took place successfully in july 2006 .

in october 2006 , nasa announced that a hubble servicing mission will indeed take place .

the launch is now scheduled for october 8 , 2008 , on space shuttle atlantis .

in october 2006 , administrator griffin stated that the "cradle to grave" cost of the servicing mission will be $900 million: $500 million to keep the hubble team together from 2004 through 2008 ; $200 million for the gyroscopes , batteries , and instruments that will be installed ; $100 million for external tanks and solid - rocket boosters for the additional shuttle flight ; and $100 million for shuttle launch processing .

nasa expects that if the 2008 servicing mission is successful , hubble will continue to operate until 2013 , rather than being deorbited in 2010 as previously planned .

according to one nasa official , "hubble's most impressive accomplishments ... lie in its future. .

the cost of the additional years of operation , however , may affect funding and scheduling for other astronomy missions .

for example , to offset the funding that congress provided for hubble in fy2005 , nasa's may 2005 operating plan postponed two other astronomy missions and reduced funding for mars exploration .

before the columbia accident , the end of hubble expenditures was expected to be a source of funding for the james webb space telescope .

according to nasa's fy2009 congressional budget justification , hubble costs are expected to be $115 million in fy2011 , $95 million in fy2012 , and $94 million in fy2013 , not including certain indirect costs .

plans for deorbiting hubble remain uncertain .

before the columbia accident , the space shuttle was to return hubble to earth at the end of its lifetime , but there is no longer any expectation of retrieval by the shuttle , whether or not the servicing mission in 2008 is successful .

hubble has no propulsion system of its own , however , so if it is not retrieved , a propulsion module would need to be attached to it to permit a controlled deorbit ( that is , to ensure that any debris falls in an unpopulated area such as the pacific ocean ) .

analysis by nasa in 2005 indicated that hubble is unlikely to make an uncontrolled reentry until at least 2020 , rather than 2012 as previously believed , and the agency now considers the deorbiting issue to be "beyond the budget horizon. .

boosting hubble's orbit during the 2008 servicing mission will delay the date of reentry even further , but at some point , deorbiting will be necessary if an uncontrolled reentry is to be avoided .

