the military personnel records division of the national personnel records center ( nprc ) , a component of the national archives and records administration ( nara ) located in st. louis , missouri , holds most existing u.s. military personnel , health , and medical records of discharged and deceased veterans of all services from world war i to the present .

neither the nprc nor the department of defense ( dod ) intends to destroy the physical records of u.s. servicemembers .

some older records have been electronically scanned to reduce the handling of fragile records .

see nara's site "access to military service and pension records" at https: / / www.archives.gov / research / order / order - vets - records.html .

official military personnel file ( ompf ) records may be requested online at https: / / www.archives.gov / veterans / military - service - records , by using the standard form 180 and submitting by mail ( the appropriate address listed on the back of the form ) , or fax ( 314-801-9195 ) .

veterans and their next - of - kin ( nok ) may request these records .

according to the nprc , for the air force , navy , marine corps , and coast guard , the nok is defined as the unremarried widow or widower , son , daughter , father , mother , brother or sister ; for the army , the nok is defined as the surviving spouse , eldest child , father or mother , eldest sibling or eldest grandchild .

if an individual does not meet the definition of a nok , he or she is considered a member of the general public and may request military personnel records via the freedom of information act ( foia ) .

see "access to ompfs for the general public" at https: / / www.archives.gov / st - louis / military - personnel / public / general - public.html .

in 1973 , a fire at nprc destroyed approximately 16 million to 18 million army and air force official military personnel files .

in such cases where files were lost , nprc uses alternate sources of information to respond to requests .

more information about obtaining military personnel files can be found on the nprc website , http: / / www.archives.gov / st - louis / military - personnel / , or by contacting the center at national personnel records center military personnel records 1 archives drive st. louis , mo 63138 tel: [phone number scrubbed] congressional line tel: [phone number scrubbed] public line status update request form: https: / / www.archives.gov / st - louis / forms older military personnel records ( generally prior to 1917 ) are located at national archives and records administration ( nara ) textual archives division washington , dc 20408 http: / / www.archives.gov / veterans / military - service - records / pre - ww - 1-records.htm .

the nprc also provides information and guidance on how to request military awards and decorations online and by mail for veterans and their nok ; replacing certain military medals ; and obtaining a cold war recognition certificate .

this is available for the records of a servicemember who separated before or during 1956 .

for records for individuals who separated after 1956 , these records can be requested through foia .

the general public may also purchase a copy of the veteran's ompf to determine the awards due and obtain the medals from a commercial source .

individuals can request information on military service medals , decorations and awards online: https: / / www.archives.gov / personnel - records - center / awards - and - decorations .

by military service ( army , navy , marine corps , and air force including army air corps & army air forces ) via mail: national personnel records center 1 archives drive st. louis , mo 63138 for coast guard: coast guard personnel service center 4200 wilson blvd. , suite 900 ( psc - psd - ma ) stop 7200 arlington , va 20598-720 .

the modern military records office of nara has custody of records relating to world war i , world war ii , korea , and vietnam .

the records vary by conflict and branch of service ; for example , the records for army units active during the interwar periods ( 1920-1939 and 1945-1950 ) are incomplete .

for more information , contact the textual records office at textual records office national archives and records administration at college park 8601 adelphi road college park , md 20740-6001 tel: [phone number scrubbed] email: [email address scrubbed] if a military unit record is not publicly available , a foia request may be submitted to the agency where the record is held .

for example , for special access records held at the national archives at college park , contact the archives foia office at the following: special access and foia division national archives at college park 8601 adelphi road college park , md 20740-6001 tel: [phone number scrubbed] email: [email address scrubbed] for more information on how to submit a foia request , visit https: / / www.foia.gov / how - to.html .

other types of auxiliary and organizational records , including army morning reports , army unit rosters , army officer pay cards , navy muster rolls , u.s. army surgeon general's office records and veterans administration index cards are maintained at the national archives in st. louis , missouri .

further information regarding these records , as well as the timespan of available records for each category , are available at http: / / www.archives.gov / st - louis / archival - programs / other - records / index.html .

certain published unit histories can also be found in the collections of the military departments ( see table 1 ) .

beers , henry putney .

the confederacy: a guide to the archives of the government of the confederate states of america .

washington , dc: national archives and records administration , 1998 .

borch , fred l. for military merit: recipients of the purple heart .

annapolis , md: naval institute press , 2010 .

center of military history .

order of battle of the united states land force s in the world war .

washington , dc: center of military history , u.s. army , 1988 .

3 volumes .

controvich , james t. united states army u nit and organizational h istories: a b ibliography .

lanham , md: scarecrow press , 2003 .

 — — united states air force and i ts a ntecedents: p ublished and p rinted u nit h istories , a b ibliography .

lanham , md: scarecrow press , 2004 .

dinackus , thomas d. order of battle: allied ground forces of operation desert storm .

central point , or: hellgate press , 2000 .

dornbusch , c. e. military bibliography of the civil war .

new york: new york public library , 1971 .

dyer , frederick h. a compendium of the war of the rebellion .

new york: t. yoseloff , 1959 .

johnson , lt. col. richard s. , and debra johnson knox .

how to locate anyone who is or has been in the military: armed forces locator guide .

spartanburg , sc: mie publishing , 1999 .

owens , ron .

medal of honor: historical facts and figures .

paducah , ky: turner publishing company , 2004 .

plante , trevor k. military service records at the national archives .

washington , dc: national archives and records administration , 2009 .

stanton , shelby l. world war ii o rder of b attle , u.s. army ( g round f orce u nits ) .

mechanicsburg , pa: stackpole books , 2006 .

 — — vietnam order of battle .

mechanicsburg , pa: stackpole books , 2003 .

u.s. department of the army .

office of military history .

order of battle of the united states army ground forces in world war ii , pacific theater of operations: administrative and logistical commands , armies , corps , and divisions .

washington , dc: department of the army , 1959 .

u.s .

naval war records office .

official records of the union and confederate navies in the war of the rebellion .

harrisburg , pa: national historical society , 1987 .

30 v. u.s. war department .

the war of the rebellion: a compilation of the official records of the union and confederate armies .

washington , dc: gpo , 1880-1901 .

70 v .

