there have been two major allegations against wahhabism and against the saudi arabian government , which is viewed as its principal proponent .

in light of allegations against wahhabism , some critics have called for a reevaluation of the relationship between the united states and saudi arabia , although others maintain that u.s. economic and security interests require continued and close ties with the saudis .

the bush administration has praised saudi counter - terrorism cooperation , and president bush has praised islam and denounced groups that have "hijacked a great religion. .

the final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the "9 / 11 commission" ) claims that "islamist terrorism" finds inspiration in "a long tradition of extreme intolerance" that flows "through the founders of wahhabism," the muslim brotherhood , and prominent salafi thinkers .

the report further details the education and activities of some 9 / 11 hijackers in the al qassim province of saudi arabia , which the report describes as "the very heart of the strict wahhabi movement in saudi arabia. .

according to the commission , some saudi "wahhabi - funded organizations," such as the now - defunct al haramain islamic foundation , "have been exploited by extremists to further their goal of violent jihad against non - muslims. .

due in part to these findings , the commission recommended a frank discussion of the relationship between the united states and its "problematic ally," saudi arabia .

wahhabism has been a focus of congressional hearings , which have examined the relationship between wahhabi religious belief and terrorist financing , as well as its alleged ties to the spread of intolerance .

several bills in the 108 th congress criticized saudi - funded religious institutions and alleged that they provide ideological support for anti - western terrorism .

section 7105 ( b ) of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108 - 458 , december 17 , 2004 ) expressed the sense of congress that "there should be a more robust dialogue between the people and government of the united states and the people and government of saudi arabia. .

section 7120 ( b ) of the act required the president to submit to congress within 180 days a strategy for collaboration with saudi arabia , which was to include proposals for promoting tolerance and diversity in saudi arabia and for diminishing support for extremist groups from saudi sources .

the report was submitted in classified form in september 2005 .

in the 110 th congress , p.l .

110 - 53 , the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( signed august 3 , 2007 ) , states that "the kingdom of saudi arabia has an uneven record in the fight against terrorism , especially with respect to... support for radical madrassas... and restrictions on religious pluralism. .

the bill requires the administration to submit a report to congress 180 days following enactment describing the long - term strategy of the united states to engage with the government of saudi arabia to facilitate political , economic , and social reforms , including greater religious freedom .

house and senate versions of the saudi arabia accountability act of 2007 ( h.r .

2976 and s. 2243 ) contain findings related to extremism and incitement .

s. 2243 specifically would require the president to certify whether the government of saudi arabia "has stopped financing and disseminating materials , and other forms of support , that encourage the spread of radical wahhabi ideology. .

both bills have been referred to committees of jurisdiction .

