the conservation reserve program ( crp ) is the federal government's largest land retirement program for private land .

the program just celebrated its 25 th year of operation .

it was first enacted by congress in 1985 to help control soil erosion , stabilize land prices , and control excessive agricultural production .

since then , program purposes have been expanded to include environmental goals .

the program is administered by usda's farm services agency ( fsa ) , with technical assistance from usda's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) and funding from usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

the fsa makes annual rental payments based on the agriculture rental value of the land , and provides cost - share assistance for up to 50% of the participant's costs in establishing various approved conservation practices .

there are also one - time sign - up bonuses and incentives for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers , new and beginning famers and ranchers , and limited - resource farmers and ranchers .

participants enroll in crp contracts for 10 to 15 years .

participants bid to retire land from production for 10-15 years .

contracts are awarded by fsa based on their assessment of the land's environmental value using an environmental benefits index ( ebi ) .

if the land is accepted , the landowner may enroll the land , receive annual rental payments for it , and maintain the land under an approved conservation plan .

after a crp contract expires , federal payments cease .

if the land in question is "highly erodible" ( about 75% of the land enrolled in the crp meets this definition ) and participants decide to return the land to production , they must manage this land under a nrcs - approved conservation system to be eligible for some federal farm programs ( including commodity payments ) .

there are two types of sign - ups for enrolling land in the crp: general and continuous .

as of march 2011 , there were 748,858 crp contracts nationally on 415,311 farms ( nearly 20% of all farms ) under all crp programs .

these data compare to 788,118 crp contracts on 443,615 farms in september 2007 .

contracts under continuous sign - ups now exceed the number of contracts under general sign - ups ( 410,301 versus 338,557 ) .

acreage under continuous sign - ups currently exceeds 5 million acres nationally .

land eligible for crp enrollment must be either ( 1 ) cropland that is planted or considered planted to an agricultural commodity in four of the previous six crop years from 1996 to 2001 , or ( 2 ) certain marginal pastureland that is enrolled in the water bank program or suitable for use as a riparian buffer or for similar water quality purposes .

the 2008 farm bill modified the land eligibility requirements so that alfalfa and other multi - year grasses and legumes are to be considered agricultural commodities when grown in a rotation practice approved by fsa .

the farm bill also clarified that when alfalfa is grown in an approved rotation practice , it is to be considered an agricultural commodity and can be used to fulfill the requirement that land be cropped in four of six previous years in order to be eligible .

acres enrolled in crep , continuous enrollments , or the farmable wetlands program are generally eligible for higher payments than acres enrolled under general sign - ups because of their higher environmental benefits , location and prevailing rental rates , and additional financial incentives for participation .

however , such contracts involve much smaller acreage on average .

crep payments average over $129 per acre and $113 for the fwp , versus an average per - acre payment of approximately $46 for the general sign - up acreage .

fsa estimates approximately $1.85 billion in projected outlays for crp payments under all programs in fy2011 .

this is about the same as for fy2010 .

this projected total includes funding for rental payments , cost - share payments , and incentive payments .

the congressional budget office had estimated that crp contract obligations would cost approximately $2.4 billion annually through 2017 .

this was before the reduction in acreage to 32 million acres .

nrcs estimated that , prior to 2003 , monetized crp benefits ( such as increased wildlife habitat and small game hunting ) averaged about $1.4 billion per year .

this figure does not include non - monetized benefits such as improved groundwater quality and wetland restoration .

the average rental rate for all crp land was slightly over $55 per acre as of march 2011 .

rental rates range from an average of nearly $46 for general sign - up acreage to nearly $130 for crep acreage .

crp rental rates are based on the three - year average of local dry - land cash rental rates .

an up - front signing incentive payment ( sip ) of $100 to $150 per acre ( depending on contract length ) is available for eligible participants who enroll certain practices .

the one - time sip is made after a contract is approved and all payment eligibility criteria have been met .

a practice incentive payment ( pip ) equal to 40% of the eligible installation costs is also available for eligible participants who enroll certain practices on their acreage .

rental rates for crp contracts became an important issue to some producers when commodity prices rose in 2008 .

the same issue is appearing again in 2011 with high commodity prices .

the producers claim that crp rental rates are significantly lower than the producers could get by renting their land out for production .

in 2008 , many producers pressured usda for penalty - free contract terminations .

similar pressures on usda are again appearing in 2011 .

if rental rates are too low , there is some chance that producers will decline to enroll their land , or , if enrolled , will decline to renew their contracts at expiration .

putting crp acreage back into production could have significant environmental effects .

although land put back into production would have to be managed under an environmental plan to be eligible for various agricultural assistance programs , there could still be an environmental cost in terms of increased sediment losses and nitrogen and phosphorus run - off if fragile land were put back into production .

the decline in commodity prices from their 2008 highs reduced the pressures on producers to terminate their contracts .

the 2008 farm bill ( section 2110 ) directs usda to conduct an annual survey of per - acre estimates of the average market dry land and irrigated land cash rental rates and to post these rates on a publicly accessible usda website .

a 2011 study by ers modeled the effect on crp of increasing commodity prices , including one pricing scenario that examined the effects on crp of 15 billion gallons of crop - based biofuels production .

using national resources inventory data to simulate offers under general sign - ups , the study suggested that maintaining crp under its current configuration could lead to significant expenditure increases for the program .

when constraints were placed on increasing rental rates , the study suggested that enrollment goals could be met with moderate increases in the crp rental rates .

the latter scenario might mean that enrollment goals could be met , but at the cost of applying a lower ebi , as producers with profitable , but environmentally sensitive , acreage choose not to enroll .

under current law , a producer wishing to terminate a contract early faces a penalty fee of 25% on rental payments paid , plus repayment , with interest , of all the funds already paid to the producer .

this includes any cost - share payments .

crp rental payments are regarded by the internal revenue service ( irs ) as income from the business of farming .

as such , they are subject to self - employment social security taxes .

producers , however , would like to treat crp payments as rental income not subject to the self - employment tax of 15.3% .

the irs position was supported by the sixth circuit court in march 2000 in wuebker v. commissioner , 205 f.3d897 .

in december 2006 , the irs issued notice 2006-108 reinforcing its position that crp payments are subject to self - employment taxes .

section 15301 of the 2008 farm bill exempts crp payments from self - employment taxes for disabled and retired contract holders after december 31 , 2007 .

retiring land in rural , largely agricultural economies could result in fewer farmers and fewer farming - related jobs in these areas .

a usda report found that , although high crp enrollment was associated with some job loss in rural areas between 1986 and 1992 — the years the crp was first underway — this was generally not the case during the 1990s .

however , the report noted that national trends could mask regional adjustments , and that "local economic adjustments might be sizeable. .

losing existing crp acreage or halting new enrollments may also have effects on local economies where hunting and fishing are important economic activities .

by statute , crp enrollment is capped at 25% of a county's cropland .

according to fsa , approximately 130 counties have at least 22.5% enrolled as of 2009 , although this can include counties with very small total acreage of cropland .

of these 130 counties , 80 have at least 25% enrolled .

the farm bill exempts crep and continuous sign - up acreage from the 25% county cap .

some groups believe that retiring land from productive agricultural use is detrimental .

in comments on the seis noted above , the president of the national grain and feed association argued that crp has substantial negative economic impacts on agricultural production and rural communities: if u.s. agriculture is to achieve economic growth , which in turn contributes to job creation and revitalization of rural communities , it is imperative that the crp be right - sized and reformed .

the idling of productive land resources cuts off the economic multiplier inherent in crop , livestock and poultry production , thereby costing jobs and suffocating economic vitality in rural communities .

further , it risks compromising the united states' ability to provide abundant , affordable and cost - competitive food , animal feed , exports and biofuels .

twenty - five years ago , when crp was introduced , soil erosion exceeded more than 3 billion tons per year , wetlands were being drained , water quality was deteriorating , and wildlife populations were under stress due to the loss of habitat .

crp contributed important solutions for each of these environmental problems , provided natural habitats for wildlife , restored more than 2 million acres of wetlands , and removed millions of tons of carbon dioxide from the air .

fsa estimates that , compared with 1982 erosion rates , the crp has reduced erosion by more than 454 million tons per year on the 34.6 million acres enrolled in the program in 2009 .

since its inception , the program has helped reduce soil erosion by 622 million tons .

through april 2006 , crp had also restored 2 million acres of wetlands and 2.5 million acres of buffers .

other conservation benefits nrcs has documented on these lands include the sequestration of more than 48 million metric tons of carbon annually ; more than 3.2 million acres of wildlife habitat established ; and a reduction in the application of nitrogen ( by 681,000 tons ) and phosphorus ( by 104,000 tons ) .

also , participants have planted nearly 3 million acres of trees , making it the largest federal tree - planting program in history .

