this report provides background and analysis on the politics of iraq , including its communities , its governing personalities and factions , security forces and militias , and the government's human rights record .

the report does not provide a detailed analysis of the u.s. - led campaign to defeat islamic state forces in iraq .

for analysis on that issue , see crs report r43612 , the islamic state and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

the territory that is now iraq fell under the rule of the ottoman empire in the 16 th century , divided into three provinces: mosul province , baghdad province , and basra province .

ottoman rule lasted until world war i , in which that empire was defeated and its dominions in the middle east were taken over by the european powers that had defeated the ottomans in the war .

britain took over iraq ( then still called "mesopotamia" ) under a league of nations mandate , but ruled via faysal i , a leader of the hashemite family ( which still rules modern - day jordan ) .

iraq gained independence in 1932 , with faysal as king .

arab nationalist military leaders led by abd al - qarim qasim overthrew the monarchy ( king faysal ii ) in july 1958 , proclaiming a republic .

qasim invited kurdish leader mullah mustafa barzani to return to iraq but , beginning in 1961 , barzani led kurdish forces in a war for autonomy from baghdad , with the ultimate objective of forming a separate kurdish state .

separately , the ba'th ( "renaissance" ) party organized against qasim and took power briefly in a 1963 coup , but the first ba'thist government was ousted in late 1963 by nationalist military leaders , who ruled until a successful second ba'th takeover in 1968 .

in july 1979 , saddam hussein ousted then - president ahmad hasan al bakr and assumed his position .

saddam hussein came to power in iraq about six months after ayatollah ruhollah khomeini's islamic revolution ousted the u.s. - backed shah in neighboring iran .

saddam apparently perceived iran's revolution as an existential threat with a potential to inspire a shiite - led revolution in iraq , which is about 60% shiite arab , 20% sunni arab , and 18% kurdish .

in september 1980 , saddam attacked iran in a war that bogged down into a rough stalemate until the summer of 1988 , when iraq and iran accepted a ceasefire encapsulated in u.n. security council resolution 598 , adopted a year prior .

in august 1990 , saddam ordered an invasion and occupation of kuwait , which along with the other persian gulf monarchies had underwritten iraq's war effort against iran .

a u.s. - led coalition expelled iraqi forces by the end of march 1991 , and iraq accepted an intrusive u.n. - led inspection regime to dismantle its weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) programs , including a nuclear program that apparently was close to producing enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon .

by the end of the 1990s , the inspection regime broke down over iraqi objections to its intrusiveness and iraq's stated frustrations about a worldwide economic embargo imposed on it after the kuwait invasion .

however , iraq's wmd program , it was later determined in a late 2002 investigation by the international atomic energy agency and the u.n. inspections mission in iraq unmovic ( u.n .

monitoring , verification , and inspection commission authorized by u.n. security council resolution 1284 of december 1999 , superseding resolution 687 of april 1991 ) , had not been revived to any meaningful extent .

a u.s. - led military coalition that included about 250,000 u.s. troops crossed the border from kuwait into iraq on march 19 , 2003 , to oust the regime of saddam hussein and eliminate suspected remaining wmd programs .

after several weeks of combat , the regime of saddam hussein fell on april 9 , 2003 .

during the 2003-2011 presence of u.s. forces , iraq completed a transition from that dictatorship to a plural political system in which varying sects and ideological and political factions compete in elections .

a series of elections began in 2005 , after a one - year occupation period and a subsequent seven - month interim period of iraqi self - governance that gave each community a share of power and prestige to promote cooperation and unity .

still , disputes over the relative claims of each community on power and economic resources permeated almost every issue in iraq and were never fully resolved .

these unresolved differences — muted during the last years of the u.s. military presence — reemerged in mid - 2012 and have since returned iraq to major conflict .

after the fall of saddam hussein , all u.s. economic sanctions against iraq were lifted , removing impediments to u.s. business dealings with iraq .

during 2003-2004 , iraq was removed from the list of state sponsors of terrorism and from the iraq sanctions act ( sections 586-586j of p.l .

101-513 ) , which codified a u.s. trade embargo imposed after iraq's invasion of kuwait , was terminated .

in subsequent years , a series of u.n. security council resolutions removed most remaining "chapter vii" u.n. sanctions against iraq that stemmed from the 1990 invasion of kuwait — opening iraq to receiving arms from any country .

iraq still is required to comply with international proliferation regimes that bar it from reconstituting saddam - era weapons of mass destruction programs , and still pays into a u.n. - run fund to compensate victims of the 1990 kuwait invasion .

the iraq wmd inspections mandate of unmovic and iaea were terminated by resolution 1762 of june 29 , 2007 .

on october 24 , 2012 , iraq signed the "additional protocol" of the nuclear non - proliferation treaty .

the 2005 elections did not resolve the sunnis' grievances over their diminished positions in the power structure , and subsequent events reinforced their political weakness and sense of resentment .

the bombing of a major shiite shrine ( al askari mosque ) in the sunni - dominated city of samarra ( salahuddin province ) in february 2006 set off major sunni - shiite violence that became so serious that many experts , by the end of 2006 , were considering the u.s. mission as failing .

the "iraq study group" concluded that u.s. policy required major change .

in august 2006 , the united states and iraq agreed on "benchmarks" that , if implemented , might achieve political reconciliation .

under section 1314 of a fy2007 supplemental appropriation ( p.l .

110-28 ) , "progress" on 18 political and security benchmarks — as assessed in administration reports due by july 15 , 2007 , and september 15 , 2007 — was required for the united states to provide $1.5 billion in economic support funds ( esf ) to iraq .

in early 2007 , the united states began a "surge" of about 30,000 additional u.s. forces — bringing u.s. troop levels from their 2004-2006 levels of 138,000 to a high of about 170,000 — intended to blunt insurgent momentum and take advantage of growing sunni arab rejection of islamist extremist groups .

as 2008 progressed , citing the achievement of many of the agreed benchmarks and a dramatic drop in sectarian violence , the bush administration asserted that political reconciliation was advancing but that the extent and durability of the reconciliation would depend on further compromises among ethnic groups .

numerous armed groups and the political contributing factors to the post - saddam insurgency and sectarian conflict remained after the u.s. withdrawal in 2011 .

these factors undoubtedly contributed to the successes of the islamic state in iraq in 2014 and the difficulty iraqi forces have had in defeating the islamic state since then .

a fragile power - sharing arrangement among all iraqi factions largely unraveled in 2011-2012 , casting doubt on president obama's assertion , stated at the time of the final u.s. withdrawal , that iraq is now "sovereign , stable , and self - reliant. .

on december 19 , 2011 , the day after the final u.s. withdrawal ( december 18 , 2011 ) — and one week after maliki met with president obama in washington , dc , on december 12 , 2011 — the government announced an arrest warrant against vice president tariq al - hashimi , a major sunni figure , for allegedly ordering his security staff to commit acts of assassination .

he fled to the krg region and then to turkey , where he remains .

maliki's opponents also cited his retaining the three main security portfolios for himself as an indication that he sought to concentrate power .

in an effort to try to restore sunni trust in the maliki government , u.s. officials intervened with various political factions and obtained maliki's agreement to release some baathists prisoners and to give provinces more autonomy ( discussed above ) .

the concessions prompted sunni cor members and ministers to resume their duties .

in march 2012 , all factions tentatively agreed to hold a "national conference" to try to reach a durable political solution , but no such conference was held .

maliki critics subsequently collected signatures from 176 cor deputies to request a no - confidence vote against maliki .

under article 61 of the constitution , signatures of 20% of the 325 cor deputies ( 65 signatures ) are needed to trigger a vote , but then president talabani stated on june 10 , 2012 , that there were an insufficient number of valid signatures to proceed .

the disputes flared again after talabani suffered a stroke on december 18 , 2012 , and left iraq for treatment in germany .

two days later , maliki moved against another sunni leader , finance minister rafi al - issawi , by arresting 10 of his bodyguards .

al issawi took refuge in anbar province with sunni tribal leaders , sparking anti - maliki demonstrations in the sunni cities in several provinces and in sunni districts of baghdad .

demonstrators demanded the release of prisoners ; repeal of antiterrorism laws under which many sunnis are incarcerated ; reform or end to the de - baathification laws ; and improved government services in sunni areas .

any assessment that islamic state gains would be limited to anbar were upended on june 10 , 2014 , when islamic state fighters — apparently assisted by large numbers of its fighters moving into iraq from the syria theater — captured the large city of mosul amid mass surrenders and desertions by the isf .

the group later that month formally changed its name to "the islamic state. .

apparently supported by many iraqi sunni residents , islamic state - led fighters subsequently advanced down the tigris river valley as far as tikrit , east into diyala province , and further in anbar province to within striking distance of baghdad .

the offensive also threatened krg - controlled territory when islamic state forces advanced to within 30 miles of the krg capital of irbil .

the relatively lightly armed kurdish forces withdrew from numerous towns inhabited mostly by christians and other iraqi minorities , particularly the yazidis — a kurdish - speaking people who practice a mix of ancient religions , including zorastrianism , which held sway in iran before the advent of islam .

in response , the pmf and established shiite militias mobilized and provided time for the isf to regroup to some extent .

these developments , coupled with the fact that islamic state fighters faced resistance from any location not dominated by sunni inhabitants , appeared to lessen the threat to baghdad itself .

the defense of baghdad and of irbil was aided by u.s. advisers ( discussed below ) , u.s. - led airstrikes , and by iran's sending of military equipment as well as irgc - qf advisers into iraq .

the state department human rights report for 2014 largely repeated previous years' criticisms of iraq's human rights record , while also analyzing gross violations of human rights committed in iraq by the islamic state .

the report cites a wide range of human rights problems committed by iraqi government security and law enforcement personnel — as well as by krg security institutions — including unlawful killings ; torture and other cruel punishments ; poor conditions in prison facilities ; denial of fair public trials ; arbitrary arrest ; arbitrary interference with privacy and home ; limits on freedoms of speech , assembly , and association due to sectarianism and extremist threats ; lack of protection of stateless persons ; wide - scale governmental corruption ; human trafficking ; and limited exercise of labor rights .

many of these same abuses and deficiencies are alleged in reports by outside groups such as human rights watch .

additional human rights issues have arisen from the reemergence of the shiite militias .

some of these militias reportedly have executed sunnis for alleged collaboration with the islamic state .

the militias have also , in some cases , allegedly prevented sunnis from returning to their homes in towns recaptured from the islamic state .

iraq's neighbors have significant interest in iraq's stability and in defeating the islamic state , but sunni - run governments in the region have been hesitant to work closely with the shiite - dominated government in baghdad .

iraq's instability also has interrupted its efforts to reintegrate into the arab fold after more than 20 years of ostracism following iraq's invasion of kuwait in august 1990 .

that reintegration took a large step forward with the holding of an arab league summit in baghdad during march 27-29 , 2012 , even though only 9 heads of state out of the 22 arab league members attended .

only one of them was a persian gulf state leader ( amir sabah al - ahmad al sabah of kuwait ) .

on may 23-24 , 2012 , iraq hosted nuclear talks between iran and six negotiating powers .

iraq has also begun to assist other arab states , for example by assisting post - qadhafi authorities in libya to destroy chemical weapons stockpiles from the qadhafi regime .

iran is the chief regional supporter and ally of the baghdad government and its influence in iraq has increased steadily since the fall of saddam hussein .

iran's leverage over baghdad has increased further since mid - 2014 as a result of tehran's military assistance to the iraqi government against the islamic state .

iran has reportedly sent as many as 1,000 advisers from the irgc - qf to help the isf and to re - activate , re - arm , and train some iraqi shiite militia forces discussed above .

iran also has provided to baghdad substantial quantities of military equipment including a reported five to seven su - 25 combat aircraft ; flown drone surveillance flights over iraq ; and conducted at least one airstrike ( december 2014 ) against islamic state forces that were within about 40 miles of iran's border .

the aircraft iran has provided to iraq might have been from among 100+ combat aircraft that iraq flew to iran at the beginning of the 1991 war against the united states and which iran integrated into its own air force .

 ( iran had not previously returned the jets , asserting that they represented "reparations" for saddam's invasion of iran in 1980. ) .

krg leaders have also praised tehran for delivering military equipment to the peshmerga almost immediately after the islamic state's major offensive in northern iraq began in mid - 2014 .

iran's military assistance to iraq furthers the overall u.s. objective in iraq of countering the islamic state , but senior u.s. officials say there is no formal u.s. coordination with iran in iraq .

by many accounts , iran cooperated with u.s. efforts to achieve a replacement for maliki as prime minister .

the united states is supporting anti - islamic state operations by only those shiite pmf that are associated with the isf , and not those directed by iran .

iran has also apparently viewed iraq as an avenue for reducing the effects of international sanctions .

in july 2012 , the treasury department imposed sanctions on the elaf islamic bank of iraq for allegedly conducting financial transactions with the iranian banking system in violation of the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2010 ( cisada , p.l .

111-195 ) .

those sanctions were lifted in may 2013 when elaf ended its business with iran .

the iraqi government treatment of the population of camp liberty , in which about 2,000 iranian oppositionists ( people's mojahedin organization of iran , pmoi ) remain , is another indicator of the government's close ties to iran .

the residents of the camps accuse the iraqi government and some shiite militias of periodic attacks on the camp .

as noted above , the mukhtar army claimed responsibility for the late october 2015 attack on camp liberty , which killed 23 pmoi residents .

this issue is discussed in crs report rl32048 , iran: politics , gulf security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

iran has periodically acted against other iranian opposition groups based in iraq , including the free life party ( pjak ) that consists of iranian kurds and is allied with the kurdistan workers' party that opposes the government of turkey .

iran has shelled purported camps of the group on several occasions .

iran is also reportedly attempting to pressure the bases and offices in iraq of such iranian kurdish parties as the kurdistan democratic party of iran ( kdp - i ) and komaleh .

the close iran - iraq relationship today contrasts sharply with the 1980-1988 iran - iraq war , in which an estimated 300,000 iraqi military personnel ( shiite and sunni ) died .

still , iraq's shiite clerics resist iranian interference and take pride in najaf as a more prominent center of shiite theology than the iranian holy city of qom .

one of the major disagreements between the united states and the government of iraq has been on syria , in which iraqi leaders see president bashar al assad as an ally .

 ( assad's alawite community practices a religion that is an offshoot of shiism. ) .

in august 2015 , iraq joined with iran , syria , and russia to form an intelligence fusion cell to cooperate against the islamic state .

the administration interpreted that arrangement as intended to assist assad and to provide russia with inroads into anti - islamic state activities in iraq .

administration officials , including chairman of the joint chiefs of staff joseph dunford in a visit to iraq in october 2015 , warned iraq that allowing russia a military role in iraq would jeopardize u.s. support .

at the same time , perhaps following iran's lead , iraq is publicly supporting a 2015 multilateral agreements on a transition of power in syria , although that agreement does not specifically stipulate that assad will leave office .

an issue that divided iraq and the united states in 2012-2014 was iraq's reported permission for iranian arms supplies to overfly iraq en route to syria .

iraq searched a few of these flights , particularly after specific high - level u.s. requests to do so , but routinely allowed the aircraft to proceed after finding no arms aboard , sometimes because the iranian aircraft had already dropped off their cargo in syria .

following a march 24 , 2013 , visit of secretary of state kerry to baghdad , the united states agreed to provide iraq with information on the likely contents of the iranian flights , and the overflights decreased in frequency .

separately from isf operations , the krg has trained some syrian kurdish militia forces to secure an autonomous kurdish area if assad loses control and sent about 200 peshmerga to assist syrian kurdish forces ( ypg , a successor to the kurdistan workers' party , pkk ) in the successful defense of the town of kobane in 2014-2015 .

turkey's policy toward iraq has historically focused almost exclusively on the iraqi kurdish insistence on autonomy and possible push for independence .

turkey has always expressed concern that iraqi kurdish independence could embolden kurdish oppositionists in turkey .

the anti - turkey kurdistan workers' party ( pkk ) has long maintained camps inside iraq , along the border with turkey .

during the 1990s and 2000s , and again since late 2015 , turkey has conducted periodic cross - border military operations against the group's camps in iraq .

however , the pkk issue has not prevented turkey from building a pragmatic and positive relationship with the krg and becoming the largest outside investor in northern iraq .

turkey did not openly oppose the krg's seizure of kirkuk in june 2014 , even though the capture would presumably help a krg independence drive .

turkey's positive relations with the krg have complicated relations between turkey and the iraqi government .

in august 2012 , then turkish foreign minister ( now prime minister ) ahmet davotoglu visited the disputed city of kirkuk , prompting iraq's foreign ministry to criticize the visit as an inappropriate interference in iraqi affairs .

in an effort to improve relations with baghdad , davotoglu visited najaf and karbala in november 2013 — iraqi cities holy to shiites — apparently to signal turkish sectarian evenhandedness .

still , turkey's permission as of mid - 2015 for the krg to sell oil without coordinating the sales with baghdad remains an irritant in iraq - turkey relations .

and , the relationship was strained in november - december 2015 when turkey added trainers to its contingent in the krg area , near mosul , prompting abbadi to insist that the extra forces withdraw .

the sunni - led arab states of the persian gulf ( gulf cooperation council , gcc: saudi arabia , kuwait , uae , qatar , bahrain , and oman ) have consistently criticized iraq's domination by shiite factions and the government's widely reported discrimination against sunni iraqis .

iraq - gcc relations worsened during 2012-2014 as the maliki government marginalized key iraqi sunni leaders as discussed above .

the gcc states have joined the u.s. - led coalition against the islamic state , but have to date limited their airstrikes to syria , not iraq , apparently not wanting to directly materially support the shiite - dominated government in baghdad .

saudi arabia had been widely criticized by iraqi leaders for delaying opening an embassy in baghdad , a move saudi arabia pledged in 2008 .

this issue faded somewhat after february 2012 , when saudi arabia announced that it had named its ambassador to jordan , fahd al - zaid , to serve as a nonresident ambassador to iraq concurrently — although still not opening an embassy in baghdad .

on september 15 , 2014 , saudi arabia announced that it would open an embassy in baghdad and , during the visit of prime minister abbadi to washington , dc , in mid - april 2015 , saudi arabia named a resident ambassador to iraq .

the appointment coincided with comments by abbadi during his u.s. visit that were critical of saudi intervention against zaidi shiite houthi rebels in yemen .

using language similar to that used by iran , abbadi said "there is no logic to the [saudi] operation [in yemen] at all in the first place. .

saudi arabia formally opened its embassy in baghdad in december 2015 with thamer al - sabhan as ambassador .

however , some of sabhan's comments since taking up his post — such as direct criticism in january 2016 that iraqi pmf are stoking sectarian tensions — have caused diplomatic friction between the two countries .

and , iraq generally supported iran's strident criticism of the saudi execution of a dissident shiite cleric in january 2016 .

the other gulf countries maintain embassies in iraq .

iraq's relationship with kuwait is always fraught with sensitivity because of the legacy of the 1990 iraqi invasion .

however , the two countries have built a close relationship as kuwait has been the most accepting of iraq's government among the gcc states .

amir sabah of kuwait was the only gulf head of state to attend the march 27-29 , 2012 , arab league summit in baghdad ; the other gulf states sent low - level delegations .

these issues are discussed in detail in crs report rs21513 , kuwait: governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

