airships and aerostats have been used historically for military surveillance and anti - submarine warfare .

unlike fixed - wing aircraft or helicopters , aerostats and airships are "lighter - than - air ( lta ) " ; typically using helium to stay aloft .

airships are traditionally manned , and use engines to fly .

aerostats are tethered to the ground , by a cable that also provides power .

as many as 32 companies are involved in the design or manufacture of more than 100 commercially available airships and aerostats in europe , asia , and north america .

the navy disbanded its last airship unit in 1962 , and since then , military use of lighter - than - air platforms has been limited to air force custodianship of a dozen aerostats .

however , a number of developments have combined to draw increased attention toward lta platforms .

first , u.s. aerospace dominance in military conflicts since 1991 has been overwhelming , making threats to lta platforms appear to be very low by historical standards .

second , the military's demand for "persistent surveillance," a function for which aerostats appear to be well suited , is growing .

network - centric warfare approaches , increased emphasis on homeland security , and growing force protection demands in urban environments all call for "dominant battlespace awareness. .

third , dod's growing orientation toward expeditionary operations has spawned studies on using airships as heavy lift vehicles .

fourth , growing budget pressures have encouraged the study of potential solutions to military problems that may reduce both procurement and operations and maintenance spending .

lta platforms may fit into this category .

finally , recent advances in unmanned aerial vehicles suggests that future airships may also be remotely piloted , or fly autonomously .

generally at issue is whether the operational need for airships and aerostats , and their ability to satisfy this need , outweigh the costs of developing and fielding them .

the debate is perhaps most effectively engaged by dividing lighter - than - air platforms into three distinct categories: aerostats , high - altitude airships , heavy lift airships .

the operational need for aerostats and their ability to satisfy this need appears the most mature of the three distinct lighter - than - air platforms .

these systems are currently fielded and their capabilities and limitations appear well - documented .

the role that they appear most suited for is persistent surveillance .

aerostats' primary advantages over other platforms capable of providing elevated , persistent surveillance ( manned aircraft and uavs ) appear to be low life cycle cost and long dwell time .

the primary operational concerns with employing aerostats appear to be vulnerability to weather and enemy ground fire .

u.s. and foreign aerostats have been lost to severe weather , as have manned aircraft and uavs .

aerostats tend not to fail in benign weather , however , while aircraft and uavs , which are more complex and dynamic systems , suffer accidents caused by factors such as human error and mechanical failure .

the vulnerability of aerostats to enemy ground fire is debated .

opponents argue that aerostats are big targets within range of many enemy weapons .

proponents argue that despite their large size , aerostats are survivable because of a low radar cross section and their ability to endure numerous punctures before gradually losing altitude .

low flying aircraft and uavs are also vulnerable to enemy ground fire .

for land - based applications , technology issues related to surveillance aerostats appear to pertain more to networking and exploiting their sensors than to the balloon itself .

one non - traditional aerostat application that may warrant study is replacing , or augmenting , navy e - 2c hawkeye surveillance aircraft with aerostats .

replacing a carrier air wing's 3-4 e - 2cs with a single or pair of aerostats could potentially improve surveillance by providing 24-hour coverage of the battle group , and could increase the wing's striking power by making room on the carrier for 6-8 more fighter aircraft .

the operational need and utility of haas is less well understood than it is for aerostats .

dod , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and other agencies are likely to need considerable time and study to determine exactly what these platforms can do , how they might be exploited , and whether these concepts offer new capabilities .

long - range aerial surveillance , communications relay , internet services relay , and laser weapon relay for missile defense , and forest fire warning are just some of the roles that haa advocates would like examined .

the haa's potential operational environment and long endurance goals present technological challenges for haas that appear much greater than those experienced by aerostats .

because the atmosphere is very thin at 70,000 feet , it will require a very large volume of helium to sustain even modest payloads .

it is estimated that the haa actd's goal of a 500 lb payload will require an airship over 500 feet long and capable of holding over 5 million cubic feet of helium .

this airship would be the largest of its kind attempted in the last 60 years .

this payload constraint is likely to be a limiting factor for military applications .

some hope , for example , that haa's could deploy very large sensor arrays that could use low frequency radar to detect small targets , like cruise missiles .

however , large radars tend to be heavy .

the radar that was being developed for the air force's now cancelled e - 10a surveillance aircraft , for example , weighs 11,000 lbs .

while producing 500 foot long airships is achievable , their handling characteristics may be challenging .

operating at high altitudes may be an "atmospheric sweet spot" for these large aerostats , but they still must successfully ascend and descend through relatively stormy altitudes .

operating these large airships for months or even years at a time may also prove a technological challenge .

many potential power sources , such as microwaves , are in their infancy , and weight and longevity will be at a premium .

equipment will have to be light , and energy efficient .

further , all systems on an haa will require uncommon levels of reliability if they are to operate for months or years at a time with no maintenance .

this high level of reliability will likely come at increased cost .

a final issue pertains to schedule .

mda hopes to field a prototype by 2006 have already slipped to 2010 , confirming the belief of many that this program's schedule is too aggressive .

in february 2006 , the air force scientific advisory board also cast doubt on this schedule when it reported that long - endurance , fixed wing uavs offer more promise than lighter - than - air vehicles in conducting surveillance from near - space altitudes .

the republic of korea initiated a haa program that spans 10 years of research and development .

considering this experience , has dod established realistic timelines , milestones and budgets to solve technological challenges , mitigate risk , and field a useful haa platform ? .

alternatively , has mda established partnerships or other relationships with researchers in korea and japan which have been working on haa concepts for over six years ? .

heavy lift airships may raise some questions regarding need and feasibility .

heavy lift airship advocates believe that these platforms can fill a void between sea lift ships that carry very large payloads slowly , and aircraft , which carry smaller loads quickly .

skeptics may argue that there may not be a void to be filled by airships , because the "transport momentum" ( payload x speed x annual utilization ) of both sealift ships and airlift aircraft are very effective , and these transport media complement each other well .

another claim by advocates that might invite study , is that heavy lift airships would require much less infrastructure than airlift aircraft .

this may be true for conventional airships , which don't need long runways , and can moor to simple and inexpensive structures .

because hybrid airships use aerodynamic lift , however , they will take - off and land much like conventional aircraft .

some estimate that 1,000 ton - class hybrid aircraft will require 5,000 foot - long runways .

along with loading , offloading equipment and facilities , these runways appear to constitute infrastructures like those required by conventional aircraft .

an attendant issue for hybrid airships is one of safety .

what happens when a 1,000 ton semi - rigid airship has an engine failure during takeoff ? .

while the take off speed may not be great , the inertial forces of such a mass would be prodigious .

when a conventional aircraft suffers from a mishap , it is towed from the runway and flight operations resume .

it appears unlikely that a disabled 1,000 ton airship could be moved quickly , and the airstrip could be blocked indefinitely .

another issue that must be studied is how compatible 1,000 ton airships would be with dod's distributed and "just in time" logistical concepts .

delivering a brigade - sized payload directly to a theater of conflict sounds attractive from a conventional wisdom point of view .

but , large payloads take longer to consolidate , load , and unload than smaller payloads , and the their delivery must be tightly scheduled .

also , dod operates on an all weather , day or night , 24 / 7 timetable .

airships will be more vulnerable to the effects of weather than are conventional aircraft .

how severe , or how manageable is this shortcoming ? .

how will an airship capable of lifting 1,000 tons of payload return to the united states once its cargo is offloaded ? .

would it require a very large ballast or a means of suppressing its buoyancy to be able to fly home ? .

vulnerability to attacks is another issue that may warrant study .

airships would fly at an altitude within reach of many surface - to - air weapons .

lta proponents say that airships have a small radar cross section and degrade gracefully if hit .

this may be true for the balloon , but a brigade - worth of equipment would have a large radar cross section .

also , while the united states is relatively unchallenged in air - to - air combat , a 1,000 ton airship with a brigade - worth of equipment could constitute a very "high value" target for enemy aircraft .

it is likely that dod would find it prudent to protect these airships with fighters .

how many fighters would be required and what would be the costs ? .

a final issue that pertains to all of the lta concepts addressed above is cost and budget .

the life cycle costs for many unmanned lta concepts could be notably less than manned aircraft , and satellites , and potentially uavs .

but can dod find room in its budget for another procurement program ? .

according to some , "a perennial issue in defense policy is whether future defense budgets will be large enough to finance all the weapon acquisition programs that are in the pipeline. .

this budget pressure , coupled with competition from a well established constituency for conventional aircraft , represent challenges to fielding lta programs .

