oman is located along the arabian sea , on the southern approaches to the strait of hormuz , across from iran .

except for a brief period of persian rule , omanis have remained independent since expelling the portuguese in 1650 .

the al said monarchy began in 1744 , extending omani influence into zanzibar and other parts of east africa until 1861 .

sultan qaboos bin sa'id al said , born in november 1940 , is the eighth in the line of the monarchy ; he became sultan in july 1970 when , with british support , he forced his father , sultan said bin taymur al said , to abdicate .

the united states has had relations with oman from the early days since american independence .

the u.s. merchant ship ramber made a port visit to muscat in september 1790 .

the united states signed a treaty of amity and commerce with oman in 1833 , one of the first of its kind with an arab state .

this treaty was replaced by the treaty of amity , economic relations , and consular rights signed at salalah on december 20 , 1958 .

oman sent an official envoy to the united states in 1840 .

a u.s. consulate was maintained in muscat during 1880-1915 , a u.s. embassy was opened in 1972 , and the first resident u.s .

ambassador arrived in july 1974 .

oman opened its embassy in washington , dc , in 1973 .

sultan qaboos was accorded formal state visits in 1974 , by president gerald ford , and in 1983 , by president ronald reagan .

president bill clinton visited oman in march 2000 .

career diplomat marc sievers has been ambassador to oman since late 2015 .

oman remains a monarchy in which decisionmaking still is concentrated with sultan qaboos .

throughout his reign , qaboos has also formally held the position of prime minister , as well as the positions of foreign minister , defense minister , finance minister , and central bank governor .

other officials serve as "ministers of state" for those portfolios and serve de - facto as ministers .

qaboos's government , and omani society , reflects the diverse backgrounds of the omani population , many of whom have long - standing family connections to parts of east africa that oman once controlled , and to the indian subcontinent .

some senior omanis argue that a formal position of prime minister is needed to organize the functions of the government and enable the sultan to focus on larger strategic decisions .

should such a post be established , potential candidates include the deputy prime minister for cabinet affairs , fahd bin mahmud al said ( who omanis already widely refer to as "prime minister" ) ; the secretary general of the foreign ministry , sayyid badr bin hamad albusaidi ; salim bin nasir al - ismaily , a businessman and economic adviser to the sultan who reportedly brokered 2013 u.s. - iran meetings ; and royal office head general sultan bin mohammad al - naamani .

along with political reform issues , the question of succession has long been central to observers of oman .

qaboos's brief marriage in the 1970s produced no children , and the sultan , who was born in november 1940 , has no heir apparent .

according to omani officials , succession would be decided by a "ruling family council" of his relatively small al said family ( about 50 male members ) .

if the family council cannot reach agreement within three days , it is to select the successor recommended by qaboos in a sealed letter to be opened upon his death ; there are no confirmed accounts of whom qaboos has recommended .

the succession issue has come to the fore since he underwent cancer treatment in germany during 2014-15 .

since returning to oman , he has appeared in public only on major occasions or to meet visiting foreign leaders .

potential successors .

the leading contenders to succeed qaboos include three brothers who are cousins of the sultan and whose sister was the woman who was briefly married to qaboos .

they are minister of heritage and culture sayyid haythim bin tariq al said , whom some assess indecisive ; asad bin tariq al said , a former military officer who has the title "representative of the sultan" and was appointed deputy prime minister for international relations and cooperation affairs in early 2017 ; and shihab bin tariq al said , the former commander of oman's navy .

all are in their 60s .

another potential choice is fahd bin mahmud , above .

under sultan qaboos , oman has pursued a foreign policy that sometimes diverges from that of oman's gcc allies saudi arabia and the uae .

oman has generally sought to mediate resolution of regional conflicts and refrain from direct military involvement in them .

oman joined the u.s. - led coalition against the islamic state , but did not conduct any airstrikes against that group .

oman did not join the saudi - led arab coalition fighting the iran - backed houthi forces in yemen and is one of the countries seeking to negotiate a solution to that conflict .

oman did not supply forces to the gcc's "peninsula shield" 2011 deployment to bahrain to help the al khalifa regime counter the uprising there .

oman strongly opposed the saudi - led move in june 2017 to isolate qatar over a number of policy disagreements .

oman's top diplomat yusuf alawi has visited washington , dc , several times , most recently in late july 2018 , in part to work with u.s. officials seeking to resolve the rift .

omani diplomats were hopeful that the annual gcc summit during december 5-6 , 2017 , would make progress on the dispute , but that meeting adjourned on december 5 , 2017 , after only two hours of talks .

qaboos , primarily because of his fragile health , has not attended any of the annual gcc summits since 2013 .

oman opposed a 2012 saudi proposal for political unity among the gcc states as a signal of gcc solidarity against the iran , even threatening to withdraw from the gcc if the plan were adopted .

other gcc leaders are similarly concerned about surrendering any of their sovereignty , and the plan has not been dropped entirely but neither has it advanced .

in 2007 , oman was virtually alone within the gcc in balking at a plan to form a monetary union .

lingering border disputes also have plagued oman - uae relations ; the two finalized their borders in 2008 , nearly a decade after a tentative border settlement in 1999 .

sultan qaboos , who is sandhurst - educated , is respected by his fellow gulf rulers as a defense strategist .

he has long asserted that the united states is the security guarantor of the region .

oman's approximately 43,000-person armed force — collectively called the "sultan of oman's armed forces" — is the third largest of the gcc states and widely considered one of the best trained .

however , in large part because of oman's limited funds , it is one of the least well equipped of the gcc countries .

oman's annual defense budget is about $9 billion out of government expenditures of about $30 billion .

sultan qaboos has always supported close defense cooperation with the united states .

in the wake of iran's 1979 islamic revolution , oman signed a "facilities access agreement" that allows u.s. forces access to omani military facilities on april 21 , 1980 .

days after the signing , the united states used oman's masirah island air base to launch the failed attempt to rescue the u.s. embassy hostages in iran , although omani officials assert that they were not informed of that operation in advance .

under the agreement , which was last renewed in 2010 , the united states reportedly can use — with advance notice and for specified purposes — oman's military airfields in muscat ( the capital ) , thumrait , masirah island , and musnanah .

some u.s. air force equipment , including lethal munitions , is reportedly stored at these bases .

according to february 2018 testimony of centcom commander general joseph votel , each year omani military forces participate in several exercises , and oman allows 5,000 overflights and 600 landings by u.s. military aircraft and hosts 80 port calls by u.s. naval vessels .

a few hundred u.s. military personnel are stationed in oman , mostly air force .

2019 port access agreement .

on march 24 , 2019 , oman and the united states signed a "strategic framework agreement" that expands the u.s. - oman facilities access agreements by allowing u.s. forces to use the ports of al duqm ( see above ) and salalah .

al duqm , in particular , is large enough to handle u.s. aircraft carriers , and the agreement was seen by the united states as improving the u.s. ability to counter iran in the region .

oman reportedly views the accord as bringing in additional investment to al duqm .

participation in middle east strategic alliance .

omani leaders express willingness to join a u.s. - backed "middle east strategic alliance" of the gcc states and jordan and egypt , envisioned as countering iran .

that coalition was to be formalized at a u.s. - gcc summit planned for spring 2018 but , because of the intra - gcc rift , has been repeatedly postponed .

the intra - gcc rift , as well as yemen , iran , and other issues , was discussed during the january 2019 visit to oman of secretary of state michael pompeo , according to a state department announcement .

on january 9 , 2019 , sultan qaboos hosted meetings on the "economic and energy pillars of the middle east strategic alliance," according to the secretary's readout of his meeting with qaboos on january 15 , 2019 .

oman has shown its support for major u.s. operations in the region by making its facilities available consistently .

oman's facilities contributed to u.s. major combat operations in afghanistan ( operation enduring freedom , oef ) and , to a lesser extent , iraq ( operation iraqi freedom , oif ) .

according to the defense department , during major combat operations of oef ( late 2001 ) there were about 4,300 u.s. personnel in oman , mostly air force , and u.s. b - 1 bombers , indicating that the omani facilities were used extensively for strikes during oef .

the u.s. military presence in oman fell to 3,750 during oif ( which began in march 2003 ) because facilities closer to iraq were used more extensively .

oman did not contribute forces either to oef or oif .

after 2004 , omani facilities were not used for u.s. air operations in afghanistan or iraq .

because of his historic ties to the british military , qaboos early on relied on seconded british officers to command omani military services , and oman bought british weaponry .

over the past two decades , british officers have become mostly advisory and oman has shifted its arsenal mostly to u.s. - made major combat systems .

still , as a signal of the continuing close defense relationship , in april 2016 britain and oman signed a memorandum of understanding to build a base near al duqm port , at a cost of about $110 million , to support the stationing of british naval and other forces in oman on a permanent basis .

oman is in a difficult economic situation .

it ran a budget deficit of $13 billion in 2016 , and about $8 billion in 2017 .

oman has addressed the shortfalls — without drawing down its estimated $24 billion in sovereign wealth reserves — by raising capital internationally .

since the beginning of 2017 , oman has raised over $10 billion by selling government bonds and receiving loans from chinese and other banks .

the government has cut subsidies substantially and has reduced the size of the government .

despite oman's efforts to diversify its economy , oil exports still generate over 70% of government revenues and nearly 50% of its gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

oman has a relatively small 5.5 billion barrels ( maximum estimate ) of proven oil reserves , enough for about 15 years at current production rates .

it exports approximately 820,000 barrels of crude oil per day .

in part because it is a small producer , oman is not a member of the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) .

oman has announced a "vision 2020" strategy to reduce its dependence on the oil and gas sector .

oman has in recent years expanded its liquefied natural gas ( lng ) exports , for which oman has a large market in asia .

oman is part of the "dolphin project," operating since 2007 , under which qatar is exporting natural gas to uae and oman through undersea pipelines , freeing up oman's own natural gas supplies for sale to other customers .

in december 2013 , oman signed a $16 billion agreement for energy major bp to develop oman's natural gas reserves .

oman is trying to attract foreign investment by positioning itself as a trading hub .

the key to that strategy is the $60 billion project — with some investment funding coming from iran , kuwait , china , the united kingdom , and the united states — build up al duqm ( see figure 1 ) as a transportation , energy , and military hub .

oman's plans for the port include a refinery ( $6 billion alone ) , a container port , a dry dock , and other facilities for transportation of petrochemicals .

a planned transit hub would link to the other gcc states by rail and enable them to access the indian ocean directly , bypassing the persian gulf .

china's investments in al duqm are part of its "belt and road initiative" to build a continuous trade link between china and europe .

its $11 billion investment in al duqm is to build the "sino - oman industrial city" there .

the chinese investments in oman help china secure its oil supplies ; oman is china's fourth - largest source of oil .

the united states is oman's fourth - largest trading partner .

in 2018 , the united states exported about $2 billion in goods to oman , and imported about $1.1 billion in goods from it — figures roughly equal to those of 2017 .

the largest u.s. export categories to oman are automobiles , aircraft ( including military ) and related parts , drilling and other oilfield equipment , and other machinery .

of the imports , the largest product categories are fertilizers , industrial supplies , and oil by - products such as plastics .

in part because of expanded u.s. oil production , the united states imports almost no omani oil .

oman was admitted to the wto in september 2000 .

the u.s. - oman free trade agreement was signed on january 19 , 2006 , and ratified by congress ( p.l .

109-283 , signed september 26 , 2006 ) .

according to the u.s. embassy in muscat , the fta has led to increased partnerships between omani and u.s. companies .

general cables and dura - line middle east are two successful examples of joint ventures between american and omani firms .

these ventures are not focused on hydrocarbons , suggesting the u.s. - oman trade relationship is not focused only on oil .

the united states phased out development assistance to oman in 1996 .

at the height of that development assistance program in the 1980s , the united states was giving oman about $15 million per year in economic support funds ( esf ) for conservation and management of omani fisheries and water resources .

on january 23 , 2016 , the united states and oman signed an agreement on cooperation in science and technology .

the agreement paves the way for exchanges of scientists , joint workshops , and u.s. training of omani personnel in those fields .

