slightly smaller than nevada , ecuador has a population of 13.8 million people .

since independence from spain in 1830 , ecuador has lost 61% of its total land area as a result of border conflicts with brazil , colombia , and peru .

despite its small size , ecuador's location on the pacific coast between two major drug - producing countries ( colombia and peru ) increases its strategic importance to the united states .

ecuador is both geographically and ethnically diverse , and has a relatively long , albeit unstable , experience with democratic rule .

some 40% of ecuadorians live in poverty and another 13% live in extreme poverty .

in the past decade , ecuador has weathered a number of political and economic crises .

the three popularly elected presidents preceding rafael correa did not complete their terms .

in 1997 , abdala bucaram was removed from office after being declared mentally unfit by the legislature and allegedly misappropriating $90 million in public funds .

in 2000 , jamil mahuad was ousted by a coup after a prolonged economic crisis led by a junta that included then - army colonel lucio gutierrez .

in april 2005 , lucio gutierrez was removed from office by ecuador's congress after weeks of popular protests .

ecuadorians rejected gutierrez's attempt to replace judges on the country's three highest courts with his political allies , a move that was also sharply criticized by the international community .

he was replaced by his vice president , alfredo palacio .

there are historical antecedents for the instability that has recently plagued ecuadorian democracy .

since 1830 , regionalism and personalism have defined ecuadorian political culture .

quito , the colonial capital , and guayaquil , the industrial port , have battled for urban dominance .

superimposed against this regional divide are the ethnic and class divisions that have encouraged political parties to develop as electoral machines for competing segments of the elite .

following the return to democracy in 1979 , party splits , bureaucratic ineptitude , and corruption proliferated .

as the economic situation has deteriorated since the 1980s , voters have reacted by blaming incumbents for their troubles and by periodically backing populist , anti - party candidates ( similar to correa ) .

this trend has led to the inability of presidents to complete their terms , as well as inconsistent economic policies from one administration to the next .

ecuador has a weak and poorly regulated economy that is overly dependent on a few export commodities ( oil , bananas , and shrimp ) with volatile prices .

in 1998 , el niño rains caused an estimated $2.6 billion worth of crop damage , white spot disease hit the shrimp industry , and oil prices plunged .

as a result , ecuador suffered a disastrous economic crisis in 1999-2000 , the country's worst in more than seventy years .

in late 1999 , then - president jamil mahuad abandoned the country's domestic currency in favor of the u.s. dollar as a last - ditch effort to stop hyperinflation .

dollarization has helped curb inflation in ecuador and restored some macroeconomic stability to the country , but limited the government's ability to conduct an independent monetary policy .

ecuador's dollarization has not been accompanied by much - needed structural reforms to diversify the economy , restrict public spending , and increase productivity and investment .

in 2003 , the gutierrez government attempted to restrict spending , increase taxes , remove subsidies , and promote private investment in the oil sector .

these efforts spawned sustained popular protests .

although the economy grew some 6.3% in 2004 as a result of high oil prices , remittance flows , and a weak u.s. dollar , a lack of fiscal discipline postponed the renewal of a new imf stand - by agreement .

for the last several years , investors have been concerned by the ecuadorian government's lack of fiscal discipline during a time of strong oil revenue growth .

the ecuadorian economy could face serious budget shortfalls in the short to medium term should global oil prices continue to fall .

on january 15 , 2007 , rafael correa , a left - leaning , u.s. - trained economist , began a four - year term as president of ecuador .

correa , an economics professor whose only prior government experience was a four - month stint as alfredo palacio's finance minister , surprised many analysts by finishing second in the first round of presidential voting held in october 2006 .

contrary to many analysts' predictions , correa won the november 2006 run - off election with 57% of the vote against alvaro noboa , a well - known banana magnate , who earned 43% of the vote .

voters appeared to embrace correa's pledge to enact dramatic political reform .

nearly halfway through his term , president correa continues to enjoy high approval ratings .

those ratings have been boosted by his efforts to reform the country's political system , increase social spending , and reassert government control over ecuador's economy and territory .

many ecuadorians approved correa's condemnation of colombia's unauthorized march 2008 raid of a guerrilla camp in ecuador .

they also supported his decision not to renew the u.s. lease on the air force base at manta when it expires in 2009 , a decision which has strained u.s. - ecuadorian relations .

correa's economic policies , though popular among ecuadorians , have concerned foreign investors .

foreign direct investment in ecuador fell from some $271 million in 2006 to roughly $179 million in 2007 .

president correa has recently suggested that , given declining oil revenues , his government may default on part of its roughly $10 billion foreign debt .

ecuador's relations with the united states have traditionally been close , although recent events have strained bilateral relations .

while the united states has concluded free trade agreements ( ftas ) with peru and colombia , negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement with ecuador have been suspended indefinitely in the wake of the dispute with the u.s. firm occidental petroleum .

u.s. officials have expressed concerns about correa's populist tendencies , his ties with hugo chávez of venezuela , and his state - centered economic policies .

some analysts have urged the u.s. government to use pragmatic means to urge president correa to maintain open - market and democratic policies , such as maintaining u.s. trade preferences for ecuador others are more skeptical , questioning why the united states should extend trade benefits for a country that has taken hostile actions against u.s. companies and refused to negotiate an fta .

ecuador , a major transport country for cocaine and heroin , has worked closely with the united states on counter - narcotics efforts in years past , but positions taken by the correa government may not bode well for the future of u.s. - ecuadorian counternarcotics cooperation .

in november 1999 , the united states signed a 10-year agreement with ecuador for the creation of a forward operating location ( fol ) for u.s. aerial counter - drug detection and monitoring operations at manta , an air force base along the pacific coast .

the united states reportedly spent some $60 million to build those fol facilities .

president correa has repeatedly confirmed that his government will not renew the lease on the u.s. air base at manta when it expires in 2009 .

he has opposed involvement in plan colombia , the colombian army's incursions into ecuadorian territory , particularly the march 2008 raid of a farc camp in ecuador , and colombia's aerial fumigation of coca crops along the ecuador - colombia border .

the united states is the largest bilateral donor in ecuador .

principal goals for u.s. assistance to ecuador are bolstering democracy , reducing poverty , protecting the environment , and securing the northern border with colombia .

ecuador received roughly $32 million in u.s. aid in fy2008 , including $9.1 million in counternarcotics assistance .

the fy2009 request for ecuador was for $32.5 million , with $13.4 million in counternarcotics assistance .

an enacted continuing resolution ( p.l .

110-329 ) will provide funding for u.s. aid programs at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 .

the united states is ecuador's main trading partner , with some 45% of ecuadorian exports going to the united states .

machinery and plastics are the leading u.s. exports to ecuador , while oil , bananas , and shrimp account for the bulk of u.s. imports from ecuador .

since joining the world trade organization ( wto ) in 1996 , ecuador has lowered its average tariff rate from 30% to 13% , but a number of nontariff trade barriers impede u.s. access to the ecuadorian market .

since 1992 , ecuador , along with peru , colombia , and bolivia , has been a beneficiary of the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) , which provides trade preferences for andean countries in exchange for counternarcotics cooperation .

although oil continues to dominate ecuador's export market , other goods , such as seafood and cut flowers , have benefitted from the program .

the atpa was reauthorized and expanded by the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( atpdea ) , title xxxi of the trade act of 2002 , ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

atpdea extended the preferential trade program until december 31 , 2006 , and expanded benefits to include certain textiles , petroleum , and pouched tuna .

since that time , congress has favored short - term extensions of atpa .

ecuadorian officials estimate that some $5.6 billion in u.s. trade and 350,000 jobs could be lost without atpa .

while colombia and peru have concluded ftas with the united states , the ecuadorian government opposes completing negotiations for an fta with the united states and is not willing to restart negotiations as a condition to continue receiving u.s. trade preferences .

some members of congress favor continuing atpa benefits regardless of a country's position on ftas , while others oppose extending benefits for bolivia and ecuador .

on october 16 , 2008 , the 110 th congress enacted legislation to extend atpa trade preferences until december 31 , 2009 for colombia and peru , and until june 30 , 2009 for bolivia and ecuador ( p.l .

110-436 ) .

under certain conditions , trade preferences for bolivia and ecuador may be extended for an additional six - month period .

for bolivia , atpa trade preferences will be extended only if the president determines that bolivia has met program eligibility criteria .

in the case of ecuador , atpa trade preferences will be automatically extended unless the president finds that the country is in violation of the eligibility criteria .

