potential issues for congress concerning the coast guard's homeland security operations include , among others , the following: the sufficiency of coast guard funding , assets , and personnel levels for performing both homeland and non - homeland security missions ; the division of the coast guard's budget between homeland security and non - homeland security missions ; whether the coast guard is achieving sufficient interoperability and coordination with other dhs , federal , state , and local authorities involved in the maritime aspects of homeland security , including coordination of operations and coordination and sharing of intelligence ; monitoring compliance with the facility and vessel security plans that the coast guard has reviewed and approved ; how the coast guard assesses security risks to various ports and prioritizes these risks for allocating port - security funding ; completing foreign port security assessments ; implementing a long - range vessel - tracking system required by mtsa ; implementing automatic identification system ( ais ) ; inland waterway security ; and response plans for maritime security incidents .

a december 2006 report from the dhs inspector general on major dhs management challenges stated: to implement the maritime transportation security act of 2002 in a timely and effective manner , uscg must balance the resources devoted to the performance of homeland and non - homeland security missions ; improve the performance of its homeland security missions ; maintain and re - capitalize uscg's deepwater fleet of aircraft , cutters , and small boats ; restore the readiness of small boat stations to perform their search and rescue missions ; and increase the number and quality of resource hours devoted to non - homeland security missions .

for example , while overall resource hours devoted to uscg's homeland security missions grew steadily from fy 2001 through fy 2005 , uscg continues to experience difficulty meeting its performance goals for homeland security missions .

a july 2006 report from the dhs inspector general on coast guard mission performance in fy2005 stated: since fy 2001 , more [coast guard] resource hours have been dedicated to homeland security missions than for non - homeland security missions .

however , after an initial drop in fy 2002 , non - homeland security resource hours have increased every period , and have now returned to within 3% of baseline levels... .

the coast guard has been more successful in meeting goals for its traditional non - homeland security missions , meeting 22 of 28 goals ( 79% ) where measurable goals and results existed , but still leaving room for improved performance .

not including the ports , waterways , and coastal security mission , by far the largest user of resource hours of any coast guard mission , the coast guard achieved only 26% of its homeland security goals ( 5 of 19 ) .... growth in total resource hours has leveled off .

since resource hours are based on the limited and finite number of available assets , the coast guard will be unable to increase total resource hours without the acquisition of additional aircraft , cutters , and boats .

consequently , the coast guard has a limited ability to respond to an extended crisis , and therefore must divert resources normally dedicated to other missions .

to improve performance within their overall constraints , the coast guard must ensure that a comprehensive and fully defined performance management system is implemented , and that experienced and trained personnel are available to satisfy increased workload demands .

in march 2005 , the government accountability office ( gao ) testified that: the maritime transportation security act of 2002 charged the coast guard with many maritime homeland security responsibilities , such as assessing port vulnerabilities and ensuring that vessels and port facilities have adequate security plans , and the coast guard has worked hard to meet these requirements .

gao's reviews of these efforts have disclosed some areas for attention as well , such as developing ways to ensure that security plans are carried out with vigilance .

the coast guard has taken steps to deal with some of these areas , but opportunities for improvement remain .

a december 30 , 2007 , press article on a prototype port security system in miami called project hawkeye and the ais states in part: a coast guard plan to combat terrorism by creating the maritime equivalent of an air traffic control system in the coastal waters here , a test for a nationwide effort , has fallen far short of expectations .

the coast guard installed long - range surveillance cameras , coastal radar and devices that automatically identify approaching vessels to help search out possible threats .

but the radar , it turns out , confuses waves with boats .

the cameras cover just a sliver of the harbor and coasts .

and only a small fraction of vessels can be identified automatically .

officials acknowledge the limited progress that the department of homeland security and the coast guard have made toward creating a viable defense here in miami or at harbors nationwide against a maritime attack , despite the billions of dollars invested since 2001.... miami was selected to serve as a laboratory for the maritime domain awareness project... .

the surveillance effort in miami , known as project hawkeye , was intended to search out vessels that might present a threat , allowing the coast guard to try to foil an impending attack .

using radar , the coast guard would track boats larger than 25 feet within 12 miles of shore .

smaller vessels—as little as a jet ski—would be tracked with infrared cameras up to five miles offshore .

the surveillance would cover an area from fort lauderdale to the florida keys .

to identify which vessels among the thousands might pose a danger , the coast guard would rely on sophisticated software that would assemble and analyze all this data .

under the plan , coast guard officials would be alerted when boats entered restricted waters , loitered in a vulnerable spot or displayed an unusual course or speed .

the cameras have at times proved helpful , allowing the coast guard to investigate how a ship went aground or to monitor security contractors at the cruise ship terminal , to make sure they are doing their job , said capt .

liam slein , deputy commander of the miami sector .

but the cameras , it turns out , are not powerful enough or installed widely enough to track small boats approaching the many inlets in the miami area .

the radar system is so unreliable—mistaking waves for boats , splitting large ships in two or becoming confused by rain—coast guard staff personnel have been told not to waste much time looking at it .

and technology the coast guard has required for large ships and wants installed on commercial fishing vessels , devices that automatically identify an approaching ship's name , location and course , has also provoked concerns .

the automated identification system , as it is known , was first developed as a collision avoidance measure , not a security system , and was not made tamperproof .

a captain or crew wanting to hide or disguise their location could simply turn the system off , or enter data that transmitted false information about the vessel's whereabouts and identity... .

most critically , the software system intended to make sense of all the collected data has not yet been installed in miami .

that means that very little of what the cameras are filming or the radar is tracking is ever used or even watched .

the data is of such limited value that at least for now , the coast guard has assigned only volunteers to deal with it.... a surveillance system similar to the one in miami is supposed to be installed at as many as 35 ports .

but given the challenges here , and the unwillingness of congress to finance the still - unproven effort , the coast guard has delayed expanding the effort to other ports until at least 2014 .

a march 31 , 2007 , press article about a private - sector vessel tracking system called the automated vessel tracking system states in part: the automated secure vessel tracking system has proven itself to businesses around the world .

it gave real - time information to oil companies as hurricane katrina raged in 2005 , helping them follow oil platforms that had been torn from their moorings .

it has tracked ships in distress far out to sea .

but the system is getting more attention these days because of who isn't using it: the coast guard .

juneau is one of the few coast guard district headquarters that subscribes to the system .

congress ordered the coast guard to begin testing by sunday a system that would track all ships approaching u.s. ports .

the coast guard says a system will be in place , but critics are concerned that it will prove to be insufficient .

the coast guard and maritime transportation act of 2006 says the coast guard , part of the department of homeland security , must begin a three - year pilot program of a system capable of tracking 2,000 ships at once "to aid maritime security and response to maritime emergencies.".. .

some lawmakers are trying to convince the coast guard that the answer already exists in the maritime industry's vessel tracking system... .

the coast guard has been relying primarily on a radio - based tracking system .

its new system is expected to use satellite technology , but not immediately and then only on a limited basis , schumer said .

the system being pushed by [senator] schumer , [representative] sanchez and other members of congress , however , has been used to monitor ship movement for the last five years by a coalition of nonprofit maritime organizations .

the system relies on emergency beacons that already are fixtures on most commercial vessels .

a software program "pings" the ship via satellite and retrieves data such as the name of the vessel , its owner , its latitude and longitude , its speed and its course .

it can also track a ship's route across the ocean , allowing observers to know whether the ship stopped and met another vessel at sea or diverted to a port that wasn't on its usual route... .

the tracking system was created in 1999 by a small family - run company called yukon fuel co. in anchorage to keep tabs on its tugs and barges as they supplied fuel and freight to isolated alaskan villages , fishing camps and mining sites .

the software proved so popular that the family sold yukon and formed secure asset reporting services inc. to market the system , said clayton shelver , the company's chief executive... .

the coast guard isn't the only player that still needs convincing .

most major shipping companies haven't signed on either .

so far , only taiwan - based evergreen marine corp. has agreed to test it .

