the u.s. post office department , the predecessor to the u.s .

postal service , did not officially address the naming of post offices until 1891 .

until then , the names of post offices were derived from a number of sources , including the name of the town or township in which the post office was located , certain neighborhoods , crossroads , local landmarks , and even the postmaster's name or place of residence .

on february 18 , 1891 , postmaster miscellaneous order 87 instructed the clerks of post offices nationwide to utilize the post office names published in the bulletins of the united states board on geographic names when naming post offices .

the next year , postmaster miscellaneous order 48 instructed the fourth assistant postmaster general not to "establish any post office whose proposed name differed from that of the town or village in which it was to be located. .

the goal of this policy was to facilitate the expeditious and efficient delivery of mail by avoiding confusion over the location of a post office .

congress first honored an individual by naming a post office through freestanding legislation in 1967 .

it named a combined post office and federal office building in bronx , ny , as the "charles a. buckley post office and federal office building" in honor of the late representative charles a. buckley ( p.l .

90-232 ; 81 stat .

751 ) .

courthouses and federal buildings , some no doubt containing postal facilities , had been named before that .

the united states postal service ( usps ) came into being in 1971 with its own separate real estate authority ( 39 u.s.c .

401 ( 5 ) ) .

all legislation to name usps facilities then was referred to the house and senate post office and civil service committees , and when these committees were abolished , to the house oversight and government reform and senate homeland security and governmental affairs committees .

as table 1 indicates , the number of post office naming bills made law rose and fell between the 108 th and 112 th congresses .

during this period , post office naming acts were a very common form of legislation , comprising almost 20% of all statutes enacted .

many of the persons honored by post office naming acts were individuals of local renown .

for example , the 110 th congress named a kansas city , mo , post office for the reverend earl abel ( p.l .

110-353 ; 122 stat .

3983 ) .

other honorees , though , were nationally recognized persons , such as gerald r. ford , jr. ( twice ) , ronald reagan ( three times ) , bob hope , cesar chavez , nat king cole , mickey mantle , and buck owens .

during the recent congresses , many post offices have been named for u.s. soldiers killed in the wars in iraq and afghanistan .

usually , these bills honor individual soldiers .

congress also has named at least one post office for all of a locality's fallen soldiers .

the practical effect of legislation renaming a post office is less than might be imagined .

for operational reasons , post offices retain their geographical designations in the usps addressing system , and there is no change in the way renamed post offices are identified in the usps's listings of post offices .

the tangible effect of naming a post office is the installation of a dedicatory plaque in "a prominent place in the facility's lobby , preferably above the post office boxes. .

the plaque , which is purchased locally at usps expense running from $250 to $500 , measures about 11 inches by 14 inches and contains the following inscription: usps , working with the sponsor of the legislation , may take responsibility for organizing a dedication ceremony .

the protocol includes inviting the honored individual and his or her family , an honor guard , a religious figure for an invocation , media notification , and light refreshments such as cake and punch .

costs for these expenses may be borne by usps from its contingency funds or shared with local community interests .

during the 111 th congress , representative darrell e. issa , the committee on oversight and government reform's ranking minority member , introduced h.r .

3137 on july 9 , 2009 .

this bill would require the usps to provide for a suitable plaque ... no later than 120 days after the date as of which — ( 1 ) a law has been enacted providing for the designation of the postal facility involved ; and ( 2 ) sufficient amounts have been received ... to provide for such plaque .

federal law authorizes the usps "to accept gifts or donations of services or property , real or personal , as it deems , necessary or convenient in the transaction of its business" ( 39 u.s.c .

401 ( 7 ) ) .

h.r .

3137 also would amend 39 u.s.c .

404 ( 7 ) to read , [the usps shall have the power to] accept gifts or donations of services or property , real or personal , as it deems , necessary or convenient in the transaction of its business including monetary donations made ( in such manner as the postal service may prescribe ) for the funding of plaques in connection with the commemorative designation of postal facilities .

the house oversight and government reform committee reported the bill on july 10 , 2009 .

no further action was taken on the bill .

