four types of tax - advantaged accounts can be used to pay for qualifying unreimbursed medical expenses: health care flexible spending accounts ( fsas ) , health reimbursement accounts ( hras ) , health savings accounts ( hsas ) , and medical savings accounts ( msas ) .

qualifying medical expenses typically include deductibles , copayments , and goods and / or services not covered by insurance .

 ( more details are given below. ) .

this report describes current law surrounding these accounts and provides a side - by - side comparison of their key features .

the report also provides an indication of the relative prevalence of the accounts .

there are two broad categories of tax provisions that can lower an individual's tax liability because of qualifying medical expenses .

first , qualifying medical expenses can be a tax deduction .

tax filers can itemize medical expenses incurred by him - or herself , spouse , and dependents if these expenses are over the legislative minimum .

second , tax filers can use one ( or occasionally more ) of the tax - advantaged accounts discussed in this report .

although the accounts differ in many ways , each account contains contributed income that the account holder uses to pay for qualifying medical expenses .

each account provides tax savings to the account holder because the money contributed to the account is not considered a part of the individual's adjusted gross income .

therefore , no taxes are paid on this income , and for those arrangements where the income is placed in an account , no taxes are paid on interest earned on the income in the account .

moreover , the tax filer does not need to itemize deductions to receive tax savings from the account .

itemized deductions cannot be funded through a tax - advantaged account , and expenses funded through an account cannot be declared as itemized deductions .

in other words , "double counting" is prohibited .

in general , qualifying medical expenses are defined in the internal revenue code ( irc ) at section 213 ( d ) and typically include deductibles , copayments , and goods and / or services not covered by insurance .

the goods and / or services can include medical services rendered by physicians , surgeons , dentists , and other medical practitioners .

the costs of equipment , supplies , devices , and prescription drugs are also qualifying expenses .

to qualify , the medical care must be primarily used to alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect or illness .

care used to benefit general health ( eg , exercise equipment , vitamins , and vacations ) is not a qualifying medical expense .

some examples of qualifying medical expenses are breast reconstruction surgery , disabled dependent care expenses , fertility enhancement ( as specified ) , hospital services , lifetime care — advance payments , long - term care , psychiatric care , special education , and transplants .

some examples of expenses that are not qualifying medical expenses are cosmetic surgery , funeral expenses , health club dues , and household help .

over - the - counter medications are not qualified medical expenses unless prescribed by a physician .

finally , insulin is always a qualifying medical expense , whether or not it is purchased with a prescription .

table 1 provides a more detailed side - by - side comparison of the laws and regulations governing each account .

in each case , the reimbursement is for qualifying medical and dental expenses not covered by insurance .

the beneficiaries for all accounts are the employee , spouse , and dependents .

data limitations make it difficult to compare measures of account usage across the four accounts .

nevertheless , this section provides a brief overview of the available information , distinguishing between the accessibility of the account and the enrollment in the account .

it is easier for each individual employer to report whether it offers one of these accounts than to report the number of employees actually enrolled .

for this and perhaps other reasons , published data are more readily available on access than on enrollment .

because very few new msas are being created , and because the number of msas has always been limited , there are almost no data available on their number .

the report also presents measures of the enrollment in each of the four account types .

it should be emphasized that the data are not comparable across the accounts .

the national compensation survey , a survey of employers conducted by the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , reports the percent of workers who have access to health care fsas .

according to the bls survey , 40% of all civilian workers in 2012 had access to a health care fsa .

when viewed by firm size , 53% of civilian workers in firms with 100 or more workers had access to an fsa .

the accounts were not as common for civilian workers in small businesses .

in establishments with fewer than 100 employees , 20% of the workers had access to a health care fsa .

the definition of accessibility is not as straightforward for hsas and hras .

unlike with fsas , those who hold hsas must have hdhps .

one measure of hsa accessibility is therefore possession of an hdhp that qualifies for an hsa .

according to a survey of private employers conducted by the kaiser family foundation and the health research & educational trust ( kff / hret ) in 2012 , 26% of firms offering health benefits offered an hsa - qualified hdhp .

this percent was 12% in 2010 and 18% in 2011 .

workers in larger firms were more likely to have access to an hdhp than those in smaller firms .

although employers are not required to restrict hra benefits to employees with hdhps , most employers chose to do so .

of employers offering health benefits , there was no discernible upward or downward trend in the percent who offered an hdhp and an hra ; the percentage was 4% in 2010 , 7% in 2011 , and 5% in 2012 .

the employee benefit research institute conducts annual internet surveys of adults ages 21 to 64 , inclusive .

the survey measures the number of adults with either an hsa or an hra .

the results are then extrapolated .

the research concluded that the combined number of adults with either an hsa or an hra was 4.8 million in 2009 , 5.4 million in 2010 , 8.5 million in 2011 , and 11.6 million in 2012 .

a substantial majority of these individuals are likely to be hsa holders .

