rs21771 - - animal rendering: economics and policy updated march 17 , 200 .

renderers convert dead animals and animal parts that otherwise would require disposal into a variety of materials , including edibleand inedible tallow and lard and proteins such as meat and bone meal ( mbm ) .

 ( 2 ) these materials in turn are exported or sold todomestic manufacturers of a wide range of industrial and consumer goods such as livestock feed and pet food , soaps,pharmaceuticals , lubricants , plastics , personal care products , and even crayons ( also see table 1 on page 6 ) .

although rendering provides an essential service to the increasingly intensive and cost - competitive u.s. animal and meat industries ( and is subject to certain government food safety and environmental regulations ) , the industry has largely operatedoutside of publicview .

however , rendering has attracted greater public attention since the discovery of bovine spongiformencephalopathy ( bse ormad cow disease ) in two north american cows in 2003 .

u.s. officials have announced or are considering newregulatory actionsintended to reassure foreign and domestic customers that bse will not threaten food safety or u.s. cattle herds .

these actions arelikely to cause changes in renderers' business practices , costs , and product values .

any changes in the economicsof rendering likelywill affect the economics of animal and meat producers too .

renderers annually convert 47 billion pounds or more of raw animal materials into approximately 18 billion pounds of products .

sources for these materials include meat slaughtering and processing plants ( the primary one ) ; dead animals fromfarms , ranches,feedlots , marketing barns , animal shelters , and other facilities ; and fats , grease , and other food waste fromrestaurants and stores .

in meat animal slaughtering and processing plants , the amount of usable material from each animal depends largely upon the species .

for example , at slaughter , a 1,200-pound steer can yield anywhere from 55% to 60% of human edible product,including meat forretail sale , edible fat , and variety meats ( organs , tongue , tail , etc .

 ) , according to various estimates .

subtractinganother 5% - 8% for theweight of the hide , which goes into leather , leaves 32% - 40% of material for rendering .

if this range were appliedconsistently to all35.5 million u.s. cattle slaughtered in 2003 , the equivalent would represent the weight of approximately 11 millionto 14 million livecattle .

 ( 3 ) elsewhere , independent renderers collect and process about half of all livestock and poultry that die from diseases or accidents beforereaching slaughter plants ( sparks 2002 ) .

u.s. farm animal mortalities in 2000 included approximately 4.1 millioncattle and calves ( totaling 1.9 billion pounds ) ; 18 million hogs ( 1 billion pounds ) ; 833,000 sheep , lambs , and goats ( 64 millionpounds ) ; and 82 millionchickens and turkeys ( 347 million pounds ) , according to sparks , which examined usda data .

"disposing of these mortalities is complicated because of the need to minimize adverse environmental consequences , such as thespread of human and animal disease or the pollution of ground or surface water," sparks ( 2002 ) observed .

"formany producers,paying a modest fee to have a renderer remove dead carcasses is likely preferred to finding alternative on - farmdisposal methods" ( i.e. , burial , incineration , or composting ) .

number and types of rendering plants .

one study estimated that 137 firmsoperated 240 plants in 1997 , with a total payroll of nearly 10,000 employees .

 ( 4 ) more recently , the national renderers association ( nra ) estimated that canada and the united states have a combined 250-260 rendering plants .

rendering facilitiesmay be eitherintegrated or independent operations .

integrated plants operate in conjunction with animal slaughter and meat processing plants and handle 65% - 70% of all renderedmaterial .

the estimated 95 u.s. and canadian facilities ( nra ) render most edible animal byproducts ( i.e. , fattyanimal tissue ) ,mainly into edible fats ( tallow and lard ) for human consumption .

edible rendering is subject to the inspection andsafety standards ofusda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) or its state counterparts , which by law already are present in themeat slaughterand processing plants .

these plants also render inedible byproducts ( including slaughter floor waste ) into fats andproteins for animalfeeds and for other ingredients .

because a meat plant typically processes only one animal species ( such as cattle,hogs , or poultry ) , itsassociated rendering operations likewise handle only the byproducts of that species .

the inedible and ediblerendering processes aresegregated .

independent operations handle the other 30% - 35% of rendered material .

these plants ( estimated by nra at 165 in the united statesand canada ) usually collect material from other sites using specially designed trucks .

they pick up and process fatand bonetrimmings , inedible meat scraps , blood , feathers , and dead animals from meat and poultry slaughterhouses andprocessors ( usuallysmaller ones without their own rendering operations ) , farms , ranches , feedlots , animal shelters , restaurants , butchers,and markets .

asa result , the majority of independents are likely to be handling "mixed species. .

almost all of the resultingingredients are destinedfor nonhuman consumption ( eg , animal feeds , industrial products ) .

the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates animalfeed ingredients , but its continuous presence in rendering plants , or in feed mills that buy rendered ingredients , isnot a legalrequirement .

the rendering process .

in most systems , raw materials are ground to a uniformsize and placed in continuous cookers or in batch cookers , which evaporate moisture and free fat from protein andbone .

a series ofconveyers , presses , and a centrifuge continue the process of separating fat from solids .

the finished fat ( eg , tallow,lard , yellowgrease ) goes into separate tanks , and the solid protein ( eg , mbm , bone meal , poultry meal ) is pressed into cakefor processing intofeed .

 ( 5 ) other rendering systems are used , includingthose that recover protein solids from slaughterhouse blood or that process usedrestaurant grease .

this restaurant grease generally is recovered ( often in 55-gallon drums ) for use as yellow greasein non - humanfood products like animal feeds .

value and use of rendered products .

the 18 billion pounds of ingredients thatrenderers produce each year have been valued at more than $3 billion , of which $870 million is exported .

of the18 billion poundtotal , 10 billion pounds were feed ingredients with a value of approximately $1 billion ( sparks 2001 ) .

mbmaccounted for 6.6 billionpounds of this , poultry byproducts 4 billion pounds , and blood meal 226 million pounds ( sparks ) .

 ( 6 ) such ingredients are valued fortheir nutrients - - high protein content , digestible amino acids , and minerals - - and their relatively low cost .

poultryoperations andpet food manufacturers accounted for 66% of the domestic mbm market of nearly 5.7 billion pounds in 2000 , whilehog and cattleoperations took most of the rest .

so long as animals are raised and processed for food , vast amounts of inedible materials will be generated , the result of prematuredeaths , herd culls , and slaughter byproducts .

"regardless of quantity , byproducts and rendered products from theslaughter processmust be sold at whatever price will clear the market or the industry ( and the environment ) incurs a cost fordisposal. .

 ( 7 ) asgovernment rules and industry practices evolve to address food safety and animal disease concerns like bse , optionsfor using thesebyproducts may become more limited .

if animal byproducts have fewer market outlets , new questions may ariseabout how todispose of them safely and who should pay .

"feed ban" impacts .

scientists currently maintain that infected animal feed is theprimary source of bse transmission ( although research continues into other potential sources ) .

therefore , u.s.officials believe thatregulation of feed ingredients is the single most effective method for controlling bse .

following the widespreadoutbreaks of bse ingreat britain and europe , the fda in august 1997 imposed a ban on feeding most mammalian proteins to cattleand other ruminants .

prohibited proteins still can be fed to other animals such as pigs , poultry and pets .

 ( fda in late january 2004announced plans toexpand the list of prohibited proteins. ) .

estimates vary on the economic impact of the feed ban .

according to a 1997 report prepared for the fda on compliance costs andmarket impacts , the fda feed ban could reduce mbm values by between $63 million and $252 million , or $25 to$100 per ton .

 ( 8 ) sparks ( june 2001 ) estimated that the average mbm value loss since the 1997 rule was $18 per ton , for a total of$288 million duringthe period 1996 to 2000 .

sparks added that these losses likely were highly concentrated among renderers thatproduce mbmexclusively , and among those handling mixed species .

the fda - commissioned report predicted that rendererswould pass much ofthe lost value to packers by paying less for raw materials ; packers in turn were expected to reduce their paymentsfor cattle .

the 2001 sparks study examined potential cost impacts of several options for more extensive feed restrictions .

it estimated that atotal animal protein feed ban to ruminants would cost $100 million yearly ; a total ban on all ruminant proteins toall farm animals,$636 million yearly ; and a total animal protein ban to all farm animals , $1.5 billion yearly .

downers and dead animals .

another recent regulatory action with an impact onthe rendering industry was usda's december 30 , 2003 , ban on all "downer" ( nonambulatory ) cattle from the humanfood supply .

u.s. officials consider downers , or animals unable to rise or walk , to be one of the higher - risk cattle groups for bse ( althoughindustry officials note that most animals become nonambulatory from injuries or non - bse diseases ) .

before theban , usdaestimated that 150,000-200,000 downers were entering slaughter plants .

one issue is whether the downer ban hasremoved aneconomic incentive to market downers and thus made it more difficult for usda to obtain such animals for bse ( and other disease ) surveillance .

on march 15 , 2004 , usda announced a major expansion of its bse surveillance program that will samplemany more downers anddead animals , adding that it is looking to renderers ( among other sites ) to make these animals available .

numerouspracticalproblems - - such as how to recover and store carcasses , who will sample , the costs , etc .

 - - now confront bothgovernment andindustry officials .

 ( 9 ) disposal questions .

if renderers earn less money from rendered byproducts anddead animals , they will pay less for such materials .

in the past , renderers paid for dead animals .

now most chargea fee to pick themup .

 ( 10 ) in its 2002 study on the cost of livestockmortalities , sparks assumed that so long as mbm could be sold for feed , the averageper - head cost of disposing of dead cattle and calves might be $8.25 per head ; if mbm is banned from animal feed,the cost could riseto $24.11 per head .

sparks estimated the per - head costs for other disposal methods at $9.33 for incineration , $10.63for burial , and$30.34 for composting .

the 2002 world health organization ( who ) report observed that rendering , because it "sanitizes" animal wastes , "performs anessential public service: the environmental clean - up of wastes too hazardous for disposal in conventional ways .

forexample , animalwastes provide ideal conditions for the growth of pathogens that infect humans as well as animals .

incinerationwould cause major airpollution .

landfill could lead to disease transmission. .

 ( 11 ) a usda advisory committee in february 2004 said that along with an enhanced bse surveillance program , "a comprehensive systemmust be implemented to facilitate adequate pathways for dead and non - ambulatory cattle to allow for collection ofsamples , and forproper , safe disposal of carcasses ; this must be done to ensure protection of public health , animal health , and theenvironment ; such asystem will require expending federal resources to assist with costs for sampling , transport and safe disposal. .

 ( 12 ) others temper this view of rendering by observing that the nation's clean air and water laws are in place to address possible adverseenvironmental impacts .

these responsibilities are enforced under the purview of the u.s. environmental protectionagency ( epa ) and generally through states and localities , which often impose their own environmental and health standards aswell .

whilerendering ( which also must abide by such standards ) certainly is one option for handling dead stock and animalbyproducts , it hasbeen argued , this option does not relieve the animal and meat industries of their environmental responsibilities .

because theseindustries created this material , they should bear the costs , not the public , particularly at a time when budget deficitsare forcingdifficult spending choices , the argument goes .

table 1 .

u.s. production , consumption , and export of rendered products,1999-2003 ( p ) source : nra ; 2003 data preliminary ( p ) .

a .

includes poultry fat and by - product meal and raw products for pet food .

b .

withheld to avoid disclosing individual firm data .

