federal agency funding for homeland security r&d was requested at about $5.1 billion for fy2007 , about the same amount as in fy2005 and fy2006 .

the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) reports that the top three agency supporters are the department of health and human services ( dhhs ) , specifically the national institutes of health ( nih ) at 40% of the total , dhs with about 23% , and the department of defense ( dod ) , with 21% .

see table 1 .

other funding agencies in descending order are the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the department of agriculture ( usda ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the national aeronautics , and space administration ( nasa ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and the department of commerce ( doc ) .

dhhs ( nih ) manages most of the federal civilian effort against bioterrorism .

dhs r&d focuses largely on technology - oriented projects , which for fy2007 , emphasize countermeasures against weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

dod's homeland security r&d portfolio includes work on countering chemical and biological threats , emergency preparedness , and r&d supported by the technical support working group ( tswg ) , a state department / dod group that coordinates interagency r&d on new technologies to combat terrorism .

usda's work includes physical protection for agricultural resources and maintaining security of the food supply .

nsf's homeland security r&d focuses on protection of critical infrastructures and key assets and includes cybersecurity r&d .

epa has focused on toxic materials research .

in the doc , r&d at the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) deals with protecting information systems .

in the past , doe's counterterrorism r&d included work on materials , detection of toxic agents , genomic sequencing , dna - based diagnostics , and microfabrication technologies .

nasa's homeland security r&d deals with aviation safety and remote sensing .

the homeland security act of 2002 , p.l .

107-296 , created dhs and , as one of its four directorates , a directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) .

the under secretary for s&t , created by title iii , has responsibility for most of dhs's research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) .

the under secretary's responsibilities are to: coordinate dhs's s&t missions ; in consultation with other agencies , develop a strategic plan for federal civilian countermeasures to threats , including research ; except for human health - related r&d , conduct and / or coordinate dhs's intramural and extramural r&d ; set national r&d priorities to prevent importation of chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear and related ( cbrn ) weapons and terrorist attacks ; collaborate with doe regarding using national laboratories ; collaborate with the secretaries of usda and dhhs to identify biological "select agents ; " develop guidelines for technology transfer ; and support u.s. s&t leadership .

if possible , dhs's research is to be unclassified .

title iii transferred to dhs doe programs in chemical and biological security r&d ; nuclear smuggling and proliferation detection ; nuclear assessment and materials protection ; biological and environmental research related to microbial pathogens ; the environmental measurements laboratory ; and the advanced scientific computing research program from lawrence livermore national laboratory .

dhs was mandated to incorporate a newly created national bio - weapons defense analysis center and usda's plum island animal disease center , but usda is permitted to continue to conduct r&d at plum island .

coast guard and transportation security administration ( tsa ) r&d are now located within dhs .

dhs's secretary is to collaborate with the dhhs secretary to set priorities for dhhs's human health - related cbrn r&d .

title iii authorized establishment of the homeland security advanced research projects agency ( hsarpa ) to support applications - oriented , innovative rdt&e in industry , ffrdcs , and universities .

extramural funding is to be competitive and merit - reviewed , but distributed to as many u.s. areas as practicable .

the law mandated creation of university - based centers of excellence for homeland security ; five multi - year awards ranging between $10 million to $18 million have been made for centers on: risk and economic analysis of terrorism at the university of southern california ; agro - security at the university of minnesota and at texas a&m ; on behavioral and sociological aspects of terrorism at the university of maryland ; and on high consequence event preparedness and response at johns hopkins .

dhs and epa jointly fund a cooperative center on advancing microbial risk assessment at michigan state ; there are plans for a dhs - lawrence livermore national laboratory cooperative center on computational challenges for homeland security .

dhs also supports a university fellowship / training program , which plans to train 200 students in 2007 , down from 300 in 2006 , and up to 15 postdoctoral fellows .

regarding intramural r&d , dhs may use any federal laboratory and may establish a headquarters laboratory to "network" federal laboratories .

dhs relies mostly on the following doe laboratories: los alamos , lawrence livermore , sandia , pacific northwest and oak ridge .

a homeland security institute ( hsi ) , an ffrdc operated by analytic services inc. , funded in may 2004 , is authorized to conduct risk analysis and policy research on vulnerabilities of , and security for , critical infrastructures ; improve interoperability of tools for field operators and first responders ; and test prototype technologies .

a clearinghouse was authorized to transfer information about innovations .

in addition , dhs created the interagency center for applied homeland security technology ( icahst ) , which validates technical requirements and conducts evaluations for threat and vulnerability testing and assessments .

p.l .

107-296 gave the dhs secretary special acquisitions authority for basic , applied , and advanced r&d ( sec .

833 ) .

the special assistant to the secretary , created by sec .

102 of the law , is to work with the private sector to develop innovative homeland terrorism technologies .

dhs issued rules for liability protection for manufacturers of anti - terrorism technologies pursuant to the support anti - terrorism by fostering effective technologies ( safety ) act of 2002 , part of p.l .

107-296 .

dhs also issued a rule to handle critical infrastructure information that is voluntarily submitted to the government in good faith that will not be subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act ( federal register , feb. 20 , 2004 , pp .

8073-8089 ) .

sec .

1003 of p.l .

107-296 authorized nist to conduct r&d to improve information security .

p.l .

107-305 , the cyber security research and development act , authorized $903 million over five years for nsf and nist r&d and training programs to combat terrorist attacks on computers .

for fy2007 , dhs requested funding for r&d per se of $1.1 billion , and congress , in p.l .

109-295 , appropriated $1.0 billion , about 22% less than the estimated fy2006 level .

this is the first reduction in the agency's r&d budget since dhs was created in 2002 .

the fy2007 budget increased r&d support for explosives countermeasures , interoperable communications , and cybersecurity .

other areas of r&d , including university centers , received decreased funding .

see table 2 .

the fy2006 appropriations law had increased r&d funding above the president's requested levels for biological countermeasures , explosives countermeasures , dndo , rapid prototyping , safety act , interoperable communications , and critical infrastructure .

see crs report rl33428 , homeland security department: fy2007 appropriations and crs report rl33345 , federal research and development funding: fy2007 , ( section on dhs ) .

the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) is a statutory office in the executive office of the president ; its director advises the president and recommends federal r&d budgets .

the ostp director is responsible for advising the president on homeland security ( sec .

1712 of p.l .

107-296 ) .

the director has chaired the national security council's preparedness against weapons of mass destruction r&d subgroup , comprised of 16 agencies .

ostp also manages the interagency national science and technology council ( nstc ) 's committee on homeland and national security to help set r&d priorities in eight functional areas .

ostp's interagency work has focused on such topics as anthrax , regulations to restrict access to research using biological "select agents," access to "sensitive but unclassified" scientific information , policy for foreign student visas , access to "sensitive" courses , and advanced technology for border control .

pursuant to executive order 13231 , ostp worked with the interagency president's critical infrastructure board to recommend priorities and budgets for information security r&d .

the working group on bioterrorism prevention , preparedness , and response , established by sec .

108 of p.l .

107-188 , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 , consists of the dhhs and dod secretaries and other agency heads .

the homeland security council ( hsc ) , created by p.l .

107-296 , provides policy and interagency guidance .

an hsc policy coordination committee on r&d was created pursuant to executive order 13228 .

former dhs under secretary mcqueary testified that , by the fall of 2004 , all u.s. government r&d "relevant to fulfilling the department's mission will have been identified and co - ordinated as appropriate. .

he inventoried dhs's many r&d - related interagency activities in testimony before the house committee on science on february 16 , 2005 .

in 2006 , gao issued a report dealing with plum island , dhs and usda are successfully coordinating current work , but long - term plans are being assessed ( gao - 06-132 ) .

controversial issues about dhs's r&d include preventing conflicts of interest in awarding r&d funds since many dhs s&t portfolio managers are hired from , and will return to , national laboratories which are among the contenders for dhs r&d contracts and awards' decisions , which according to gao , are often undocumented ( based on dhs needs to improve ethics - related management controls for the science and technology directorate , december 2005 , gao - 06-206 ) ; providing congress with more detailed information regarding priority setting and r&d budgeting and spending ( see h.rept .

109-476 and s.rept .

109-273 on dhs's fy2007 appropriations request ) ; monitoring hsarpa's mission and performance in transitioning homeland security technology to the field ; assessing possible waste in technology procurement ; improving the effectiveness of dhs's s&t ( only one program of six that were evaluated using omb's performance assessment rating tool ( part ) received a score of "highly effective" ) ; developing s&t priorities that meet responder needs and benefit from external experts' advice ; monitoring the adequacy of cybersecurity r&d ; and improving linkages between providing rapid scientific and technical expertise and decisionmaking and responding to weapons of mass destruction attacks and incidents .

dhs's acting inspector general testified on january 26 , 2005 before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs that the s&t directorate needs to better integrate threat assessment information into its priority - setting and to improve inter - and intra - agency coordination .

executive order 13311 transferred to dhs the president's responsibilities to design procedures to protect sensitive unclassified homeland security information that were mandated by sec .

892 of p.l .

107-296 .

dhs issued guidance for its own information control procedures in management directive system md number: 11042.1 , 01 / 05 / 05 , but has not yet released government - wide guidance on this controversial topic .

for additional information , see crs report rl33303 , "sensitive but unclassified" information and other controls: policy and options for scientific and technical information .

during the 109 th congress , the house passed h.r .

1817 , a dhs authorization bill , on may 18 , 2005 ; it was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

it would have required creation of the technology clearinghouse mandated in p.l .

107-296 , a homeland security technology transfer program , and a working group , including the dod secretary , to advise the clearinghouse to identify relevant military technologies .

it would also have required assessment of whether dhs procurements are candidates for the litigation and risk management protections of p.l .

107-296 , established a university center of excellence for border security , authorized academic and other types of cybersecurity r&d , and allowed doe laboratories to participate in proposal writing and other activities of the university centers of excellence .

on june 14 , 2006 , the homeland security committee reported two bills .

an amended h.r .

4941 , the homeland security s&t enhancement act , would have required dhs to transfer anti - terrorism technology developed by federal agencies or the private sector , to develop standards for first - responder communications equipment , require the government to share results of tests of equipment with first responders , to develop a strategic plan for s&t activities , and to work to develop guidelines for researchers about the potential homeland security implications of their work .

h.r .

4942 , the promoting anti - terrorism capabilities through international cooperation act , would have required dhs's s&t directorate to support homeland security r&d with u.s. allies .

it was reported ( h.rept .

109-674 ) , amended , and approved on september 26 , 2006 .

h.r .

5814 , an authorization bill , reported by the homeland security committee on july 19 , 2006 , would have streamlined safety act procedures to develop anti - terrorism technology , enhanced biosurveillance systems , and created an assistant secretary for cybersecurity .

