rs21812 - - march 11 terrorist attacks in madrid and spain's elections: implications for u.s.policy october 5 , 2004 summary this report discusses the march 11 , 2004 terrorist attacks in madrid,spain and their impact on spain's march 14 parliamentary elections , which resulted in the surprise victory of thesocialist party over the ruling right - of - center popular party .

the report also examines some of the possibleimplications of the attacks and the elections for the u.s. - led coalition in iraq , the war on terrorism and u.s. - spainrelations .

this report will be updated as warranted .

see also crs report rs21794 , iraq coalition: publicopinionindicators in selected european countries , by [author name scrubbed] .

during the morning rush hour of march 11 , 2004 , bombs hidden in 10 backpacks exploded within 15 minutesof eachother on four trains along a nine - mile stretch of a commuter line from the suburb of santa eugenia to the busyatocharail terminal in madrid .

three other backpack bombs were defused by police .

the explosions killed 191 personsandwounded over 1800 others .

the death toll was by far the largest ever for a terrorist attack in spain and was thelargestin europe since the 1988 bombing of a pan am airliner over lockerbie , scotland .

the attacks took place exactlytwoand one - half years after the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 .

the spanish government , led by prime minister jose maria aznar of the right - of - center popular party ( pp ) , quicklyinsisted that the attacks were the work of the basque terrorist group eta and downplayed any suggestion thatislamicextremists could be involved .

in justifying their view , spanish officials noted that they had stopped an eta efforttoplace bombs on trains on christmas eve 2003 and had intercepted on february 29 a madrid - bound van loaded bytheeta with one thousand pounds of explosives .

on the day of the attack , at spain's urging , the u.n. security councilpassed resolution 1530 , which condemned eta's alleged role in the bombing .

however , skeptics noted that thescope of the attacks , the detailed planning and precision needed to carry them out , and above all , the huge casualtytollwere more likely to be hallmarks of al qaeda or an al qaeda - like organization , not eta .

the credibility of the government began to crumble quickly as indications emerged of the possible involvement ofislamic extremists in the bombings .

less than four hours after the attacks , police found several detonators and anaudiotape of verses from the koran in an abandoned van in the town of alcala de henares , through which thebombedtrains had passed .

about 12 hours after the attacks , police found a cellphone from an unexploded backpack bomb .

they traced it to a business owned by a moroccan immigrant named jamal zougam , who was suspected of havinglinks to al qaeda .

despite these discoveries on the day of the attacks , the government continued to insist publiclythateta was responsible until hours before the polls opened on march 14 , when police arrested zougam as well as twoother moroccans and two indians suspected of involvement in the attacks .

 ( 1 ) the government's perceived mishandling of the crisis sparked outrage among many spaniards .

critics of the government charged that it had deliberately tried to focus blame on eta rather than al qaeda , knowing that if thepublic believed that eta had committed the attacks , the government's popularity could be enhanced , due to thebroadpublic support for its hard - line stance against eta .

on the other hand , if al qaeda or an affiliated group wasresponsible , critics asserted , the government feared that it would lose support because many voters would believethatit had brought the attacks on spain by its highly unpopular support for the war in iraq .

spanish police have made progress in breaking up the terrorist cell responsible for the attack .

on march 30 , spanishinterior minister angel acebes said that the government suspected the al qaeda - linked moroccan islamiccombatantgroup with involvement in the attacks .

spanish and moroccan officials believe the group was also involved in may2003 suicide bombing attacks in casablanca , morocco which killed 45 people , including several spaniards .

onapril2 , an unexploded bomb was found on railroad tracks between madrid and seville .

on april 3 , seven men suspectedofinvolvement in the madrid attacks were killed when they blew themselves up after they were surrounded by police.the dead included the alleged leader of the terrorists , serhane ben abdelmajid farkhet , known as "the tunisian. .

police found evidence that the group was ready to commit additional attacks .

police have said that the groupfinancedits activities through drug trafficking and other crimes .

in june 2004 , italian police arrested rabei osman sayedahmed , known as 'mohammed the egyptian. .

ahmed , a former explosives instructor in al qaeda training camps,was one of the principal planners of the march 11 attacks , according to police .

by september 2004 , nearly twodozenpersons charged with involvement in the attacks were in police custody .

a parliamentary commission began aninvestigation into the march 11 attacks and the government's response to them in june 2004 .

the terrorist attacks took place just before spain's march 14 parliamentary elections , leading some observerstoconclude that they may have been intended to influence the vote .

in a public opinion poll taken in february 2004,two - thirds of those polled said that the war in iraq had increased the threat of terrorism , and 85% were concernedabout a possible terrorist strike against spain .

 ( 2 ) nevertheless , although the opposition socialist party ( psoe ) led byjose luis rodriguez zapatero campaigned in part on the strong public opposition to the government's iraq policy,theruling pp appeared to be poised for a narrow victory , based on its record of a largely successful economic policyandits tough stand against eta .

the pp campaign was led not by aznar , who is retiring from politics at the end of histerm , but by his successor as pp leader , mariano rajoy .

although the pp held a lead in opinion polls in the weeks prior to the election , its projected margin of victory shranksteadily .

according to the final opinion polls published on march 7 ( spanish law imposes a blackout on public pollsfive days before an election ) , pp was expected to win 42% of the vote and the psoe 38% .

these totals would havemeant that the pp would likely have lost its absolute majority in parliament , but would have likely stayed in powerincoalition with smaller regional parties .

another late poll taken before the bombings put the pp's lead at 2.5% .

internal polls of both parties on the day before the attacks reportedly had the two parties in a virtual dead heat .

 ( 3 ) the results of the election surprised many observers .

the socialist party of spain ( psoe ) won 42.5% of thevote tothe pp's 37.6% .

the socialists won 164 seats in the congress of deputies , up from 125 in the previous parliament .

the pp won 148 seats , down from its previous total of 183 seats .

the socialists fell short of an absolute majority,sothey will have to form a coalition , perhaps among the united left , a tiny , hard - line communist party , and severalregional parties .

the pp maintained control of the senate , the regionally - based house of the parliament .

turnout for the vote was 77.2% , up from 68.7% in the 2000 elections .

it should be noted that this turnout , while high,is not unprecedented in spain's recent electoral history , and is often associated with changes in government .

turnoutin 1996 was 77.38% and 79.97% in 1982 , each case corresponding to a victory by the opposition of the time .

 ( 4 ) somespanish observers attributed a large part of the psoe's success to the votes of about 2 million young , first - timevoters .

madrid - based observers noted that the news of the arrest of al qaeda - linked figures on the evening ofmarch13 was transmitted rapidly among young people by cellphone , as was the exhortation , perhaps encouraged bysocialistsupporters , to punish the government at the polls .

 ( 5 ) .

after the elections , a delicate issue raised by political leaders and analysts in spain and throughout the world has been:did al qaeda "win" this election by intimidating the spanish electorate ( thereby perhaps setting a troublingprecedentfor other countries ) , or did the election result demonstrate the strength of spain's democracy ? .

some spaniards,especially supporters of the socialists , said that the result did not reflect a desire to appease terrorists , but was duetopublic anger at an allegedly arrogant government that had made decisions on iraq and other issues without thesupportof the spanish public .

they note that public opinion polls had shown that up to 90% of the public was opposed tothegovernment's support for the war in iraq and rejected a link between the war on terrorism and the war in iraq .

theeffort to blame eta for the march 11 bombing was the final straw for many voters , they assert .

as for the chargethatthe terrorist attacks had determined the outcome , zapatero's supporters point to a post - election poll in which only8.8% of those polled said that the terrorist attacks had affected their vote .

 ( 6 ) those critical of the election result note that the government appeared to be headed for a narrow victory just daysbefore the attack , appearing to make the attack the decisive factor in the result .

some observers , including somein theunited states , have criticized the election results as dangerous appeasement of terrorists .

on march 17 , housespeaker dennis hastert said , "here's a country that stood against terrorism and had a huge terrorist act within theircountry , and they chose to change their government and to , in a sense , appease terrorists. .

representative henryhyde,chairman of the house international relations committee , said "the vote in spain was a great victory for alqaeda. .

 ( 7 ) administration officials have avoided making statements directly critical of the election results , perhaps fearing theirimpact on relations with the new government .

like their socialist adversaries , spanish conservatives reject any implication that the election result revealed cowardice by the spanish people , noting spain's struggle of more than three decades against eta and its continuedcommitment to the deployment in afghanistan after a may 2003 plane crash that killed 62 spanish soldiers returningfrom the country .

however , according to one view , some spaniards may be laboring under a delusion that they canopt out of the dangers of globalization , while enjoying the benefits .

according to this interpretation , many in spainmay believe that their country is a secondary player in world affairs and should not get mixed up in great powerpolitics .

this supposed attitude is said to be a result of spain's historical development , which has included acenturies - long decline from great power status and international isolation under the franco regime .

these observersbelieve that this attitude may be bolstered by perceptions among some spaniards that the united states , includingthebush administration , knows little about spain , and is insensitive to spanish concerns .

 ( 8 ) .

on april 18 , 2004 , the day after the new spanish government took office , zapatero announced the immediate withdrawal of the 1,300 spanish troops in iraq .

the suddenness of the move came as a surprise to many observers,because during the campaign zapatero had left open at least the possibility that the troops could stay , if certainconditions were met .

in a five - minute phone call to zapatero , president bush expressed regret about the "abrupt"spanish decision and warned against taking actions that would give "false comfort to terrorists. .

all spanishcombattroops left iraq by april 27 .

unnamed u.s. officials sharply criticized the way the withdrawal was planned , sayingitwas done without proper coordination and in an "unprofessional" way that could unnecessarily jeopardize operationsand lives .

 ( 9 ) given that spain's troops made up lessthan 1% of coalition forces in iraq , it may be argued that thelong - term military impact of a spanish withdrawal may not be dramatic .

however , some observers are concernedthatthe spanish withdrawal could be part of a trend of declining public support for the iraq mission in europeanmembers,which could undermine the coalition in the long run .

 ( 10 ) zapatero has stressed that his first priority is the fight against terrorism , and has called for closer cooperation amongeu police and intelligence services .

in september 2004 , french and spanish officials announced a joint unit ofpoliceand judges to combat terrorist groups , including eta and islamic extremists .

however , the new government'scommitment to use military force to fight terror may be less certain .

zapatero has said that military force shouldbe a"last resort' in the war against terrorism , claiming that it "can never be an effective method for eliminating orfightingfanatic , radical and criminal groups. .

 ( 11 ) nevertheless , as a signal that it is still committed to the global war on terror , spain expanded its contribution to theinternational security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan from 137 to 1,040 in august 2004 , in order to provideadditional security for afghanistan's october 2004 elections .

however , spain plans to withdraw 500 of the troopsafter the elections , despite afghan pleas to extend the deployment of the entire contingent .

the change in government in spain may have a significant effect on u.s. - spanish relations .

the close , personal relationship that developed between president bush and aznar is unlikely to be repeated with zapatero .

aznarforgeda close relationship with the united states in part because he believed that a partnership with the world's onlysuperpower would enhance spain's role in the world , making it a major international player .

a close alliance withtheunited states also secured u.s. support and aid for aznar's tough stance against eta and basque separatism .

aznar's critics said that the spanish leader was motivated by a desire to enhance his own personal prestige ratherthanto serve spain's real interests .

in contrast to aznar's closeness to the administration , zapatero appeared to beunconcerned that some of his initial remarks might be taken as insults by the white house .

for example , he assertedthat president bush had based his iraq policy on "lies" and suggested that the american people should vote him outofoffice in november 2004 .

 ( 12 ) more recently , hesuggested that the chances for peace in iraq would enhanced if morecountries followed spain's example and pulled their forces out of iraq , causing the united states to seek aclarification of his remarks .

 ( 13 ) according to zapatero , the current focus of spain's foreign policy is building closer ties to its european union partners , particularly france and germany , while still retaining good relations with the united states .

spain's newleaders say they will push forward more vigorously with eu integration .

zapatero's supporters say this policy willbein line with the foreign policy pursued by spain in the post - franco era , which they view as being based on a broadpublic consensus , as opposed to the allegedly autocratic style of aznar .

on the other hand , as in the cases of france and germany , which have also had difficulties with washington,damageto u.s. - spanish relations may be limited by common interests , including the fight against terrorism .

in september2004 , spain's attorney general announced that spain and the united states plan to sign an agreement by the end of2004 under which prosecutors from both countries could share information about islamic militants .

both thenationalintelligence reform act ( s. 2845 ) and the 9 / 11 recommendations appropriations act ( h.r .

10 ) call for closer international cooperation in the fight against terrorism , including by eliminating terroristsanctuariesand curtailing terrorist financing .

a question for the future is the use of u.s. military bases in spain .

the administration was easily able to secure theuse of u.s. bases in spain for the iraq operation .

the bases played a significant role in the delivery of men andmateriel to the iraqi theater .

given the criticisms by spain's new leaders of the concept of what they view as a u.s.policy of "preventive war," it might be more difficult to secure spanish permission to use the bases in futureoperations , especially if the action did not have prior u.n. security council approval .

1 .

 ( back ) leslie crawford and joshua levitt , "aplace in the history of infamy - - how the government's assumption andmisjudgement shook spain," financial times , march 26 , 2004 , 15 .

2 .

 ( back ) ap / ipsos poll , march 5 , 2004 .

3 .

 ( back ) lizette alvarez and elaine sciolino,"parsing spain's result: many voters felt misled," new york times , march18 , 2004 , 1 .

4 .

 ( back ) el pais newspaper website , http: / / www.elpais.es .

5 .

 ( back ) neomi ramirez and luis f. fidalgo,elecciones generales 14-m. resultados .

evolucion del voto , el mundo ,march 16 , 2004 , p. 17 .

6 .

 ( back ) "spanish socialists ten points ahead infirst post - election poll," agence france presse , march 22 , 2004 .

7 .

 ( back ) "spanish politicians rebuff u.s.accusations of appeasement," associated press , march 18 , 2004 .

8 .

 ( back ) pablo pardo , "the spanish disposition," the weekly standard , march 29 , 2004 .

9 .

 ( back ) robin wright and bradley graham , "spainplans to hasten withdrawal of troops," washington post , april 22,1004 , 25 .

10 .

 ( back ) for more on this issue see crs report rs21794 , iraq coalition: public opinion indicators in selected europeancountries , by [author name scrubbed] .

11 .

 ( back ) john diamond , "zapatero wants toalter war on terror," usa today , march 22 , 2004 , 13 .

12 .

 ( back ) keith richburg , "spain's next primeminister says u.s. should dump bush," washington post , march 18 , 2004,23 .

13 .

 ( back ) "zapatero comments on iraq drawu.s .

demand for clarification," agence france presse , september 14 , 2004 .

