t he old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program , better known as social security , is administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) .

the survivors insurance component of oasdi covers insured workers in case of death .

when a worker insured by social security dies , his or her family may qualify for survivors benefits .

at the end of 2017 , there were approximately 6 million survivor beneficiaries , representing 9.7% of the total oasdi beneficiary population .

average monthly survivors benefits in december 2017 were $1,151.71 .

that month , 80.9% of survivor beneficiaries were female ( including female children ) and 31.8% of survivor beneficiaries were children .

additional data on survivor benefits are provided in table 1 at the conclusion of this report .

the social security act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-271 ) , which created the social security program , did not include any provisions for monthly survivors benefits , but did include a lump - sum payment upon the death of a fully insured person over the age of 65 .

monthly survivors benefits were established in the social security amendments of 1939 ( p.l .

76-379 ) , including those for widows , parents , and children .

this was offset by a reduction in the size of the lump - sum death payment , although coverage expanded to both fully or currently insured workers ( defined in the " lump - sum death benefits " section ) , regardless of age .

these changes were made to "afford more adequate protection to the family as a unit" than could be afforded by a single lump - sum payment that did not take into account family size or number of survivors .

 table 1 , at the conclusion of this report , provides data on the various types of survivors benefits .

the total survivors benefits paid to an insured worker's family are capped regardless of the number of family members who qualify for benefits .

the maximum family benefit is 150% to 188% of the worker's pia , depending on the amount of the pia .

if the total survivors benefits payable to a worker's family exceed this maximum , each person's benefit will be reduced proportionately .

divorced widow ( er ) benefits do not count toward the maximum .

survivors benefits may also be reduced for beneficiaries who are working and younger than full retirement age .

survivor beneficiaries younger than full retirement age are subject to a retirement earnings test , wherein their benefits are reduced if their earnings exceed certain limits .

the benefits of other family members would not be affected by this reduction .

working in employment not covered by social security can also lead to lower benefits .

the government pension offset ( gpo ) affects the benefits of beneficiaries who have worked in non - covered employment .

if the survivor receives a government pension based on non - covered work , the gpo will reduce the survivors benefits by two - thirds of the survivor's monthly pension amount .

in addition to monthly survivors benefits , a deceased worker's family may be eligible to receive a one - time death benefit of $255 .

only one lump - sum death benefit is payable to the family of an insured worker .

the lump - sum death benefit is paid to the insured worker's surviving spouse , regardless of age , as long as the spouse meets certain requirements .

if no eligible widow or widower exists , the death benefit is paid in equal shares to any children who qualify for child's benefits based on the deceased worker's record .

if a worker leaves no eligible spouse or child , the lump - sum death payment will not be paid .

