the marine corps is responsible for the conduct of amphibious operations in support of the full spectrum of u.s. national security objectives .

if the marines need armored fighting vehicles in the early stages of an amphibious landing , these vehicles must either be transported by landing craft with limited protection against enemy fire , or the armored vehicle must come ashore under its own power .

like current aavs , the efv is designed to roll off a navy amphibious assault ship , move under its own power to the beach , and cross the beach and operate inland .

the efv is designed to be launched 25 miles off shore ( the aav can be launched only 2 miles from shore ) permitting the fleet to operate "over the horizon," where it theoretically would be less vulnerable to enemy fire .

there are concerns that the 25-mile over the horizon operating capability may no longer provide the protection to the fleet that it once did .

one example of such lack of protection is the 2006 hezbollah c - 802 cruise missile attack against an israeli ship where two missiles were fired , with one hitting the israeli warship , which was about 10 miles from shore , and the second missile striking an egyptian ship 36 miles from shore .

concerns also have been raised that , when ashore , the flat - bottomed efv may be excessively vulnerable to improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) .

congress might decide to evaluate general dynamics' proposal to build 200 efvs instead of 573 .

one evaluation criteria could be the efv's overall performance in operational testing , which is in its final stages .

while general dynamics claims that current testing is reportedly "exceeding requirements by 90 percent," the marines have not yet issued their final test results .

another issue for consideration is if the technologically advanced efv now fits in with the marines' planned restructuring to what it describes as a "middle weight force" with less equipment that it currently possesses .

while general dynamics is promoting a 200 efv procurement , it is likely that if this course of action is chosen , that they would then advocate for the acquisition of additional efvs over time , perhaps approaching the 500 plus or even 1,000 vehicle requirements of the past .

if the efv program is terminated as secretary gates intends , there could likely be two decades - worth of knowledge and associated technologies , which could be a major benefit — as well as potential cost savings — for the aav upgrade and acv programs .

while it is reasonable to assume that the marines would make good use of work previously done on the efv , congress might consider examining what efv technologies the marines plan to migrate to the acv .

this examination could help to ensure that there is "value added" by these technologies and that they meet "cost - benefit" criteria — in other words , these technologies meet acv key performance parameters ( kpps ) and are not expensive "nice to have" features that could potentially drive up the acv per unit cost .

congress might wish to review whether the marines' plan to field the acv in four years is overly ambitious .

during the navy's presentation of its fy2012 budget request , it was reported that navy and pentagon officials stated that the "soonest that the acv would be ready was 2024. .

originally , general amos had reportedly wanted the gcv to be fielded using an acquisition track similar to the mine - resistant ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicle , which was fielded in a matter of months as opposed to years .

as previously noted , the commandant of the marine corps , general james amos , has committed the marine corps to fielding the acv within four years .

it is not known if this four - year requirement is based on a specific operational need or if it is driven by other factors .

because of the wide disparity in expectations for the delivery date of the acv , it might be beneficial to take a comprehensive look at the requirements and expected resources available to the marines to ensure that a four - year development cycle is not both overly optimistic and ambitious .

while the marines certainly cannot afford another two - decades long developmental effort , some believe that they cannot afford to rush acv development and testing in order to meet an arbitrary timeline .

