the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides health care services to veterans who meet certain eligibility requirements .

the vha is primarily a direct service provider of primary care , specialized care , and related medical and social support services to veterans though an integrated health care system .

in 1973 , congress enacted the veteran health care expansion act of 1973 ( p.l .

93-82 ) , which , among other things , established effective september 1 , 1973 , the civilian health and medical program of the department of veterans affairs ( champva ) as a means of providing health care services to dependents and survivors of certain veterans .

as stated in the house report accompanying p.l .

93-82 : the nation has long recognized that the widow and children of a veteran who dies of service - connected disease or injury or of a veteran who has a service - connected total disability are in a special category and deserving of substantial compensation and assistance in return for the sacrifice the family has made .

this recognition has been shown in title 38 programs which provide for death compensation benefits , home loans , and educational assistance benefits for wives , widows , and war orphans .

failure to provide for the medical care of such individuals is an oversight which should be corrected .

champva is fundamentally a health insurance program where certain eligible dependents and survivors of veterans ( veterans rated permanently and totally disabled from a service - connected condition ) obtain medical care from private health care providers .

beneficiaries usually pay 25% of the cost of medical care up to an annual catastrophic cap of $3,000 plus an annual outpatient deductible of $50 per individual or $100 per family .

champva pays the remaining 75% of the cost of the beneficiaries' medical care .

champva was designed to share costs of health services and to provide medical care in a manner similar to the care provided to certain eligible beneficiaries under the department of defense ( dod ) tricare program ( described later in this report ) .

the program is administered by the veterans health administration ( vha ) , office of community care , located in denver , co .

the number of beneficiaries enrolled in champva has grown over the years .

from fy2001 through fy2017 , enrollments grew by 396% — from 96,500 to 478,600 beneficiaries ( see figure 1 ) .

the 2001 expansion of champva eligibility to certain individuals aged 65 years and older has contributed somewhat to the increase in enrollment .

moreover , there has been an increase in enrollment of dependents and spouses of certain vietnam - era veterans with service - connected disabilities .

this increase in vietnam - era champva sponsorship has occurred as aging vietnam - era veterans with service - connected disabilities experience a worsening of symptoms and a change in disability status .

once a veteran becomes va - rated permanently and totally disabled for a service - connected disability , the veteran's spouse and dependents are then eligible to enroll in champva .

the enactment of the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-163 ) , expanded champva eligibility to include additional categories of non - veterans , such as primary family caregivers of certain seriously injured veterans qualifying under the program of comprehensive assistance for family caregivers ( pcafc ) .

table a - 1 provides a summary of major legislative changes that have affected the champva program since 1973 ( see appendix a ) .

the number of unique champva users has also grown by 485% , from 61,900 in fy2001 to 361,900 in fy2017 ( see figure 1 ) .

unique users are enrollees who utilize health care at least once in a fiscal year .

appendix b provides a state - by - state breakdown of the number of champva enrollees and unique users for fy2017 .

funding for champva is provided through the vha's medical services account .

as shown in figure 2 , spending for champva ( excluding administrative costs ) has increased by 945% between fy2001 and fy2017 .

the average cost per patient has also increased from approximately $2,349 per patient in fy2001 to an estimated $4,200 per patient in fy2017 .

a demographic shift in champva enrollees from less expensive younger beneficiaries to more expensive aging beneficiaries , the "extension of champva benefits to beneficiaries over the age of 65," and the general inflation of medical costs are potential reasons for this increase in champva expenditures .

the next section provides answers to frequently asked questions about the program .

the questions are presented according to the following topics: eligibility , benefits , payments , and other relevant programs .

tricare is a health care program run by the dod for families of active duty military servicemembers , families of servicemembers who died while on active duty , and retired military service men , women , and their families , regardless of their disability status .

champva is a comprehensive program run by the va for eligible family members of veterans rated permanently and totally disabled for a service - connected disability or the family members of veterans who died from a va - rated service - connected disability , whereas tricare has no disability criteria required for eligibility .

the sponsoring veteran does not receive services through champva , as he or she is eligible to receive services through the va .

dependents of military retirees are not eligible for champva , and must apply for benefits through tricare .

champva is the secondary payer for beneficiaries with medicare coverage .

under section 3 of the veterans' survivors benefits improvement act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-14 ) , referred to as champva for life , champva benefits were expanded to those over the age of 65 in the following circumstances .

if a beneficiary turns 65 before june 5 , 2001 , and only receives medicare part a , the beneficiary is eligible for champva without having to purchase medicare part b coverage .

if a beneficiary turns 65 before june 5 , 2001 , and receives both medicare part a and part b , the beneficiary must retain both parts to be eligible for continued champva as secondary coverage .

if a beneficiary turns 65 on or after june 5 , 2001 , the beneficiary must be enrolled in medicare parts a and b to be eligible for champva .

enrollment in medicare part d is not required to become or remain eligible for champva .

individuals aged 65 or older who are not entitled to medicare part a retain champva eligibility .

the citi is a voluntary program for champva beneficiaries that provides medical care through local va facilities on a space - available basis .

beneficiaries receiving care at the va through the citi program are not required to pay a deductible or participate in cost sharing .

no extra enrollment is necessary to participate in the citi program ; the beneficiary simply has to determine if the local va is a participating facility .

the majority of va facilities are citi participants .

it is important to emphasize that care is delivered based on the availability of space .

beneficiaries on medicare or who have an hmo plan as their primary insurance are not eligible for the citi program .

under the aca , individuals are required to maintain minimum essential coverage for themselves and their dependents .

beginning in 2014 , the aca requires most individuals who do not maintain minimum essential insurance coverage — and do not qualify for an exemption — to potentially pay a penalty for noncompliance .

those enrolled in the champva program are considered to have minimum essential coverage and therefore are not subject to the individual mandate penalty when filing their taxes .

the penalty is in effect through 2018 ; beginning in 2019 , the penalty will be effectively eliminated ( i.e. , beginning in 2019 , individuals who do not comply with the mandate will not have to pay the penalty ) .

if a champva enrollee wishes to purchase additional health care insurance from the health insurance marketplace ( exchanges ) , he or she would not qualify for premium credits and subsidies .

however , he or she may still purchase private health insurance to complement champva coverage .

appendix a. champva legislative history appendix b. champva enrollment and unique users , by stat .

