operation enduring freedom ( oef ) began on october 7 , 2001 , and was primarily conducted in afghanistan .

on december 28 , 2014 , president obama announced that oef had ended .

a "follow - on mission," operation freedom's sentinel ( ofs ) , was started on january 1 , 2015 , to "continue training , advising , and assisting afghan security forces. .

operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) began on march 19 , 2003 , and was primarily conducted in iraq .

on august 31 , 2010 , president obama announced that oif had ended .

a transitional force of u.s. troops remained in iraq under operation new dawn ( ond ) , which ended on december 15 , 2011 .

several thousand u.s. civilian personnel , contract personnel , and a limited number of u.s. military personnel remain in iraq carrying out u.s. government business and cooperative programs under the auspices of agreements with the iraqi government .

on october 15 , 2014 , u.s. central command designated new military operations in iraq and syria against the islamic state of iraq and the levant as operation inherent resolve ( oir ) .

 ( for more information on war and conflict dates , see crs report rs21405 , u.s .

periods of war and dates of recent conflicts , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

daily updates of total u.s. military and civilian casualties in oif , oef , ond , oir , and ofs can be found at the department of defense's ( dod's ) website , at http: / / www.defense.gov / news / casualty.pdf .

table 1 gives the overall casualties in oif , ond , and oef .

the u.s. army office of the surgeon general ( osg ) , using the defense medical surveillance system ( dmss ) , provided data on the incidence of post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) cases .

according to dr. michael carino of the osg , a case of ptsd is defined as an individual with two or more outpatient visits or one or more hospitalizations during which ptsd was diagnosed .

the threshold of two or more outpatient visits is used in the dmss to increase the likelihood that the individual has , or had , clinically diagnosable ptsd .

a single visit on record commonly reflects a servicemember who was evaluated for possible ptsd , but did not actually meet the criteria for clinical diagnosis .

in this data set , an incident of ptsd among deployed servicemembers is defined as occurring when a deployed servicemember was diagnosed with ptsd at least 30 days after being deployed .

many statistics on traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) are available to the public , at the defense and veterans brain injury center , at http: / / dvbic.dcoe.mil / dod - worldwide - numbers - tbi .

unlike ptsd numbers , which are segmented by those deployed and those not previously deployed , tbi numbers represent medical diagnoses of tbi that occurred anywhere u.s. forces are located , including the continental united states .

 table 4 shows the number of individuals with battle - injury major limb amputations for oef , ofs , oif , ond , and oir .

a major limb amputation includes the loss of one or more limbs , the loss of one or more partial limbs , or the loss of one or more full or partial hand or foot .

the total number of individuals with major limb amputations as of june 1 , 2015 , is 1,645 .

figure 3 charts the number of major limb amputations due to a battle injury in oif , ond , oir , oef , and ofs from 2001 through june 1 , 2015 , for all services .

dod provides data on the demographics of servicemembers who have died or been wounded in action in oif , ond , and oef through the defense casualty analysis system at https: / / www.dmdc.osd.mil / dcas / pages / casualties.xhtml .

to find this information , select a conflict and select between "deaths" or "wounded in action," and then select from the demographic categories , including gender , age , race , and ethnicity .

similar data have not yet been publically released for oef and oir .

