earlier federal law , the jacob wetterling act , encouraged the states to establish and maintain a registration system .

each of them has done so .

the walsh act preserves the basis structure of the earlier law , expands upon it , and makes more specific matters that were previously left to individual choice .

for purposes of compliance by the states and other jurisdictions the prior law remains in effect until the later of three years after enactment or one year after the necessary software for the new uniform , online system has become available .

for registrants , however , the new requirements became effective upon enactment .

the adam walsh child protection and safety act is focused , as its name implies , upon child protection and safety .

its efforts involve the creation of new federal crimes , the enhancement of the penalties for preexisting federal crimes , and the amendment of federal criminal procedure , among other things .

many of these efforts are child - specific ; some are more general .

the new federal crimes include the following .

murder in the course of a wider range of federal sex offenses .

internet date rape drug trafficking .

kidnaping that involves the use of interstate facilities .

child abuse in indian country .

production of obscene material .

obscenity or pornography in internet source codes .

child exploitation enterprises .

the amendments to federal criminal procedure are a bit more numerous and somewhat more likely to implicate crimes in addition to those committed against children .

among their number are: random searches of sex offender registrants as a condition of probation or supervised release .

expanded dna collection from those facing federal charges or convicted of any federal offense .

elimination of the statute of limitations for various sexual crimes or crimes committed against a child .

participation of state crime victims in federal habeas proceedings .

study of the elimination of marital privileges in abuse cases .

preventive detention in cases involving a minor victim or a firearm .

compensation for guardians ad litem .

government control of evidence in pornography cases .

forfeiture procedures in obscenity , exploitation and pornography cases .

murder during course of various sex offenses as a felony murder predicate .

civil commitment procedure for federal sex offenders .

the act's penalty enhancements are the most extensive of its amendments to federal criminal law and procedure .

it establishes new sentencing ranges for the federal crimes of murder , kidnaping , maiming , or aggravated assault when the victim is a child .

in the case of murder , the penalty is imprisonment for any term of years not less than 30 years , imprisonment for life , or death ; in the case of kidnaping or maiming , imprisonment for life or any term of years not less than 25 years ; and in the case of aggravated assault , imprisonment for life or any term of years not less than 10 years .

while the new minimums terms of imprisonment must yield to any otherwise applicable higher mandatory minimum , the new maximum penalties trump any otherwise applicable maximum .

the provision has the effect of making capital offenses out of several federal murder statutes that heretofore were punishable only by a term of imprisonment when the victim is a child and when the misconduct involves the intentional killing of the victim or a reckless , fatal act of violence .

the act increases penalties for several other child offenses including .

the act establishes , reinforces , and revives several grant programs devoted to child and community safety , including the following .

big brothers big sisters of america ( authorizing appropriations totaling $58.5 million through fy2011 ) .

national police athletic league ( authorizing appropriations totaling $64 million through fy2010 ) .

state , local and tribal governments in order to outfit sex offenders with electronic monitoring devices ( authorizing appropriations totaling $15 million through fy2009 ) .

public and private entities that assist in treatment of juvenile sex offenders or that assist the states in their enforcement of sex offender registration requirements ( authorizing appropriations totaling $30 million through fy2009 ) .

facilitating the prosecution of cases cleared as a consequence of the dna backlog elimination ( authorizing necessary appropriations through fy2011 ) .

law enforcement agencies to combat sexual abuse of children ( authorizing necessary appropriations through fy2009 ) .

a private nonprofit entity for a program of crime prevention media campaign ( authorizing appropriations totaling $34 million through fy2010 ) .

state , local and tribal government programs for the voluntary fingerprinting of children ( authorizing appropriations totaling $20 million through fy2011 ) .

the rape , abuse & incest national network ( rainn ) to operate a sexual assault hotline , conduct media campaigns , and provide technical assistance for law enforcement ( authorizing appropriations totaling $12 million through fy2010 ) .

to enable state , local and tribal entities to verify the addresses of registered sex offenders ( authorizing necessary appropriations through fy2009 ) .

the act includes a wide assortment of other provisions designed to prevent , prosecute or punish the victimization of children .

among them are sections that broaden access to federal criminal records information systems , create a national child abuse registry , expand recordkeeping requirements for those in the business of producing sexually explicit material , immunize officials from civil liability for activities involving sexual offender registration , and authorize and direct the department of justice to establish and maintain a number of child protective activities .

