the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ) , signed into law on january 8 , 2002 ( p.l .

107-110 ) , required that all paraprofessionals assigned instructional duties and employed in title i , part a - funded schools meet minimum qualifications by january 8 , 2006 .

the nclb states that paraprofessionals ( also known as instructional aides ) must have completed two years of college , obtained an associate's degree , or demonstrated content knowledge and an ability to assist in classroom instruction .

on june 17 , 2005 , the education department ( ed ) announced that the paraprofessional deadline would be extended to the end of the 2005-2006 school year to coincide with the related nclb deadline for highly qualified teachers ( hqt ) .

the use of instructional aides in u.s. classrooms has been increasing every year since data on paraprofessionals were first collected by ed's national center for education statistics .

instructional aides accounted for 2.5% of total full - time equivalent instructional staff in 1970 , 11.9% in 1980 , 16.5% in 2000 , and 17.2% in 2009 .

ed's interim report on nclb teacher quality implementation revealed that paraprofessionals accounted for about one - third of instructional staff in title i - a funded schools and districts .

instructional aides are also increasingly handling classroom responsibilities without supervision .

ed's final report on nclb teacher quality implementation indicated that 19% of paraprofessionals spent "at least half of their time working with students in the classroom without a teacher present. .

recognition that the quality of instruction in u.s. schools is increasingly affected by the quality of paraprofessional staff has bolstered support for federal instructional aide standards .

prior to the nclb , the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) required only that paraprofessionals possess a high school diploma .

this requirement was established in previous esea amendments passed under the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-382 ) .

legislative proposals establishing higher standards for paraprofessionals were supported by ed under both the clinton and bush administrations , and were eventually enacted under the nclb .

as of the enactment of the nclb on january 8 , 2002 , all newly hired title i paraprofessionals whose duties include instructional support must possess the minimum qualifications prior to employment .

that is , they must have completed two years of study at an institution of higher education , obtained an associate's ( or higher ) degree , or passed a formal state or local academic assessment , demonstrating knowledge of and the ability to assist in instructing reading , writing , and mathematics .

paraprofessionals hired on or before january 8 , 2002 , who were performing instructional duties in a program supported with title i funds , were required to meet these requirements by the end of the 2005-2006 school year .

the nclb paraprofessional qualification requirements apply only to title i paraprofessionals with instructional duties ; that is , those who provide one - on - one tutoring if the tutoring is scheduled at a time when a student would not otherwise receive instruction from a teacher ; assist with classroom management , such as organizing instructional and other materials ; provide assistance in a computer laboratory ; conduct parental involvement activities ; provide support in a library or media center ; act as a translator ; or provide instructional services to students under the direct supervision of a teacher .

individuals who work in food services , cafeteria or playground supervision , personal care services , non - instructional computer assistance , and similar positions are not considered paraprofessionals , and do not have to meet these requirements .

also , esea section 1119 ( e ) indicates that paraprofessionals who only serve as translators or who only conduct parental involvement activities must have a secondary school diploma or its equivalent , but do not have to meet additional requirements .

under nclb , local education agencies ( leas ) must make progress toward meeting their state's annual objectives for teacher quality and student achievement .

if a state determines that an lea has failed to make progress toward meeting those annual objectives for three consecutive years , the lea is prohibited from using title i - a funds on any paraprofessional hired after the date of the determination .

nclb authorized most esea programs through fy2007 .

the general education provisions act ( gepa ) provided an automatic one - year extension of these programs through fy2008 .

while most esea programs no longer have an explicit authorization , the programs continue to receive annual appropriations and paraprofessional quality requirements continue to be in place .

leas in states that have received an esea flexibility waiver are not restricted in the use of title i - a funds for failing to meet nclb teacher quality and student achievement accountability requirements ; however , all leas still must comply with the law's paraprofessional quality requirements .

the 114 th congress has acted on legislation to reauthorize the esea .

possible reauthorization issues concerning the paraprofessional provisions in title i include the following: are the assessments used to evaluate paraprofessional quality rigorous enough , and are they adequately tied to academic standards for students ? .

some consider the parapro and workkeys tests to be the "easy route," and claim they do not measure a instructional aide's ability to improve classroom instruction .

might a reauthorized esea be more explicit about the nature of these tests by linking them to other accountability provisions ? .

should ed be given greater authority to enforce higher standards for paraprofessional assessments ? .

should the paraprofessional qualification requirements be applied to a broader group of instructional aide s ? .

for example , should these requirements be applied to all paraprofessionals with instructional responsibilities , not just to those paid with title i - a funds ? .

should the exceptions currently made for computer lab assistants , translators , and those assisting with parental involvement be curtailed ? .

is the language regarding "direct supervision" too vague or too difficult to enforce ? .

do current provisions for the professional development of instructional aide s adequately encourage states to improve the paraprofessional workforce ? .

should states be given incentives to adopt paraprofessional certification requirements , as have been adopted in some states ? .

are there other ways to encourage paraprofessional development beyond the minimum qualifications that would positively affect the overall level of instructional quality ? .

have the paraprofessional qualification requirements significantly affected the extent to which title i - a funds are used to hire these staff ? .

in particular , have a significant number of paraprofessionals lost their jobs , or been assigned to non - title i - a positions , after the end of the 2005-2006 school year because they were unable to meet the paraprofessional qualification requirements ? .

has this resulted in an overall decline or improvement in the quality of instruction ? .

should the roles of states versus leas in setting policies and implementing these requirements be clarified ? .

particularly in comparison to the teacher quality requirements of the nclb , there has been relatively little guidance from ed , or clarity in the statute , on state - versus - lea roles in the area of paraprofessional qualification requirements .

has the result been a constructive form of flexibility or dysfunctional ambiguity ? .

