colonial america was well acquainted with habeas corpus and with occasional suspensions of the writ .

the drafters of the united states constitution , after enumerating the powers of congress , inserted the limitation that "the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it. .

consistent with the common law , the writ was available to those confined by federal officials without trial or admission to bail , but was not available to contest the validity of confinement pursuant to conviction by a federal court of competent jurisdiction , even one whose judgment was in error .

in 1867 , congress substantially increased the jurisdiction of federal courts to issue the writ by authorizing its issuance "in all cases," state or federal , "where any person may be restrained of his or her liberty in violation of the constitution , or of any treaty or law of the united states. .

early in the forties , the court stopped requiring that an alleged constitutional violation void the jurisdiction of the trial court before federal habeas relief could be considered .

federal judges soon complained that federal prisoner abuses of habeas had become "legion. .

congress responded by incorporating into the 1948 revision of the judicial code the first major revision of the federal habeas statute since 1867 .

state courts exerted little pressure for revision of the federal habeas statute in 1948 .

although habeas relief had been available to state prisoners by statute since 1867 and subsequent decisions seemed to invite access , the hospitality that federal habeas extended to state convicts with due process and other federal constitutional claims had not yet become apparent .

this all changed over the next two decades .

some of the change was attributable to expansive supreme court interpretations of the procedural guarantees of the bill of rights and of the extent to which those guarantees were binding upon the states through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .

by the early seventies , the supreme court had begun to announce a series of decisions grounded in the values of respect for the work of state courts and finality in the process of trial and review .

thus , state prisoners who fail to afford state courts an opportunity to correct constitutional defects are barred from raising them for the first time in federal habeas in the absence of a justification .

nor may they scatter their habeas claims in a series of successive petitions .

those who plead guilty and thereby waive , as a matter of state law , any constitutional claims , may not use federal habeas to revive them .

and state prisoners may not employ federal habeas as a means to assert , or retroactively claim the benefits of , a previously unrecognized interpretation of constitutional law ( i.e. , a "new rule" ) .

the antiterrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( aedpa ) , codified , supplemented , and expanded upon the court's limitations on the availability of the writ .

aedpa was the culmination and amalgamation of disparate legislative efforts , including habeas proposals , some of them stretching back well over a decade .

its adjustments help define the contemporary boundaries of the current writ .

one of the most interesting and perplexing features of federal habeas corpus law involves the question of congress' authority to restrict access to the writ .

the constitution nowhere expressly grants a right of access to the writ , although it might be seen as an attribute of the suspension clause or the due process clause or both .

yet the suspension clause says no more than that "the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it," u.s. const .

art.i , §9 , cl.2 .

and the due process clause speaks with an equal want of particularity when it declares that , "no person shall ... deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law," u.s. const .

amend .

v. balanced against this , is the power of congress to "ordain and establish" the lower federal courts , u.s. const .

art .

iii , §1 ; to regulate and make exceptions to the appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court , u.s. const .

art .

iii , §2 , cl.2 ; to enact all laws necessary and power to carry into effect the constitutional powers of the courts as well as its own , u.s.const .

art .

i , §8 , cl.18 ; and at least arguably the power to suspend the privilege to the writ in times of rebellion or invasion , u.s. const .

art .

i , §9 , cl.2 .

the question as to the scope of congress' control over court's appellate jurisdiction in habeas cases surfaced when a prisoner challenged the aedpa's habeas limitations in felker v. turpin .

in particular , felker argued that the provisions which declared the appellate court determination of whether to authorize a second or successive habeas petition was neither appealable nor subject to a petition for rehearing or for a writ of certiorari .

the court took no offense to the limitation of habeas appellate jurisdiction .

since the aedpa does not repeal the court's authority to entertain a petition for habeas corpus , there can be no plausible argument that the act has deprived the court of appellate jurisdiction in violation of article iii , §2 .

review remained possible under the original writ of habeas corpus .

the felker court disavowed any contention that the aedpa's provisions violated the suspension clause .

it did not stop with the proposition that the suspension clause does not extend to convicted prisoners or any other prisoners ineligible for the writ under common law , however , but assumed that the suspension clause of the constitution refers to the writ as it exists today , rather than as it existed in 1789 .

even under this relaxed standard it found any claim based on felker's case wanting .

the aedpa's limitation on repetitious or stale claims was seen as a variation of res judicata , which in the area of habeas had been an evolving body of equitable principles informed and controlled by historical usage , statutory developments , and judicial decisions .

the added restrictions which the act places on second habeas petitions are well within the compass of this evolutionary process and do not amount to a suspension of the writ contrary to article i , §9 .

shortly after felker , however , the court narrowly construed congressional efforts to restrict review of various immigration decisions and recognized that the courts retained jurisdiction to review habeas petitions , with the observation that otherwise serious suspension clause issues would arise .

the court was compelled to face the issue of congress' constitutional authority to absolutely bar access to the writ , which the court avoided in felker , in boumediene v. bush .

boumediene was among the foreign nationals detained at the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba .

the military commissions act stripped federal courts of habeas jurisdiction over the guantanamo detainees .

the government argued that noncitizens designated as enemy combatants and detained in territory located outside our nation's borders have no constitutional rights and no privilege to habeas corpus .

the detainees disputed both claims .

they argued that the legislation violated the suspension clause , which declares that "[t]he privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it. .

the court began with the observation that , "[t]he framers viewed freedom from unlawful restraint as a fundamental precept of liberty , and they understood the writ of habeas corpus as a vital instrument to secure that freedom. .

the framers also remembered the history of the english writ with its periodic suspensions of the writ .

"in our own system the suspension clause is designed to protect against these cyclical abuses .

the clause protects the right of the detained by a means consistent with the essential design of the constitution .

it ensures that , except during periods of formal suspension , the judiciary will have a time - tested device , the writ , to maintain the delicate balance of government that is itself the surest safeguard of liberty. .

these separation of powers concerns and the history of the territorial scope of the writ led the court to conclude that article i , § 9 , clause 2 of the constitution has full effect at guantanamo bay .

and so the question became , did the suspension clause bar curtailment of habeas jurisdiction in the manner of the military commissions act provision ? .

since the military commissions act did not constitute a formal suspension of the writ , the issue was whether the statute stripping jurisdiction to issue the writ avoids the suspension clause mandate because congress has provided adequate substitute procedures for habeas corpus in the detainee treatment act's combatant status review tribunal procedures .

the court identified , in context of boumediene , the essential features of habeas corpus and any adequate substitute .

first , it noted that "the privilege of habeas corpus entitles the prisoner to a meaningful opportunity to demonstrate that he is being held pursuant to the erroneous application of interpretation of relevant law. .

second , "the necessary scope of habeas review in part depends upon the rigor of any earlier proceedings. .

thus , "when a person is detained by executive order , rather than , say , after being tried and convicted in a court , the need for collateral review is more pressing. .

third , "[f]or the writ of habeas corpus , or its substitute to function as an effective and proper remedy in this context , the court that conducts the habeas proceeding must have the means to correct errors that occur during [prior] proceedings. .

fourth , it must have "some authority to assess the sufficiency of the government's evidence against the detainee .

it also must have the authority to admit and consider relevant exculpatory evidence that was not introduced during the earlier proceeding. .

the court found the detainee treatment act procedures wanting when assessed against the standards of an adequate substitute for normal habeas procedures .

thus , the provision of the military combatants act , purporting the curtail habeas jurisdiction with respect to guantanamo detainees , was found to constitute an unconstitutional suspension of the writ .

