iran has sought to shape and influence the post - saddam political structure in iraq to iran's advantage by assuring the political success of pro - iranian politicians , but with mixed success .

during 2003-2005 , iran calculated that it suited its interests to support the entry of iraqi shiite islamist factions into an election process that the united states established in iraq .

the number of shiites in iraq ( about 60% of the population ) virtually ensured shiite dominance of an elected government .

to this extent , iran's goals did not conflict with the u.s. objective of trying to establish representative democracy in iraq .

iran helped assemble a shiite islamist bloc ( "united iraqi alliance" ) , encompassing virtually all the major shiite factions — the islamic supreme council of iraq ( isci ) , the da'wa ( islamic call ) party , and the faction of the 35-year - old cleric moqtada al sadr .

this formidable alliance won 128 of the 275 seats in the december 15 , 2005 , election for a full - term parliament .

dawa senior leader nuri al - maliki was selected as prime minister ; several isci figures took other leadership positions , and five sadrists were given ministerial posts .

isci is the iraqi faction with the longest and closest ties to iran .

isci's leaders , including ayatollah mohammad baqr al hakim , who was killed in an august 2003 car bomb in najaf , had spent their years of exile in iran and built ties to iranian leaders .

his was succeeded as isci leader by his younger brother , abd al aziz al - hakim , but he died of lung cancer in august 2009 .

he was succeeded by his son , ammar al - hakim .

finance minister bayan jabr and other isci leaders , such as deputy president adel abd al - mahdi and constitutional review commission chair hummam al - hammoudi , are other senior isci leaders .

during saddam's rule , isci fielded an underground militia , the "badr brigades" ( renamed the "badr organization" ) , which was recruited , trained , and armed by iran's revolutionary guard corps , the most politically powerful component of iran's military , during the 1980-88 iran - iraq war .

during that war , badr guerrillas conducted attacks from iran into southern iraq against iraqi officials .

it sparked an unsuccessful uprising against saddam at the end of the 1991 persian gulf war .

at the time of saddam's fall in april 2003 , the badr brigades numbered about 15,000 .

during 2005-6 , apparently with the active work of then interior minister bayan jabr , the militia burrowed into the iraqi security forces ( isf ) , particularly the national police unit of the iraqi police force .

however , since 2007 , the militia has become integrated into iraq's political process and security forces .

the sadr faction's political ties to iran were initially limited because his family remained in iraq during saddam's rule .

still , the sadr clan has political and ideological ties to iran ; moqtada's cousin , mohammad baqr al sadr , founded the da'wa party in the late 1950s and was a political ally of ayatollah khomeini when khomeini was in exile in najaf ( 1964-1978 ) .

baqr al sadr was hung by saddam hussein in 1980 at the start of the da'wa party rebellion against saddam's regime .

moqtada is married to one of baqr al sadr's daughters .

since 2008 , sadr himself has been studying in iran to elevate his religious credentials , and running his movement from there .

iran recognized political value and potential leverage in sadr's faction — which had 30 total seats in the 2006-2010 parliament , a significant , dedicated following among lower - class iraqi shiites , and which built an estimated 60,000-person "mahdi army" ( jaysh al - mahdi , or jam ) militia after saddam's fall .

during 2004-2008 , sadr alternately unleashed and reined in the jam as part of a strategy of challenging what he asserted is u.s. occupation of iraq .

although u.s. and iraqi military operations repeatedly defeated the jam , iran perceived it as useful against the united states in the event of a u.s. - iran confrontation , particularly for its ability to kill u.s. forces with rockets and other weaponry .

in 2005 , iran reportedly began arming this milita through the revolutionary guard's "qods ( jerusalem ) force," the unit that assists iranian protégé forces abroad .

during 2005-6 , the height of sectarian conflict in iraq , jam militiamen , as well as badr fighters in and outside the isf , committed sectarian killings of sunnis , which accelerated after the february 2006 bombing of the al askari mosque in samarra .

iran's influence in iraq remains substantial but it has waned from a high point in 2005-2008 .

some experts have long predicted that iran's influence would fade as iraq asserts its nationhood , as the security situation has improved , and as arab - persian differences reemerge .

many experts point out that iraqi shiites generally stayed loyal to the iraqi regime during the 1980-1988 iran - iraq war .

najaf , relatively secure and prosperous , might eventually meet pre - war expectations that it would again exceed iran's qom as the heart of the shiite theological world .

as noted , some of these trends are starting to appear , but it is unlikely that anything close to the enmity that existed when saddam hussein was in power will return .

not only are relations unlikely to turn adversarial , no matter who is selected as the next iraqi prime minister , but iraq might emerge as pivotal to iran's effort to parry u.s. efforts to isolate it .

