north korea's systematic violation of its citizens' human rights and the plight of north koreans trying to escape their country have been well documented in multiple reports issued by governments and other international bodies .

the bush administration initially highlighted and later de - emphasized pyongyang's human rights record as its policy on nuclear weapons negotiations evolved .

congress has consistently drawn attention to north korean human rights violations on a bipartisan basis .

on several occasions , congress has criticized the executive branch for its approach to these issues , through tough questioning of administration witnesses during multiple hearings and through written letters of protest to high - level officials .

although the obama administration has indicated that it will seek to continue the nuclear negotiations , it has not indicated how the issue of human rights will be addressed .

the passage of the north korean human rights act of 2004 ( h.r .

4011 ; p.l .

108 - 333 ; and 22 u.s.c .

7801. ) .

and its reauthorization in 2008 ( h.r .

5834 , p.l .

110 - 346 ) serve as the most prominent examples of legislative action on these issues .

the legislation both reinforced some aspects of the bush administration's rhetoric on north korea and expresses dissatisfaction with other elements of its policy on north korea .

the reauthorization bill explicitly criticizes the implementation of the original law and reasserts congressional interest in adopting human rights as a major priority in u.s. policy toward north korea .

u.s. attention to north korean human rights and refugees is complicated by the geopolitical sensitivities of east asia .

china is wary of u.s. involvement in the issue and chafes at any criticism based on human rights .

south korea also had reservations about a more active u.s. role , particularly in terms of refugees , although the current lee administration in seoul has been more amenable to such efforts .

both want to avoid a massive outflow of refugees , which they believe could trigger instability or the collapse of north korea .

u.s. executive branch officials worry that criticism of how seoul and beijing approach north korea's human rights violations could disrupt the multilateral negotiations to deal with pyongyang's nuclear weapons programs .

north korean refugees seeking resettlement often transit through other asian countries , raising diplomatic , refugee , and security concerns for those governments .

in the first several years of the bush administration , high - level officials , including the president and secretary of state , publicly and forcefully criticized the regime in pyongyang for its human rights practices .

as efforts to push forward the six - party talks accelerated in 2007 , the administration did not propose any negotiations with north korea over human rights but asserted that human rights is one of several issues to be settled with north korea after the nuclear issue is resolved .

the six - party agreement of february 13 , 2007 , calls for the united states and north korea to "start bilateral talks aimed at resolving bilateral issues and moving toward full diplomatic relations. .

prior to the agreement in 2007 , the bush administration held that it would not agree to normalization of diplomatic relations with north korea until there was progress on human rights ( presumably including refugees ) and other issues .

however , after the signing of the agreement in february 2007 , some observers say that former assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs christopher hill focused exclusively on a satisfactory settlement of the nuclear issue .

the 108 th congress passed by voice vote , and president bush signed , the north korean human rights act of 2004 ( nkhra ) .

the legislation authorized up to $20 million for each of the fiscal years 2005-2008 for assistance to north korean refugees , $2 million for promoting human rights and democracy in north korea and $2 million to promote freedom of information inside north korea ; asserted that north koreans are eligible for u.s. refugee status and instructs the state department to facilitate the submission of applications by north koreans seeking protection as refugees ; and required the president to appoint a special envoy to promote human rights in north korea .

the act also expressed the sense of congress that human rights should remain a key element in negotiations with north korea ; all humanitarian aid to north korea shall be conditional upon improved monitoring of the distribution of food ; support for radio broadcasting into north korea should be enhanced ; and that china is obligated to provide the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) with unimpeded access to north koreans inside china .

some hail the nkhra as an important message that human rights will play a central role in the formulation of u.s. policy towards north korea .

passage of the legislation was driven by the argument that the united states has a moral responsibility to stand up for human rights for those suffering under repressive regimes .

advocates claim that , in addition to alleviating a major humanitarian crisis , the nkhra will ultimately enhance stability in northeast asia by promoting international cooperation to deal with the problem of north korean refugees .

critics say the legislation risks upsetting relations with south korea and china , and ultimately the diplomatic unity necessary to make north korea abandon its nuclear weapons program through the six - party talks .

further , they insist that the legislation actually worsens the plight of north korean refugees by drawing more attention to them , leading to crackdowns by both north korean and chinese authorities and reduced assistance by southeast asian countries concerned about offending pyongyang .

while the passage of the nkhra raised the profile of congressional interest in north korean human rights and refugee issues , many of the activities had existing authorizations already in place .

the state department had programs directed toward raising awareness of north korean human rights issues as well as providing some assistance to vulnerable north korean refugees through other organizations .

korean - language broadcasting by radio free asia ( rfa ) and voice of american ( voa ) pre - dated the passage of the law .

however , some activities appear to have been enhanced as a result of the law's enactment , particularly the admission of north korean refugees for resettlement in the united states .

the reauthorization bill renews funding that expired in fy2008 , reasserts key tenets of the legislation , and criticizes the pace of the executive branch implementation of the original law .

it also cites the small number of resettlements of north korean refugees and the slow processing of such refugees overseas .

funding is reauthorized through 2012 at the original levels of $2 million annually to support human rights and democracy programs , $2 million annually to promote freedom of information to north koreans , and $20 million annually to assist north korean refugees .

it also requires additional reporting — portions of which can be classified as necessary — on u.s. efforts to process north korean refugees , along with reporting from the broadcasting board of governors on progress toward achieving 12 hours per day of broadcasting korean language programming .

as part of its policy of increasing economic integration and fostering better ties with north korea , south korea until recently refrained from criticizing pyongyang's human rights record and downplayed its practice of accepting north korean refugees .

lee myung - bak's election as south korea's president in december 2007 , however , appeared to usher in a new approach: lee's administration has tied assistance from the south to north korean progress on denuclearization and openly criticized north korea's human rights situation .

in years past , south korea had usually abstained from voting on united nations resolutions calling for improvement in north korea's human rights practices .

at the u.n. human rights council meeting in march 2008 , however , south korea voted for a similar resolution .

lee has also conditioned fertilizer and food aid on improved access to the north's distribution systems to ensure that such aid is not going only to pyongyang's elite and military .

this approach has contributed to a considerable chill in north - south relations since lee took office .

a joint statement from president bush and president lee in august 2008 urged progress in improving north korea's human rights , the first time such a mention appeared .

