environmental activities of the u.s. coast guard fall within the service's program for protection of natural resources , and consist of maritime oil spill prevention , marine debris , and pollution response preparedness .

protection of living marine resources and fisheries also falls in this category , but is not discussed here .

marine environmental protection is one of six "non - homeland security missions" specified in the homeland security act of 2002 .

congressional appropriations for the coast guard are not broken down by specific mission ( eg , marine environmental protection ) , but are allocated to broader categories , such as "operating expenses. .

the coast guard accounts for mission - specific funding by using a "sophisticated activity - based costing model. .

table 1 identifies the estimated levels of spending for the marine environmental protection mission in recent years .

protecting the marine environment from accidental oil and chemical spills is a key mission of the coast guard .

along with representatives of 15 other federal departments and agencies , the coast guard and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) comprise the national response team and 13 regional response teams .

epa serves as the chair , and the coast guard is the vice - chair of these teams .

the national contingency plan ( ncp ) provides the organizational structure and procedures for preparing for and responding to discharges of oil and hazardous substances on both water and land .

coast guard responsibilities can be divided into two categories: ( 1 ) spill response and ( 2 ) spill prevention / preparedness .

as the primary response authority in coastal zone waters , the coast guard has the ultimate authority to ensure that a spill is effectively removed and that actions are taken to prevent further discharge from the source .

during such response operations , a coast guard on - scene coordinator would coordinate the efforts of federal , state , and private parties .

preventing and preparing for spills is also a coast guard responsibility , and the coast guard's jurisdiction covers vessels ; onshore , transportation - related facilities ; and deepwater ports .

the coast guard's prevention / preparedness duties are based on international agreements and federal standards and regulations .

the oil pollution act of 1990 ( opa ) and the international treaty marpol 73 / 78 require the owners and operators of vessels that carry oil and designated hazardous substances to submit to the coast guard "vessel response plans" and / or "shipboard oil pollution emergency plans. .

these vessel - specific plans address such matters as spill mitigation procedures , training requirements for the crew , and spill mitigation equipment required to be carried onboard .

the coast guard must approve the plans for a ship to operate legally in u.s. waters .

under these authorities vessel operators also must submit to regular inspections , and the coast guard's inspection program is a key component of their oil spill prevention effort .

the coast guard represents the united states at the international maritime organization ( imo ) , which , through treaties , sets international environmental and safety standards for vessels .

important treaties cover the following topics: accidental and operational oil and chemical pollution ; the right of a coastal state to take measures on the high seas to prevent , mitigate , or eliminate danger to its coastline from pollution by oil ; a global , cooperative framework for combating major incidents or threats of marine pollution from oil and hazardous and noxious substances ; and pollution from the dumping of wastes and other materials .

the coast guard created the national pollution funds center ( npfc ) in 1991 to carry out many of the requirements of title i of the opa .

the npfc manages the oil spill liability trust fund ( osltf ) .

the osltf is primarily used to finance prompt responses to oil spills and to reimburse parties for applicable costs associated with oil spills ( eg , cleanup costs , natural resource damages , economic losses ) .

initially , the primary source of revenue for the fund was a 5-cents - per - barrel fee on imported and domestic oil .

collection of this fee ceased on december 31 , 1994 , because of a "sunset" provision in the law .

however , in april 2006 , the tax resumed as required by the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

moreover , in 2008 , the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) increased the tax rate to 8 cents per barrel through 2016 ; in 2017 , the rate is scheduled to increase to 9 cents per barrel .

the tax terminates at the end of 2017 .

to ensure that responsible parties can be held accountable for cleanup costs and damages in the event of an oil spill ( thereby preserving the oil spill fund ) , opa requires that vessels show evidence of financial responsibility , such as insurance .

the npfc carries out this mandate by issuing certificates of financial responsibility ( cofrs ) to shipping vessel owners when owners demonstrate the ability to pay for oil spill cleanup and damages .

in general , vessels over 300 gross tons are required to have a valid cofr to operate in u.s. waters .

the npfc also takes action to recover cleanup costs from responsible parties .

it documents ongoing costs and damages from the spill area , and bills the responsible party .

about 40% of spills in u.s. waters are "mystery" spills , and the costs go unrecovered .

marine debris ( eg , discarded fishing lines or nets ) can endanger birds and marine animals , and cause damage to coral reefs .

even less lethal trash from recreational fishing and boating ( such as beverage cans and bottles , food wrappers , and foam plastic pieces ) degrades beaches , coral reefs , and the oceans .

the coast guard's approach to debris is preventive , promoting compliance by boarding and inspecting vessels , and working with local port agencies to ensure there are facilities to receive garbage from vessels .

the coast guard also coordinates with the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the national marine fisheries service , the national park service , and the ocean conservancy in monitoring and measuring amounts of marine debris .

this activity is authorized in the act to prevent pollution from ships , 33 u.s.c .

1905 and 1915 , as well as marpol annex v .

the coast guard has a history of scientific study of the oceans dating back to 1881 , when it began arctic cruises along the alaska coast .

today the coast guard's role is that of a facilitator , supporting the scientific efforts of other groups .

moreover , many of the oceanographic and other scientific activities conducted by federal agencies , including the coast guard , were consolidated in 1970 with the creation of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

the coast guard operates three icebreakers in the arctic and antarctic , and provides supplies to remote stations .

the coast guard also participates in the international ice patrol , which monitors iceberg danger in the northwest atlantic , particularly in the area of the grand banks of newfoundland .

the iceberg season is usually from february to july , but the ice patrol is logistically flexible and can commence operations when iceberg conditions dictate .

coast guard operations must comply with applicable environmental laws .

ongoing initiatives include meeting the more stringent emission requirements of the clean air act amendments of 1990 , and developing strategies to minimize the generation of hazardous waste .

there also are continuing efforts to design pollution prevention into shore facility improvement projects , and to conduct environmental audits at facilities to find and correct potential environmental violations .

