foreign nationals not legally residing in the united states who wish to come to the united states generally must obtain a visa to be admitted .

under current law , two departments — the department of state ( dos ) and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) — each play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens .

dos's bureau of consular affairs ( consular affairs ) is the agency responsible for issuing visas , dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is charged with approving immigrant petitions , and dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) is tasked with inspecting all people who enter the united states .

dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is the lead agency on enforcing immigration law in the interior of the united states .

as congress debates comprehensive immigration reform and its component parts of immigration control ( i.e. , border security and interior enforcement ) , legal reform ( i.e. , temporary and permanent admissions ) , and the resolution of unauthorized alien residents , concerns arise over the capacity of the department of homeland security to identify and remove temporary aliens who fail to depart when their visas expire .

the phenomenon of foreign nationals who enter legally on a temporary basis and continue to stay after their visas expire is a fundamental problem of immigration control .

this issue is not new ; indeed , congress has been grappling with options to address it over the past two decades .

in the early 1990s , policy makers became especially concerned about what was perceived to be a growing number of nonimmigrant overstays .

at that time , nearly 2.7 million aliens had established legal status through the provisions of the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) of 1986 ( p.l .

99-603 ) — a law which also significantly strengthened border and interior immigration enforcement provisions .

nonetheless , demographers at the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) estimated that 3.5 million unauthorized aliens were residing in the united states in 1990 .

by 1996 , the estimated number of unauthorized alien residents was 5.8 million , with about 2.1 million ( 41% ) estimated to have overstayed their nonimmigrant visas .

the remaining 59% were assumed to have entered the united states illegally .

recent estimates indicate that the unauthorized resident alien population ( commonly referred to as illegal aliens ) rose from 3.2 million in 1986 to 12.4 million in 2007 , before leveling off at 11.7 million in 2012 .

statutorily , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides the elements to control the entry and exit of foreign nationals .

provisions of law requiring electronic immigration databases and the collection of biometrics were enacted before the close of the 20 th century .

the ina makes clear that nonimmigrants who fail to leave under the terms of their visa become ineligible for readmission .

nonimmigrant overstays have been an issue in the debate over immigration control for many years .

in 1981 , the select commission on immigration and refugee policy ( scirp ) cited nonimmigrant visa abuse and document control as concerns and included the establishment of a "fully automated system" to track nonimmigrant arrivals and departures from the united states among its recommendations to the president and the congress .

this unanimous recommendation for an automated entry / exit system to monitor nonimmigrant overstays was part of a comprehensive set of proposals that scirp offered as part of its statutory mandate to evaluate the existing laws , policies and procedures governing the admission of immigrants and refugees to the united states .

in 1996 , congress put this recommendation into law ; nonetheless , the issue of nonimmigrant overstays has remained a congressional concern .

over the years , it became apparent that the data on nonimmigrant overstays were unreliable because these data were based upon the i - 94 arrival / departure form .

the i - 94 forms are no longer collected from foreign nationals at air and sea ports , and the integrity of the i - 94 collection process at land ports is problematic , as discussed above .

moreover , two major classes of nonimmigrants are exempt from filling out the i - 94 when visiting the united states for business or pleasure: canadian citizens admitted for up to six months and mexican citizens entering with a border crossing card ( laser visa ) along the southwestern border who intend to limit their stay to less than 30 days and intend not to travel beyond a set perimeter from the border .

estimates of nonimmigrant overstays residing in the united states are plagued by the broader difficulties in measuring all three components of unauthorized migration — aliens entering without inspection between ports of entry and aliens entering with fraudulent documents , as well as aliens overstaying or otherwise violating the terms of legal entry .

the extent that some nonimmigrant overstays become "quasi - legal" aliens ( eg , those who have legal permanent resident petitions pending or have sought relief from removal from an immigration judge ) further complicate the estimates .

reportedly , the failure of dhs to consistently update the alien's record — for example if the authorized period of admission is extended , if deferred departure is granted , or if the immigration status changes — is another major factor that prevents dhs from calculating reliable estimates of overstays .

a way forward on the issue of nonimmigrant overstays seems out of reach , absent a reliable method to measure emigration or an effective exit - monitoring system .

