when a senator introduces a bill or joint resolution , the measure is usually referred to committee , pursuant to provisions of senate rules xiv , xvii , and xxv .

when the house informs the senate that it has passed a bill or joint resolution that was introduced in the house , and the senate receives the measure , the measure is also usually referred to a senate committee .

 ( senate rules contain procedures for processing concurrent and simple resolutions ( rule xiv , paragraph 6 ) , treaties ( rule xxx ) , and nominations ( rule xxxi ) , which are not covered in this report. ) .

senate rule xiv , paragraph 2 requires that bills and resolutions have three readings before passage , and that they be read twice before being referred to committee .

 ( the "third reading" occurs before a vote on final passage. ) .

although a senator may demand ( under paragraph 2 ) that the readings occur on three different legislative days , bills and joint resolutions may be read twice on the same day "for reference" ( referral ) if there is no objection ( under paragraph 3 ) .

most bills and resolutions are read twice and referred to committee on the same day that they are introduced by a senator or received from the house .

the senate may , however , use provisions of senate rule xiv to bypass referral of a bill or joint resolution to a senate committee in order to have the measure placed directly on the senate calendar of business .

the calendar's general orders section lists measures eligible for senate floor consideration .

broadly , the two purposes of preventing the referral of a bill or joint resolution to a committee and placing it directly on the calendar are ( 1 ) to facilitate the full senate's opportunity to consider the measure ; or ( 2 ) to bypass a committee's potential inaction or , to the measure's sponsor , potential hostile action .

although placing a bill or joint resolution directly on the calendar does not guarantee that the full senate will ever consider it , the measure is available for floor consideration and certain procedural steps , such as committee reporting or discharging a committee from a bill's consideration , and procedural requirements , such as the two - day availability of a committee report , may be obviated .

in this report , the terms bill ( s ) or measure ( s ) refer to bills and joint resolutions .

senate rule xiv , paragraph 4 , states: "... every bill and joint resolution introduced on leave , and every bill and joint resolution of the house of representatives which shall have received a first and second reading without being referred to a committee , shall , if objection be made to further proceeding thereon , be placed on the calendar . .

 ( emphasis added . ) .

therefore , through objection , a bill or joint resolution after two readings is prevented from being referred to committee and is placed directly on the calendar .

it is usually the majority leader ( or another senator in his stead ) , acting on his own or at the request of any other senator , who objects to "further proceeding" — committee referral — on a measure .

for example , this procedure was used to place s. 1035 directly on the calendar .

on april 21 , 2015 , the presiding officer recognized majority leader mcconnell for this colloquy with the chair: mr. mcconnell .

mr. president , i understand that there is a bill at the desk , and i ask for its first reading .

the presiding officer .

the clerk will read the bill by title for the first time .

the senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: a bill ( s. 1035 ) to extend authority relating to roving surveillance , access to business records , and individual terrorists as agents of foreign powers under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 and for other purposes .

mr. mcconnell .

i now ask for a second reading and , in order to place the bill on the calendar under the provisions of rule xiv , i object to my own request .

the presiding officer .

objection having been heard , the bill will be read for the second time on the next legislative day .

in the next edition of the senate's calendar of business on april 22 , this action was recorded in the section bills and joint resolutions read the first time .

the measure was pending at the desk ( of the presiding officer ) .

since objection had been heard to the second reading , the presiding officer recognized majority leader mcconnell the next legislative day , april 22: mr. mcconnell .

mr. president , i understand there is a bill at the desk due for a second reading .

the presiding officer .

the clerk will read the bill by title for the second time .

the legislative clerk read as follows: a bill ( s. 1035 ) to extend authority relating to roving surveillance , access to business records , and individual terrorists as agents of foreign powers under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 and for other purposes .

mr. mcconnell .

in order to place the bill on the calendar under the provisions of rule xiv , i object to further proceedings .

the president pro tempore .

objection having been heard , the bill will be placed on the calendar .

s. 1035 had received its second reading , but there was objection to further proceeding on referral of the bill to committee .

the presiding officer , under rule xiv , ordered that the bill be placed on the senate calendar .

in the calendar beginning april 23 , s. 1035 appeared as calendar order no .

60 in the section general orders , with other measures eligible for floor consideration .

this same procedure is followed to have house - passed bills and joint resolutions placed directly on the senate calendar .

bills and joint resolutions are also sometimes placed on the calendar by unanimous consent .

 ( for a fuller examination of the senate's use of the rule xiv procedure and other procedures and actions to bypass committees , and also both to bypass committees and pass legislation , see crs report rs22299 , bypassing senate committees: rule xiv and unanimous consent , by michael l .

koempel. ) .

