inflation , the general rise in the prices of goods and services , is important to policymakers for several reasons .

first , rising inflation is unpopular with the public , in part because some households are more adversely affected by inflation than others .

second , high or rising inflation can reduce productivity by distorting price signals , so that it is hard for businesses to tell if prices are changing in relative terms , and by individuals wasting resources in order to maintain the purchasing power of their wealth .

finally , inflation plays a key role in macroeonomic stabilization policy .

changes in inflation often indicate changes in the business cycle — rising inflation is often a sign that the economy is overheating and falling inflation is a sign that the economy is sluggish .

the federal reserve ( fed ) is mandated to keep inflation low and stable , and alters interest rates in order to do so .

in recent years , the fed has focused attention on the core rate of inflation , a measure of inflation that excludes food and energy prices , in explanations of its policy decisions .

for example , in july 2007 , the third sentence of the 10-sentence federal open market committee statement summarizing the committee's policy decision read , "readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months. .

in fed chairman ben bernanke's july 2007 testimony to congress , he stated that "food and energy prices tend to be quite volatile , so that , looking forward , core inflation...may be a better gauge than overall inflation of underlying inflation trends. .

when core inflation approached 3% in 2006 , chairman bernanke said that it had "reached a level that , if sustained , would be at or above the upper end of the range that many economists , including myself , would consider consistent with price stability...." this report defines core inflation , reviews recent trends , and analyzes the advantages and drawbacks of using core inflation .

no official measure of "inflation" exists .

inflation is measured as the percent change in a price index .

several indices track price changes , with each data series measuring something different .

the most commonly cited measure of inflation is the percent change in the consumer price index ( cpi ) .

this index measures the price of a basket of consumer goods and services that is representative of overall consumer purchases in urban areas .

when food and energy prices are omitted from the cpi , the remaining basket is commonly referred to as the core cpi .

the overall measure of cpi , which includes food and energy , is often referred to as the headline cpi .

another common measure of inflation is the percent change in the gdp ( gross domestic product ) price deflator , which is used to transform nominal gdp into real gdp .

since the gdp deflator is based on the prices of all goods and services in the economy , it is a broader measure of inflation than the cpi .

a subset of the gdp deflator that is conceptually similar to the cpi , but includes more items and areas , is the personal consumption expenditures ( pce ) price deflator ; for technical reasons , the fed sometimes prefers this measure to the cpi in their analyses .

core measures of the gdp and pce deflators are also available .

conceptually , core inflation could be any measure of inflation that attempts to strip out price volatility , but the most common definition of core strips out only two particularly volatile categories of goods , food and energy .

the four most volatile items in the cpi are all food or energy products .

the standard deviation of energy prices is estimated to be 12 times higher than overall inflation .

omitting food and energy prices from the cpi is not a trivial modification — food and beverages accounted for 15% of the headline cpi basket , and energy accounted for an additional 9% in 2006 .

while excluding food from core inflation has become conventional , it may no longer be warranted .

the volatility of food has decreased significantly since the 1970s .

until 2007 , the recent divergence between headline and core inflation was driven by energy prices .

in 2007 , food prices rose rapidly — it is too soon to tell whether this development marks a renewed period of persistent volatility .

if food prices are no longer volatile , then policymakers may be losing useful information by omitting them .

in recent years , headline inflation has typically outpaced core inflation , as seen in figure 1 , because of the rapid rise in energy prices .

in 2007 , headline inflation was also driven up by a 3.9% increase in food prices .

the difference between core and headline has not always been trivial — from 2003 to 2006 , core inflation was 0.9 percentage points lower than headline .

considering that the fed judges 2% inflation to be on the low side and 3% inflation on the high side , the definition used in these years would have arguably strongly colored their policy stance .

the difference between core and headline inflation over this period was overwhelmingly the result of energy prices , which rose by an average of 12.8% a year as measured by the cpi .

when comparing purchasing power over two time periods , headline inflation is the relevant measure .

comparisons over time of wages , wealth , rates of return , government transfers such as social security payments , and so on should all use a headline measure of inflation , because all of these concepts depend on a broad measure of inflation .

for example , adjusting household income by core inflation would not be useful since food and energy consumption account for about one - quarter of average household expenditures .

similarly , government programs and parts of the tax code that are adjusted for inflation are based on headline inflation .

economic growth is also calculated by first adjusting gdp by headline inflation .

core inflation is used by policymakers for the reason offered by chairman bernanke in the introduction — policymakers are most concerned about the future path of inflation , and current core inflation data may give better information than current headline data about future headline inflation .

headline inflation often does not have good predictive power over short - time periods because food and energy prices are so volatile .

for example , the monthly headline inflation rate varied between - 6.3% and 7.5% in 2006 at annualized rates , whereas the core rate varied between 1.2% and 3.6% .

policymakers are concerned with future inflation because of lags between a change in policy and its effect on the economy .

in essence , it is already too late for policy to influence current inflation , a policy change today can only affect future inflation .

theoretically , short - term changes in inflation can be caused by the supply - side or demand - side of the economy .

when rising inflation is demand - driven , it means that spending is growing too quickly in the overall economy , and production cannot keep pace .

this phenomenon is captured in the famous saying "too much money chasing too few goods. .

the fed's task is to counteract this by raising interest rates in order to reduce the growth rate of interest - sensitive spending .

likewise , if spending is rising too slowly , inflation will fall , which the fed can counteract by reducing interest rates .

in the short run , the overall inflation rate can also be affected by sharp price changes of individual goods caused by supply shocks .

for example , bad weather can drive up food prices or a reduction in the oil supply can drive up energy prices .

since these supply shocks are temporary , they should not have any lasting effect on inflation ( holding aggregate spending constant ) , in which case they can be ignored by policymakers .

in the long run , price shocks on the supply side should cancel each other out ( since , across all goods , there will be an equal number of positive and negative surprises ) , and average inflation should be completely demand driven .

ideally , policymakers would like to be able to identify whether any change in inflation was demand - driven or supply - driven .

unfortunately , there is no straightforward way to do this , so they have commonly used core inflation as a proxy for demand - driven inflation , reasoning that food and energy are two sectors of the economy that are most susceptible to supply shocks .

furthermore , policymakers are particularly concerned with inflationary expectations , and a rising core rate may be a better sign than rising headline that inflationary expectations have risen .

relying on core inflation for policymaking has its drawbacks , however .

there is no inherent reason that changes in food and energy prices cannot be caused by changes in aggregate demand .

for example , rapid spending growth could push up energy prices if supply does not rise in response .

in fact , an argument has been made that a change in aggregate demand would first show up in price changes of goods that have flexible pricing , such as commodities that are traded on financial markets where prices change continually to clear the market .

both energy and basic foodstuffs are traded on financial markets , although the cpi measures final food and energy products , not basic commodities .

furthermore , a rise in the price of any one good need not lead to a change in inflation if the prices of other goods fall to offset it .

technically , if a rise in one price leads to a rise in overall inflation , it must be because of some accommodation on the fed's part ( because it did not raise interest rates enough to induce other prices to fall ) .

most economists believe that some accommodation to relative price changes is desirable because it reduces the volatility of economic growth , whereas zero accommodation could lead to needless disruptions in economic activity .

for example , fed governor frederic mishkin used the fed's macro model of the u.s. economy to show that when the fed reacts to changes in headline inflation instead of core inflation , future inflation will be slightly less volatile , but unemployment will be significantly more volatile .

but if the fed accommodates a rise in the price of one good too much , then the price of all goods could start rising .

in other words , a rise in headline inflation could feed through to higher core inflation .

this scenario occurred in the 1970s where rising energy prices resulted in a rise in total inflation .

in scenarios like this one , a focus on core inflation could forestall a needed policy change until it is too late .

indeed , a case can be made today that more of a focus on headline inflation would have avoided the persistent upward trend in core inflation that has occurred from 2003 to 2007 and brought core inflation above the fed's self - defined "comfort zone. .

the weakness with the focus on core inflation is that when energy prices rise continually for a period of several years , they no longer represent random price fluctuations that offer no useful information about future inflation .

as a result , too much monetary policy accommodation may have taken place recently , causing the economy to overheat .

future events will reveal if this is the case , or if the rise in core inflation can be painlessly reversed without a recession .

in the end , the question of what measure of inflation is best for policymaking is an empirical one .

one study found that "no core measure does an outstanding job forecasting [headline] cpi inflation...we find no strong evidence to suggest that a selected core measure will be able to retain its usefulness as a tool to forecast inflation for any given period..." another study did not find a statistically significant relationship between core inflation and future headline inflation , although the relationship becomes significant when limited to a more recent time period .

two other studies found that headline inflation is a better predictor of future headline inflation than core inflation .

an explanation for this finding is that during the past 10 years , changes in core inflation have tended to lag behind changes in headline inflation as illustrated in figure 1 .

one study found that a core measure that excludes only energy was a better predictor of future inflation from 1983 to 2001 than a measure excluding food and energy .

in fact , that study found food prices to be a better predictor of future inflation than any other measure , including core inflation .

some studies suggest that there may be more sophisticated measurements that are better gauges of underlying inflationary pressures than the standard definition of core inflation .

core inflation has the advantage from a policy perspective , however , of being transparent , whereas the more sophisticated measurements could be hard for the public to understand and open to accusations of data mining or manipulation .

while this advantage may make core inflation a useful tool for communicating fed policy to the public , the empirical evidence suggests it to be , by itself , an inadequate tool for policymaking .

