the dispute in gonzales v. raich involved a conflict between california's compassionate use act and the federal controlled substances act ( csa ) .

in august 2002 , after federal agents seized and destroyed the respondent's medicinal marijuana plants , suit was brought in the northern district of california seeking both declaratory and injunctive relief against the u.s. attorney general preventing the prosecution of medicinal users pursuant to the csa .

respondents argued that "as applied" to their specific situations the csa exceeded congress's authority under the commerce clause and , therefore , was unconstitutional .

the district court denied the motion , concluding that the respondents could not establish a likelihood of success on the merits .

in reaching its conclusions , the court relied heavily on its 1942 decision in wickard v. filburn , which held that the agricultural adjustment act's federal quota system applied to bushels of wheat that were homegrown and personally consumed .

wickard stands for the proposition that congress can rationally combine the effects that an individual producer has on an interstate market to find substantial impacts on interstate commerce .

the court pointed to numerous similarities between the facts presented in raich and those in wickard .

initially , the court noted that because the commodities being cultivated in both cases are fungible and that well - established interstate markets exist , both markets are susceptible to fluctuations in supply and demand based on production intended for home - consumption being introduced into the national market .

according to the court , just as there was no difference between the wheat mr. wickard produced for personal consumption and the wheat cultivated for sale on the open market , there is no discernable difference between personal home - grown medicinal marijuana and marijuana grown for the express purpose of being sold in the interstate market .

thus , the court concluded that congress had a rational basis for concluding that "leaving home - consumed marijuana outside federal control would similarly affect price and market conditions. .

respondents argued that wickard was distinguishable because in the case of wheat the activity involved was purely commercial , and the evidence clearly established that the aggregate production of wheat had a significant effect on the interstate market .

conversely , respondents claimed that the activity at issue in raich is non - commercial—the respondents had never attempted to sell their marijuana—and congress had made no finding that the personal cultivation and use of medicinal marijuana has a substantial effect on the interstate marijuana market .

the court , however , noted that the standard for assessing the scope of congress's power under the commerce clause , is not whether the activity at issue , when aggregated , substantially affects interstate commerce ; but rather , whether there exists a "rational basis" for congress to have concluded as such .

the court , applying this deferential standard , concluded that "congress had a rational basis for believing that failure to regulate the intrastate manufacture and possession of marijuana would leave a gaping hole in the csa. .

moreover , the court affirmed that "congress was acting well within its authority to 'make all laws which shall be necessary and proper' to 'regulate commerce ... among the several states.' .

despite having concluded that under the "rational basis test" congress had acted within its constitutional authority when it enacted the csa and applied it to intrastate possession of marijuana , the court nevertheless had to distinguish lopez and morrison , the court's more recent commerce clause decisions .

the court concluded that the csa , unlike the statutes in either lopez ( gun free school zones act ) or morrison ( violence against women act ) , regulated activity that is "quintessentially economic," therefore , neither lopez or morrison cast any doubts on the constitutionality of the statute .

the court specifically rejected the reasoning used by the ninth circuit , concluding that "congress acted rationally in determining that none of the characteristics making up the purported class , whether viewed individually or in the aggregate , compelled an exemption from the csa ; rather , the subdivided class of activities defined by the court of appeals was an essential part of the larger regulatory scheme. .

in supporting its conclusions , the court noted that , by characterizing marijuana as a "schedule i" narcotic , congress was implicitly finding that it had no medicinal value at all .

in addition , the court returned to the fact that medicinal marijuana was a fungible good , thus making it indistinguishable from the recreational versions that congress had clearly intended to regulate .

according to the court , to carve out medicinal use as a distinct class of activity , as the ninth circuit had done , would effectively make " any federal regulation ( including quality , prescription , or quantity controls ) of any locally cultivated and possessed controlled substance for any purpose beyond the 'outer limits' of congress'[s] commerce clause authority. .

moreover , the court held that california's state law permitting the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes cannot be the basis for placing the respondent's class of activity beyond the reach of the federal government , due to the supremacy clause , which requires that , in the event of a conflict between state and federal law , the federal law shall prevail .

finally , the court responded to the respondent's argument that its activities are not an "essential part of a larger regulatory scheme" because they are both isolated and policed by the state of california and they are completely separate and distinct from the interstate market .

the court held that not only could congress have rationally rejected this argument , but also that it "seem[ed] obvious" that doctors , patients , and caregivers will increase the supply and demand for the substance on the open market .

in sum , the court concluded that the case for exemption can be distilled down to an argument that a locally grown product used domestically is immune from federal regulation , which has already been precluded by the court's decision in wickard v. filburn .

justice o'connor's dissent focused on the lack of evidence indicating that medicinal marijuana users have a discernable or significant effect on the interstate market which congress sought to regulate .

moreover , justice o'connor , emphasizing the system of "joint sovereignty" espoused by james madison , argued that this overreaching by the federal government deprives the states of their ability to make their own independent political judgments with respect to the validity of medicinal marijuana laws .

both justice scalia's concurring opinion and justice thomas's dissenting opinion focused on the scope and import of the "necessary and proper" clause .

justice scalia's opinion argued that because congress could rationally have concluded that regulating such intrastate activity would have undercut its objective of prohibiting the sale of marijuana on the interstate market , it was necessary to extend the scope of the csa to encompass this behavior .

on the other hand , justice thomas's dissent argues that the "necessary and proper clause" as originally understood cannot be used to expand the scope of congress's enumerated powers .

according to justice thomas , by allowing congress to regulate such intrastate , non - commercial activity the court has effectively granted the federal government a general police power over the entire country that subverts the constitution's basic principles of federalism and dual sovereignty .

