concerns about global climate change and its impacts on the environment and the economy are encouraging policy - makers and stakeholders to explore a range of options to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and other greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) .

congress is considering legislation that would , among other things , provide incentives for parties to reduce or mitigate ghg emissions or to sequester ( store ) additional co 2 .

the possible use of forestry and agricultural practices and lands to mitigate or sequester co 2 is part of the debate .

however , substantial uncertainty exists about current ability to accurately quantify , monitor , and verify the amount of carbon sequestered by various agricultural and forestry practices .

by comparison , measuring the carbon from a discrete point source , such as a power plant , is relatively easy and precise .

incorporating the agriculture and forestry sectors in an emissions reduction program will likely require a firm basis for measuring carbon inventories and change for forestry and agricultural practices and lands .

farm and forest activities can be both a source and a sink of ghgs , releasing ghgs through plant and animal respiration and decomposition and removing co 2 through photosynthesis , storing it in vegetation and soils ( a process known as sequestration ) .

a range of land management , agricultural conservation , and other farmland practices can reduce or abate emissions and / or sequester carbon .

these include tree planting , soil conservation , manure and grazing management , and land retirement , conversion , and restoration .

many of these activities , however , may be impracticable for an emission trading program because they might not meet credible standards for quantifying , monitoring , and verifying emission reduction or carbon storage .

reliable tools and techniques are needed for carbon inventories and carbon change on forests and agricultural lands .

the ability to measure carbon levels allows countries that have committed to reducing ghg emissions to measure their current annual emissions and carbon storage ( and changes in carbon stocks ) .

current estimates show that forests account for a significant share of estimated existing carbon stocks globally ; agricultural lands account for a small share of stored carbon .

also , the ability to measure carbon levels provides the means to estimate the mitigation potential of forest or agriculture activities that sequester additional carbon in soils or vegetation ( i.e. , result in a net reduction compared to estimated baseline conditions or current sequestration ) .

this may allow a farm or forestry activity to be recognized as a way to mitigate or offset emissions — through voluntary action , an emissions trading market , or a regulatory program .

for an emissions trading program to be credible , a participating entity is usually required to meet a series of established protocols that specify what , when , where , and how to measure changes in carbon .

protocols provide technical guidelines or standardized rules for quantifying , monitoring , and verifying the mitigation of an activity .

they specify requirements on project eligibility , scale and baseline measurements , measurement frequency , and verification .

the difficulty is developing credible protocols that are quantitatively defensible and readily applicable across areas with differing land uses , weather , and other site - specific conditions .

protocols also address , to varying degrees , concerns about the validity of activities , such as additionality , leakage , and permanence .

protocols may be either voluntary or set by regulation .

in one voluntary market , the chicago climate exchange ( ccx ) has protocols for a range of soil and land management projects , including agricultural methane , soil carbon , rangeland soil carbon management , and tree planting projects .

the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) — the first regional mandatory , market - based effort to reduce ghg emissions — is developing technical standards for a narrower set of offset projects from the agricultural and forestry sectors , providing for afforestation and methane reduction from livestock operations .

individual requirements of current protocols and standards can vary widely by program .

numerous methods exist to measure forest and agricultural carbon .

the appropriate measure to use in specific circumstances depends on several variables , including the purpose for measuring the carbon , the scale and basis to be measured , the frequency of the measurement , and how the measurement is to be verified .

congress has already taken steps to address some of the challenges associated with measuring carbon changes from forested and agricultural lands and practices .

the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ) includes a provision ( sec .

2709 ) directing usda to "establish technical guidelines that outline science - based methods to measure the environmental services benefits," including carbon storage , from forests and agricultural activities .

this includes developing measurement procedures and a reporting protocol and registry .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 , sec .

712 ) directs the secretary of the interior to develop a methodology to assess carbon sequestration and emissions from ecosystems .

this methodology is to cover measuring , monitoring , and quantifying ghg emissions and reductions , and provide estimates of sequestration capacity and the mitigation potential of different ecosystem management practices .

congress continues to face the question of whether its current authorized activities provide adequate and sufficient guidelines for accurately measuring carbon levels from forest and agricultural activities .

the appendix provides an annotated assessment of a range of agricultural and forestry activities , describing potential considerations according to measurement ( quantification , verification , and monitoring ) , additionality , permanence , and leakage .

the text box below provides a brief description of these different criteria .

for more background information , see crs report rl34241 , voluntary carbon offsets: overview and assessment .

