in 1992 , congress voted to establish a 12-member commission to study the notch issue .

the commission on the social security "notch" issue released its report on december 31 , 1994 .

its principal conclusion was that the "benefits paid to those in the 'notch' years are equitable , and no remedial legislation is in order. .

its report states that "the uneven treatment between those in the 'notch' years and those just before them was magnified by the decision of congress to fully grandfather" people born before 1917 under the old law .

it further states that "in retrospect" congress "probably should have" limited the benefits of those whose benefits were calculated using the erroneous formula in the 1972 amendments , but that it was too late to do so given their advanced age .

among advocacy groups , support for legislation to increase benefits for notch babies has been limited .

the lead proponent of such legislation is the trea senior citizens league ( tscl ) .

some members have complained that tscl has misled seniors about the issue in mailings that solicit money .

a few veterans' groups and grassroots notch groups also have supported notch legislation .

most other organizations representing older americans , led by aarp , have opposed notch legislation .

the afl - cio , the national association of manufacturers , and the national taxpayers union also have come out in opposition , as did the carter , reagan , and george h. w. bush administrations .

the clinton administration , the george w. bush administration , and , to date , the obama administration have taken no position .

one lesson from the experience of the notch babies is that almost any change to social security benefits can create a notch .

whenever benefits increase or decrease at some specific point along a continuum — most commonly a point defined by date of birth , income , or assets — a notch or "cliff" can result at the point on the continuum where the benefits rise or fall .

for example , if benefits are increased for everyone born before ( or after ) a certain date , a downward notch in benefits will occur for beneficiaries whose date of birth is after ( or before ) that date .

notches are quite common in means - tested programs , such as supplemental security income ( ssi ) , in which benefits are conditioned on having income or assets under a certain threshold .

for example if an aged or disabled person who lives alone has no other income and has assets of less than $2,000 , he or she is eligible for a federal ssi benefit of $674 per month in 2011 .

if he or she has assets of $2,001 , then the individual is ineligible for benefits in that month .

an alternative to creating a "notch" or "cliff" in benefits would be to phase in the change in benefits over a range , whether it be a range of birth years , a range of income , or a range of assets .

the disadvantages of phasing in changes in benefit levels over a range of birth years , income or assets , are that it can target the desired change less precisely and can sometimes raise the total cost of the program .

take , for example , a hypothetical proposal to reduce the deficit of the social security trust funds by reducing the benefits of all old - age beneficiaries born after 1969 by 10% .

this would create a notch based on one's date of birth .

other things being equal , two retired workers with identical career average earnings who were born one day apart on december 31 , 1969 and january 1 , 1970 , respectively , would have benefits that would differ by 10% .

another alternative would be to phase in the change over a range of birth years .

this would replace the notch with a slope .

depending on the specifics of the phase - in , the approach could result in total expenditures that are higher or lower .

for example , if the reduction were phased in at the rate of one percentage point per year , beginning with a 1% reduction for those born after december 31 , 1960 , a 2% reduction for those born after december 31 , 1961 , etc. , there would be no notch , and savings would be greater than under the original proposal .

on the other hand , the reduction could be phased in at 1% per year beginning with those born after december 31 , 1969 .

this , too , would eliminate the notch , but total savings would be less than under the original proposal .

in summary , a notch or cliff in benefits is a common consequence of conditioning the amount of benefits ( or taxes ) on an individual's location along a continuum based on date of birth , income , or assets .

notches can be eliminated by phasing in the change in benefits or taxes , but only at the cost of either targeting the change in benefits or taxes less precisely or spending more or less than would occur with a notch or cliff .

over the years , many bills have been introduced in congress to increase benefits for notch babies , but there has been little legislative action on them .

in past congresses , various attempts were made to gain support for discharge petitions to force the house ways and means committee to report out a bill , but the sponsors were unable to get enough signatures .

notch legislation , however , did reach the senate floor a number of times .

