unemployment compensation ( uc ) is a joint federal - state program financed by federal taxes under the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) and by state payroll taxes under the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) .

the underlying framework of the uc system is contained in the social security act ( ssa ) .

title iii of the ssa authorizes grants to states for the administration of state uc laws ; title ix authorizes the various components of the federal unemployment trust fund ( utf ) ; and title xii authorizes advances or loans to insolvent state uc programs .

the utf is designated , by law , as a trust fund in the u.s. treasury .

the designation as a trust fund is a federal accounting mechanism to directly link revenues and distributions connected to the uc programs .

the utf accounts include the employment security administration account ( esaa ) , the extended unemployment compensation account ( euca ) , the federal unemployment account ( fua ) , 53 state accounts , the federal employees compensation account ( feca ) , and two accounts related to the railroad retirement board .

federal unemployment taxes are credited to the esaa ; each state's unemployment taxes are credited to the state's unemployment account .

federal taxes are dedicated to pay for uc administration grants to the states — including administration of the eb program — and the federal share of eb .

state taxes are dedicated to pay for regular uc benefits and the state share of eb .

typically , the eb program is funded 50% by the federal government and 50% by the states , however , p.l .

111-5 , as amended , temporarily provided for 100% federal funding of eb from february 22 , 2009 , through december 31 , 2013 .

although the utf contains 59 separate accounts ( often referred to as book accounts ) to attribute and distribute the monies based on program purpose , the utf is a single trust fund .

the use of separate accounts solely means that revenues and distributions are directly linked to uc program purpose .

the use of a single trust fund ( the utf ) for all uc programs permits a balance to carry over surplus spending authority to subsequent years .

the balance represents reserve spending authority available to these programs in addition to the spending authority provided by the automatic appropriation of current tax receipts .

this reserve spending authority is used during recessions when uc outlays exceed utf tax revenues , that is , when current spending exceeds current receipts .

like many of the utf's other transactions , the balance is effectively a bookkeeping entry .

all uc tax receipts and outlays for benefits and administration flow through the treasury , and thus affect federal revenue , outlays , and the overall financial position ( deficit or surplus ) of the federal government .

the utf accounts for all uc and eb financial transactions .

this accounting device ( designation as a trust fund ) is used to accumulate legal spending authority that is available automatically when needed .

however , the utf does not contain financial resources .

the required cash the federal government needs to pay benefits or administrative costs must be drawn from current resources through either taxation or borrowing .

the revenue and the expenditures of the uc system are counted in the federal budget .

federal unemployment taxes are deposited into the unemployment trust fund .

following federal law , the treasury invests all receipts in federal securities that bear interest .

this investment increases the federal debt .

when these securities are redeemed to pay for administration of the program , to lend funds to the states , or to pay for extended benefits , this investment decreases the federal debt .

state unemployment taxes are deposited into the unemployment trust fund .

following federal law , the treasury invests all state unemployment tax receipts in federal securities that bear interest .

this investment increases the federal debt .

when states pay uc benefits to unemployed individuals , the treasury redeems those securities held within that state's unemployment trust fund account .

thus , the payment of regular state uc benefits decreases the federal debt .

if states do not have enough reserves in their utf account , title xii of the ssa allows the states to borrow funds from the fua within the utf .

 ( states may borrow from other sources although some states are prohibited from doing so under state laws. ) .

the issuing of loans to the state would require that the fua redeem securities .

this redemption would decrease the federal debt .

if the fua is insolvent and the other federal accounts within the unemployment trust fund do not have sufficient balances to lend the funds that states need ( as occurred in fy2010 through fy2015 ) , title xii of the ssa allows the fua to borrow funds from the treasury .

if the treasury issues new securities in order to lend funds to the fua , this will increase the federal debt .

when a state pays back the state loan from the fua , the fua would then use those funds to repay its debt to the treasury and the federal debt would be decreased .

the utf is credited with revenues from three primary sources: state unemployment taxes on employers , federal unemployment taxes on employers , and u.s. government agency transfers .

although uc benefits are taxable and are fully subject to the federal income tax , those revenues do not support the uc system and are not credited to the utf .

these three types of revenues are depicted at the top of figure 1 .

states are authorized to designate that these funds be used to pay uc benefits .

state unemployment account funds that are attributable to state unemployment taxes may only be used for unemployment benefits and the state's portion of eb payments .

administrative costs are funded through distributions from the esaa to the state unemployment accounts .

at the end of fy2016 , states were estimated to have collected $40.9 billion while expending $32.3 billion in regular uc benefits .

each fiscal year , funds are appropriated through the federal budget process to make distributions from the esaa for the states' costs of administering their unemployment compensation programs , and for the federal costs of administration .

the secretary of labor determines ( certifies ) the amount of the administrative payments , and permits the secretary of the treasury to make the payments to the states .

the secretary of labor in certifying a state for payment takes into account ( 1 ) that the state's uc programs contain specific provisions related to the payment of monies from the state unemployment system , ( 2 ) the state agency's specific responsibilities in administering the uc program and uc benefits , and ( 3 ) the rights and responsibilities of the uc benefit recipients .

net monthly activity is the sum of revenues credited to the esaa less distributions for refunds of futa taxes and additional taxes attributable to a reduced credit for suta taxes .

by the end of fy2016 , the federal accounts had collected an estimated $4.8 billion ; the esaa had a net balance of $2.1 billion .

since the ceiling for the esaa was $1.7 billion , $0.4 billion in excess funds were transferred to the euca .

by the end of fy2016 , the esaa had distributed a total of $4.1 billion to the states for administrative costs .

if states have an active eb program , euca distributions are made for the federal portion ( 50% ) .

at the end of the fiscal year after any required distribution from the esaa , the euca balance is calculated .

the euca balance is limited to the maximum of $750 million or 0.5% of covered wages .

if the euca balance exceeds the limitation , the excess is distributed to the fua .

at the end of fy2016 , no funds were expended to pay for the federal share of eb benefits as no state met the economic criteria to provide an eb benefit in fy2016 .

the euca net balance was an estimated shortfall of ( negative ) $11.0 billion ( a cash balance of $1.2 billion , $8.7 billion owed to the general fund of the treasury and $3.5 billion owed to fua / esaa ) .

the euca ceiling was $28.8 billion ; thus , there was no fund transfer to the fua .

in addition to any euca distribution , the fua is credited with the additional taxes paid by employers when a reduced credit against federal taxes exists because the state has an outstanding unpaid loan from fua .

fua funds are distributed as loans to states , through the state unemployment accounts .

 ( see the discussion below on " loans to insolvent accounts " for a more detailed explanation of these loans. ) .

the fua balance is limited to the maximum of $550 million or 0.5% of covered wages .

at the end of fy2016 , the estimated net fua balance was an estimated $8.2 billion ( $4.5 billion borrowed by the states , and $3.5 billion owed from esaa / euca , and an end of year cash balance of $0.14 billion ) .

the balance was lower than the $28.8 billion ceiling and so no reed act distribution occurred .

 ( see below for details of the reed act distributions. ) .

in addition , distributions are made to the state unemployment accounts from the feca to reimburse the states for employment compensation paid to former federal employees .

each federal agency reimburses the utf for its share of federal workers' uc benefits .

at the end of the fiscal year , there is a limitation on the balance in the esaa — the account balance cannot exceed 40% of the prior fiscal year's appropriation by congress .

if the balance in the esaa exceeds this limitation , the excess is distributed to euca .

after the distribution , if the balance in the euca exceeds the limitation , the excess is distributed to the fua .

if after the distribution from the euca , the fua balance exceeds the limitation , the excess is distributed , as a reed act distribution , to the states .

at the end of fy2016 there was no reed act distribution .

the treasury can write checks for a state unemployment account , provided that legal spending authority exists for such spending if the state unemployment account has a positive balance .

during the most recent recession , current taxes and reserve balances were insufficient to cover expenditures for uc benefits .

many state unemployment accounts required and / or continue to require "loans" to pay for state uc benefits .

the state unemployment accounts can borrow from the fua .

if states do not increase their suta taxes to repay the loan , federal law requires that the principal of the loan is repaid by reducing federal tax credits for suta taxes and crediting those increased revenues to the fua .

the state cannot pay the interest on such loans using the state unemployment account but must pay the interest through state general revenues or other measures .

federal law also authorizes appropriations if balances in the federal accounts are insufficient to cover their expenditures .

for example , if the states' borrowing needs exceed the available fua balance , congress is authorized to appropriate additional spending authority to cover the amount needed .

such appropriations require discretionary action by congress and the president .

from fy2009 through fy2015 , the fua had to borrow funds from the treasury in order to loan funds to the state accounts .

