thus far , more than 500 bills have been introduced in the 109 th congress that apply , in whole or in part , specifically to indians , federal indian programs , or native hawaiians .

among the major native american policy issues of concern to the 109 th congress are: indian health care , indian trust fund management reform , indian gaming lands , and native hawaiian recognition .

each of these issues is briefly discussed in this report .

congress faces a possibly multi - billion - dollar problem stemming from indian trust funds .

the federal government's management of indian trust funds and lands has led to financial claims against the united states by indian individuals and tribes .

the indian individual claimants alone suggest they are owed as much as $176 billion .

besides lawsuits , the issue has also led to the controversial reorganization of two agencies , the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) and the office of special trustee for american indians ( ost ) within doi .

the bia has long managed funds , lands , and related physical assets held in trust for indian tribes and individuals .

trust lands total about 56 million acres ( almost 46 million acres for tribes and 10 million acres for individuals ) .

the funds' asset value recently totaled about $3.3 billion , of which about $2.9 billion was in about 1,400 tribal accounts and $400 million was in more than 260,000 individual indian money ( iim ) accounts .

the treasury department houses the accounts , including making payments to beneficiaries .

historically , the bia was frequently criticized for its management of trust lands and funds .

investigations and audits in the 1980s and after showed that , among other problems , the bia could not document the asset values of all trust fund accounts and could not link all trust lands to their owners and accounts .

congress enacted the american indian trust fund management reform act of 1994 to reform the management of indian trust funds and assets ; the act directed the secretary of the interior to account for trust fund balances and created the ost to oversee trust management reforms .

two years later , based on the 1994 act and general trust law , iim account holders filed a class action suit in the federal district court for the district of columbia against the various u.s. officials , demanding an accounting of their funds and correction of fund mismanagement ( cobell v. norton , civil no .

96-1285 , d.d.c. ) .

in addition , at least 25 tribal suits have been filed , covering specific tribes' funds .

these events have led to the current reorganization of the bia and ost and to congressional consideration of the settlement of iim and tribal claims arising from trust fund and lands mismanagement .

the indian gaming regulatory act ( igra ; p.l .

100-497 ) was enacted to provide a regulatory structure for gambling on indian reservations and certain other lands , with the intent that tribes would use gaming revenues for tribal economic development and governmental programs .

igra prohibits gaming on any trust lands acquired after its enactment in 1988 , but allows eight exceptions to this prohibition , including ones for tribes without reservations in 1988 , newly recognized tribes , restored tribes , and land - claim settlements , and in circumstances where the interior secretary and the state governor agree that the acquisition would benefit the tribe and not harm the local community .

critics assert that the exceptions allow "reservation shopping," where tribes seek trust lands for gaming "off - reservation" ( i.e. , distant from tribes' existing reservations or current or historic locations ) , and also undermine the on - reservation economic development intended by congress and encourage land claims and investor - funded tribal petitions for federal acknowledgment .

two of the bills introduced to curb the exceptions , s. 2078 and h.r .

4893 , have been reported .

both bills delete the exception requiring secretarial and gubernatorial agreement , but allow applications filed before a certain 2006 date ( march 7 for h.r .

4893 , april 15 for s. 2078 ) to go forward , although h.r .

4893 adds a geographic limitation to lands with a "nexus" to the tribe .

both bills retain exceptions for tribes without reservations in 1988 , newly recognized tribes , and restored tribes ( but with limitations for the latter two exceptions , including a tribal land "nexus," interior secretary approval , and , for h.r .

4893 , a tribal - local mitigation agreement ) .

the land claim exception is repealed by h.r .

4893 but retained by s. 2078 although with geographic and legal limitations .

h.r .

4893 adds a new exception for tribes landless on the date of its enactment , but applies the same limits as for newly recognized tribes .

opponents object that the bills add new and unfair burdens on newly recognized , restored , and landless tribes , that the exceptions for secretarial / gubernatorial agreements and land claims have been used only rarely since 1988 , and especially that h.r .

4893 's requirement for mitigation agreements is an unprecedented subjection of tribal sovereignty to local governments .

s. 2078 awaits senate floor action .

h.r .

4893 was considered by the house september 13 and failed to pass .

 ( for more information , see crs report rs21499 , indian gaming regulatory act: gaming on newly acquired lands . ) .

native hawaiians , the indigenous people of hawaii , are not currently considered indians under federal indian law and have no political entity that , like indian tribes , is recognized by the federal government .

congress has however authorized a number of federal programs to benefit native hawaiians .

supporters of recognition are concerned that the absence of a recognized native hawaiian political entity endangers federal and state native hawaiian programs , exposing them to current legal challenges that claim the programs are race - based .

at present , indian tribes are usually recognized either by congress or through the doi's administrative process ; native hawaiians , however , are excluded from the doi process , which means congressional action is needed for a native hawaiian political entity to be recognized .

three bills in the 109 th congress , s. 147 , h.r .

309 , and s. 3064 , would establish a process by which a native hawaiian political entity would be organized and federally recognized .

the bills leave for later negotiations ( and legislation ) questions concerning the political entity's governmental powers and lands , and exclude the native hawaiian political entity from bia programs and from coverage under the indian gaming regulatory act .

some of the arguments for and against the bills are summarized here .

proponents argue that congress has power to recognize a native hawaiian political entity because congress's constitutional authority over "commerce with ... the indian tribes" extends to all indigenous native peoples in the united states .

they also argue that congress has recognized a "special political and legal relationship with the native hawaiian people" ( s. 147 , â§2 ( 21 ) ) identical with that with indian tribes .

they point to the numerous native hawaiian programs that congress has established , especially the hawaiian homelands program , which was established in 1921 when hawaii was a territory but is now under hawaii state control ( with certain continuing congressional duties ) , under which certain public lands are reserved for lease only to native hawaiians .

proponents argue that native hawaiians have not given up their claims to sovereignty but rather had sovereignty forcibly withdrawn in the 1893 overthrow of the kingdom of hawaii , an action led by americans living in hawaii and with the active support of certain u.s. officials and armed forces there .

 ( the new republic of hawaii agreed to u.s. annexation in 1898. ) .

they further state that native hawaiians , like indian tribes , have maintained a single distinct community , with cultural and political institutions .

opponents dispute these points .

they argue that congress's authority extends only to indian tribes , not to all indigenous peoples , and that hence congress does not have constitutional authority to recognize a native hawaiian political entity .

a september 2005 justice department statement echoed this concern over constitutionality .

opponents also argue that the united states does not have a special responsibility to native hawaiians as it has for indian tribes .

opponents also contend that recognition of a native hawaiian political entity would be based on race alone , arguing that unlike indian tribes the native hawaiian entity would not need to meet criteria of geography , community , and continuous political autonomy .

they argue further that native hawaiian recognition would set a precedent for political recognition of other , race - based , non - indian groups .

for instance , the u.s. civil rights commission on may 5 , 2006 , issued a briefing report opposing passage of s. 147 as reported , citing racial discrimination concerns .

in addition , some opponents dispute the claims regarding native hawaiian sovereignty , arguing among other things that native hawaiians' sovereignty ended well before 1893 because the kingdom gave political rights to non - native hawaiians , or that sovereignty resided in the monarch , not the native hawaiian people , and ended with the 1893 overthrow .

bills similar to s. 147 and h.r .

309 received extensive consideration in the previous three congresses .

s. 147 was reported by the senate indian affairs committee on may 16 , 2005 ( s.rept .

109-68 ) .

s. 3064 , an amended version of s. 147 introduced may 25 , 2006 , is based on discussions among congressional offices , the administration , and the state of hawaii .

the senate on june 8 , 2006 , failed to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed to consider s. 147 , effectively ending senate consideration of s. 147 and s. 3064 .

h.r .

309 was referred to the house resources committee and has not been reported .

separately , the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on the constitution held a hearing on july 19 , 2005 , on constitutional issues raised by h.r .

309 ( serial no .

109-37 ) .

