this report discusses proposals to raise the cigarette tax to help pay for reauthorization of the state children's health insurance program .

this report describes current taxes , discusses potential revenue gains , and discusses some of the basic issues surrounding a tax increase .

it also briefly discusses the tax increase on cigars .

h.r .

2 passed the house on january 14 , 2009 and it included the same cigarette tax as proposed in the 110 th congress , an increase of 61 cents per pack , raising the tax from 39 cents to $1 .

the estimated revenues in the house bill were $64.7 billion for fy2009-fy2018 , with $57.3 billion of the total from cigarettes .

the senate version and the final legislation , p.l .

111-3 includes taxes similar to h.r .

2 ( very slightly higher across the board , with a 61.66 cents increase in cigarette taxes ) .

the vast majority of tobacco taxes are on cigarettes , which account for 94% of tobacco sales ( totaling $75 billion in 2007 ) .

federal cigarette taxes are $0.39 per pack , accounting for 94% of federal tobacco tax revenue .

there is a 4 cent tax on a package of small cigars .

large cigars carry a tax of 20.719% of sales price , not to exceed $48.75 per 1,000 units , leading to a maximum tax of almost 5 cents per cigar .

per ounce , the tax is 7 cents on pipe tobacco ; 1 cent on chewing tobacco ; 4 cents on snuff ; and 7 cents on pipe and roll - your - own tobacco .

there are also taxes on cigarette paper and cigarette tubes .

the 61-cent cigarette tax increase would lead to a tax about 2.5 times the current tax .

 ; these same proportions are proposed for snuff , chewing , tobacco and pipe tobacco .

roll your own tobacco's tax increases about eight fold and seven fold and the relatively small taxes on small cigars are increased to those on cigarettes .

large cigars are the only tobacco product with a tax based on price , but they also have a cap ; the price - based tax rises in proportionally , but the cap increases by much more , from 5 cents per cigar to $0.40 in the house bill ( $0.4026 in the senate finance bill and the final legislation ) .

tobacco tax receipts in the united states in fy2007 included $7.5 billion in federal tax , $16.2 billion in state and local taxes , and $8 billion in payments from the master tobacco settlement .

state and local taxes , therefore , were roughly 88 cents per pack and the tobacco settlement payment is approximately the same as the federal tax , 43 cents per pack .

although the tobacco settlement payments resulted from negotiations between the tobacco companies and the states to settle state lawsuits , the payments function as if they were a national tobacco excise tax that is allocated to the states , and any changes that alter consumption would affect these payments .

some of the states have securitized their payments ( exchanged the stream of payment for a fixed up - front amount ) .

according to estimates , about a quarter of payments are made to private investors , rather than to state and local governments .

as a percentage of sales revenues , the federal , state and local , and tobacco settlement payments are respectively 10.0% , 21.6% and 10.7% , for a total of 42.2% .

the joint committee on taxation projected an fy2010 revenue gain of $6.4 billion from the 61 cent increase .

crs estimates suggest there will be a loss of revenue to the states approaching $1.5 billion .

there are many alternative sources of revenue ( or offsetting spending ) for funding the child health program .

are tobacco taxes the most desirable source of revenue ? .

compared to other taxes , the incentive effects may be desirable .

at the same time , the burden falls heavily on lower income people , which may be of concern .

thus , there is a trade - off between the objective of discouraging smoking , and particularly discouraging youth smoking , and the distributional effects of the tax .

the remaining issue involves an economic efficiency question relating to arguments that have been made that additional taxes are appropriate to cover costs smokers impose on others .

a number of economic studies have questioned that proposition .

the following sections discuss these issues .

although taxes on other products are a small part of total tobacco taxes , there has been some controversy about the increases for cigars in 110 th congress proposals and their potential disruption of the industry , as reported in the media .

small cigar taxes increase by a factor of 27 .

they are apparently viewed by some as substitute for cigarettes who argue they should bear the same tax .

small cigars constitute less than 1 / 10 of 1% of cigarette sales .

for large cigar taxes , which are currently a maximum of 5 cents , the tax could rise to as much as $10 in the original senate finance committee proposal in the 110 th congress .

the ceiling was lowered to $3 on the senate floor in the 2007 legislation and the ceiling in the house bill was $1 in 2007 .

h.r .

2 has a ceiling of $0.40 , which although much lower is eight times the previous maximum .

according to tax data , large cigar sales above the current 5 cents cap ( premium cigars ) account for about half the total .

according to the cigar association of america , the average manufacturer's price is about $1.90 for these premium cigars ; the average tax on these cigars would be almost a dollar ( 0.5313 times $1.90 minus $.05 ) in the original 110 th congress senate proposal , but much smaller in the house bill because of lower rate and cap and smaller in the final proposal .

most state cigar taxes are based on value and would apply to the federal tax ; they are estimated by the cigar association of america at about 30% .

if retail prices are twice the manufacturer's price the price of large cigars under the cap in the original senate proposal would have risen by 20.8% and the price of large cigars over the cap , while varying considerably , would have averaged a 33% increase .

prices would rise more if there is also a retailers markup on the tax .

the ceiling of $0.4026 would result in much more modest effects .

there is less information on the effects of other tobacco products on health or the behavioral response .

if the purpose of the tax on cigars is to account for health costs , a per unit rather than a price based tax would seem appropriate .

cigars may differ from cigarettes in that a larger share may be likely to be smoked only occasionally and would therefore be less harmful to health .

they may also be less concentrated at lower incomes .

the occasional usage ( lack of addictiveness ) may mean a larger price response , but the usage by higher income consumers may mean a smaller response .

