islamic finance is based on shariah , an arabic term that often is translated to "islamic law. .

shariah provides guidelines for aspects of muslim life , including religion , politics , economics , banking , business , and law .

shariah - compliant financing ( scf ) constitutes financial practices that conform to islamic law .

scf institutions are similar to conventional financial intermediaries in that they are profit - maximizing institutions and offer traditional banking services , but differ in some of the principles under which they operate .

research from the international monetary fund ( imf ) indicates that islamic banking appears to be a complement to conventional banks , rather than a substitute .

major principles of shariah that are applicable to finance and that differ from conventional finance are: ban on interest ( riba ) : in conventional forms of finance , a distinction is made between acceptable interest and usurious interest ( i.e. , excessive rates of interest ) .

in contrast , under islamic law , interest is considered to be usurious and is prohibited .

some question how lenders profit from financial transactions under islamic law .

for instance , in a real estate setting , scf takes the form of leasing , as opposed to loans .

instead of loaning money to a prospective purchaser , the bank obtains the property and leases it to the shariah - compliant investor , who pays rent instead of interest .

ban on uncertainty: uncertainty in contractual terms and conditions is prohibited , unless all of the terms and conditions of the risk are clearly understood by all parties to a financial transaction .

risk - sharing and profit - sharing: parties involved in a financial transaction must share both the associated risks and profits .

earnings of profits or returns from assets are permitted so long as the business risks are shared by the lender and borrower .

ethical investments that enhance society: investment in industries that are prohibited by the qur ' an , such as alcohol , pornography , gambling , and pork - based products , is discouraged .

asset - backing: each financial transaction must be tied to a "tangible , identifiable underlying asset," such as real estate or commodities .

under shariah , money is not considered an asset class because it is not tangible and thus , may not earn a return .

financial institutions seeking to offer shariah - compliant products typically have a shariah supervisory board ( or at a minimum , a shariah counselor ) .

the shariah board is to review and approve financial practices and activities for compliance with islamic principles .

such expertise raises the attractiveness of shariah - compliant financial intermediaries to investors considering islamic banking .

international institutions have been established to promote international consistency in islamic finance .

the accounting and auditing organization for islamic financial institutions ( aaoifi ) , founded in 1991 and located in bahrain , issues international standards on accounting , auditing , and corporate governance .

it has 200 members from 45 countries ; its membership includes central banks , islamic financial institutions , and other bodies in the islamic banking and finance industry .

another regulatory body is the islamic financial services boards ( ifsb ) , which began operations in 2003 and is based in malaysia .

ifsb puts forth standards for supervision and regulation .

many leading islamic financial centers around the world have adopted international scf regulation standards .

u.s. federal banking regulators have provided some formal guidance about islamic products .

the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) issued two directives concerning shariah - compliant mortgage products .

in 1997 , the occ issued guidance about ijara ( "lease" ) , a financial structure in which the financial intermediary purchases and subsequently leases an asset to a consumer for a fee .

in 1999 , the occ recognized murabaha ( "cost - plus" ) , under which the financial intermediary buys an asset for a customer with the understanding that the customer will buy the asset back for a higher fee .

standardization of islamic finance regulations has been of increasing interest in the industry .

shariah is open to interpretation and islamic scholars are not in complete agreement regarding what constitutes scf .

islamic finance laws and regulatory practices vary across countries .

the lack of concurrent viewpoints makes it difficult to standardize islamic financing .

standardization also may be challenging because the maturity of islamic finance markets varies from country to country , with some markets well - established and others that are more nascent .

without standardization , some industry officials express concern that shariah - compliance risk may grow .

the lack of standardization across islamic finance markets raises legal uncertainty that a contract will not be recognized as valid under islamic law by all islamic scholars .

this uncertainty has been highlighted by a recent dispute between lebanon's blom bank and kuwait's islamic firm investment dar over whether or not a contract between the two entities was compliant with islamic principles and if payment should be made .

many observers view standardization of scf regulations as important in increasing the marketability and acceptance of islamic products .

over the years , there have been numerous initiatives to improve regulatory practices .

for example , in 2009 , the ifsb published guiding principals on issues such as governance and capital adequacy requirements for various financial products .

the aaoifi is in the process of developing new standards in risk management and corporate governance .

estimates vary of the size and growth rates of assets held internationally under islamic finance , but suggest that islamic finance is a rapidly growing industry .

while it represents a small proportion of the global finance market ( estimated at 1% - 5% of global share ) , the islamic finance industry has experienced double - digit rates of growth annually in recent years ( estimated at 10% - 20% annual growth ) .

industry experts estimate that assets held under islamic finance management doubled between 2007 and 2010 to reach around $1 trillion .

a survey of the top 500 islamic financial institutions shows that shariah - compliant assets in these institutions rose from $822 billion in 2009 to $895 billion in 2010 .

in 2010 , 18 new banks offering scf entered the market and six conventional banks started providing scf via "islamic finance windows. .

in the united states , there is growing interest for islamic finance and business opportunities for lenders .

some have suggested islamic finance may be an attractive option for investors as conventional finance faces challenges from the u.s. subprime lending crisis and recession concerns .

in the united states , shariah - compliant finance largely exists in personal home mortgages .

since its establishment in 2002 , guidance residential ( reston , va ) , an islamic home finance company , has provided over $1.5 billion in shariah - compliant home financing in the united states .

other financial intermediaries that provide islamic - based home mortgages include university islamic financial ( ann arbor , mi ) , devon bank ( chicago , il ) , and american finance house lariba ( pasadena , ca ) .

hsbc is the only large commercial bank that offers u.s. islamic finance , and is focused on new york .

the federal national mortgage association ( fannie mae ) and the federal home mortgage corporation ( freddie mac ) purchase shariah - compliant mortgage contracts from financial intermediaries , allowing providers to originate further mortgages .

in 2007 , freddie mac reportedly purchased more than $250 million in islamic home loans , a small but notable fraction of the enterprise's $1.77 trillion in business activities .

other forms of shariah - compliant services are offered in the united states as well .

for instance , devon bank and zayan finance offer scf for commercial real estate .

shariah - compliant mutual funds are offered by intermediaries such as the amana mutual funds trust , azzad funds , and the dow jones islamic fund .

international financial intermediaries also provide scf in the united states .

muslim investors from the countries of the gulf cooperation council ( gcc ) have sought to diversify their financial portfolios geographically and to invest their wealth in u.s. assets .

for instance , the bahrain - based arcapita bank has structured shariah - compliant transactions in private equity and real estate in the united states .

u.s. - based companies also have taken advantage of alternative funding sources through islamic financing abroad .

for example , in november 2009 , general electric became the first major u.s. company to sell an islamic bond .

it sold a five - year , $500 million islamic bond in order to attract international investors who want to invest according to islamic principles .

as islamic finance activities grow in the united states , critics raise concerns about the related capital adequacy and system risks .

proponents of islamic finance assert that the ban on risk - taking mitigates many concerns .

some also view the integration of ethics and values into finance as a positive development , especially in light of recent u.s. business corruption scandals .

many investors reportedly consider shariah - compliant finance to be more resilient to global economic and financial crises than conventional finance .

however , others point out that islamic financial markets are still tied to the world economy and are not completely sheltered from the ups and downs of international markets .

the growth of islamic finance in the united states may have implications for congressional oversight .

congress may be interested in evaluating the relationship between the current u.s. banking legal and regulatory framework and islamic finance .

current u.s. laws and regulation may be broad enough to accommodate some aspects of islamic finance .

others aspects of islamic finance may pose some unique challenges to u.s. laws and regulations , such as applying rules created for conventional , interest - based products to islamic products .

there is debate about whether or not , or the extent to which , regulators should apply rules on conventional products to islamic product counterparts .

some u.s. financial institutions express concerns about the possible ties of some islamic institutions to terrorist finance networks .

according to this viewpoint , there is the possibility that islamic banking transactions may channel funds to terrorists or enable terrorists to access funds .

others assert that the risks of islamic finance are not significantly greater or different than those from conventional finance and that the majority of recent terrorist financing cases related to scf have been thrown out of court .

in congressional testimony , one observer stated "there is no reason — in theory — to suspect that islamic finance would be particularly immune or particularly vulnerable to abuse by money launderers or terrorist financiers. .

some proponents also assert that security - related concerns about islamic finance stem from a lack of understanding of scf or from stereotyping .

there may be a "conflation" of islamic finance with hawala , an informal trust - based money transfer system prominent in the middle east and many muslim countries .

hawala transactions are based on an honor system , with no promissory instruments exchanged between the parties and no records of the transactions .

some analysts consider the hawala system particularly susceptible to terrorist financing .

