in health insurance , beneficiaries may face two types of out - of - pocket payments: ( 1 ) participation - related cost - sharing , typically in the form of monthly premiums , regardless of whether services are utilized , and ( 2 ) service - related cost - sharing , which consists of payments made directly to providers at the time of service delivery .

such beneficiary cost - sharing under medicaid is described below .

in order to obtain health insurance generally , enrollees may be required to pay monthly premiums and / or , less frequently , enrollment fees .

such charges are prohibited under traditional medicaid for most eligibility groups .

nominal amounts set in regulations , ranging from $1 to $19 per month , depending on monthly family income and size , can be collected from ( 1 ) certain families moving from welfare to work who qualify for transitional assistance under medicaid , and ( 2 ) pregnant women and infants with annual family income exceeding 150% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , or , for example , about $19,800 for a family of two .

premiums and enrollment fees can exceed these nominal amounts for other specific groups .

for example , for certain individuals who qualify for medicaid due to high out - of - pocket medical expenses , states may implement a monthly fee as an alternative to meeting financial eligibility thresholds by deducting medical expenses from income ( i.e. , the "spend down" method ) .

cost - sharing is not capped for workers with disabilities and income up to 250% fpl .

premiums cannot exceed 7.5% of income for other workers with disabilities and income between 250% and 450% fpl .

 ( if a state covers both groups , the same cost - sharing rules must apply. ) .

finally , some groups covered by medicaid through certain waivers can be charged premiums that exceed nominal amounts .

under dra authority , the general rules regarding applicable premiums are specified for three income ranges .

for individuals with income under 100% fpl , and between 100% to 150% fpl , premiums are prohibited .

like traditional medicaid , other specific groups ( eg , some children , pregnant women , individuals with special needs ) are also exempt from paying premiums under the new dra option .

for persons with income above 150% fpl , dra places no limits on the amount of premiums that may be charged .

for the most part , premiums are not used under traditional medicaid , except for workers with disabilities and waiver populations .

among the four states ( idaho , kansas , kentucky , and west virginia ) with approval for alternative dra benefit packages , only kentucky imposes monthly premiums: ( 1 ) $20 / family with children with income over 150% fpl who are enrolled in the state children's health insurance program ( schip ; additional details below ) , and ( 2 ) up to $30 / family ( not to exceed 3% of the adjusted , average monthly income ) during the last six months of transitional medicaid for working families with income over 100% fpl .

beneficiary out - of - pocket payments to providers at the time of service can take three forms .

a deductible is a specified dollar amount paid for all services rendered during a specific time period ( eg , per month or year ) before health insurance ( eg , medicaid ) begins to pay for care .

coinsurance is a specified percentage of the cost or charge for a specific service rendered .

a copayment is a specified dollar amount for each item or service delivered .

while deductibles and coinsurance are rarely used in traditional medicaid , copayments are applied to some services and groups .

the appendix provides a comparison of the maximum charges allowed for service - related cost - sharing under traditional medicaid , dra , and schip .

schip is a capped federal grant that allows states to cover low - income , uninsured children in families with income above medicaid eligibility thresholds .

children may be enrolled in separate schip programs for which schip rules apply ( shown in the appendix ) , or in medicaid , for which traditional medicaid or dra rules apply .

some states ( eg , kentucky ) have both types of schip programs ( a medicaid expansion and a separate schip program ) , for which children with the highest income levels are enrolled in the separate program .

service - related cost - sharing under separate schip programs generally parallels the rules under traditional medicaid for lower - income subgroups ; there are no limits specified for higher - income subgroups .

total schip cost - sharing is capped at 5% of family income per eligibility period .

service - related cost - sharing under traditional medicaid is prohibited for the following specific groups and services: ( 1 ) children under 18 , ( 2 ) pregnant women for pregnancy - related services , ( 3 ) services provided to certain institutionalized individuals , ( 4 ) individuals receiving hospice care , ( 5 ) emergency services , and ( 6 ) family planning services and supplies .

for most other groups and services , nominal amounts are allowed .

for example , nominal copayments specified in regulations range from $0.50 to $3 , depending on the payment for the item or service .

these nominal amounts will be increased by medical inflation beginning in 2006 ( regulations not yet released ) .

under the dra option , certain groups and services are also exempt from the service - related cost - sharing provisions .

these exemptions are nearly identical to those under traditional medicaid .

however , under traditional medicaid , all children under 18 are exempt , while under dra , only children covered under mandatory eligibility groups ( the lowest income categories ) and certain foster care / adoption assistance youth are exempt .

also , groups exempted from the general service - related cost - sharing provisions under dra may nonetheless be subject to cost - sharing for non - emergency services provided in a hospital emergency room ( er ) , and / or for prescribed drugs ( see the appendix ) .

under schip , only american indian and alaskan native children are exempt from cost - sharing , and cost - sharing is also prohibited for well - baby and well - child services .

among the four states with approval for alternative benefit packages via dra , only kentucky includes cost - sharing for participants , summarized in table 1 .

for many services across the four kentucky plans , there is no cost - sharing for beneficiaries .

when applicable , copayments for selected non - institutional services , acute inpatient hospital care , and for generic and preferred brand - name drugs are very similar to the maximums allowed under traditional medicaid .

for non - preferred brand - name drugs and for non - emergency care in an er , a 5% coinsurance charge will be applicable in most cases .

for all four kentucky plans , the maximum annual out - of - pocket expense per member is $225 for health care services and $225 for prescriptions .

additionally , under dra , the total aggregate amount of all cost - sharing ( premiums plus service - related charges ) cannot exceed 5% of family income applied on a monthly or quarterly basis as specified by the state .

under kentucky's dra spa , this limit is applied on a quarterly basis .

the rules governing consequences for failure to pay premiums differ somewhat under traditional medicaid and dra .

under traditional medicaid , for certain groups of pregnant women and infants for whom monthly premiums may be charged , states cannot require prepayment , but may terminate medicaid eligibility when failure to pay such premiums continues for at least 60 days .

in contrast , under dra , states may condition medicaid coverage on the payment of premiums , but like traditional medicaid , states may terminate medicaid eligibility only when nonpayment continues for at least 60 days .

states can apply this dra provision to some or all applicable groups .

under both traditional medicaid and dra , states may waive premiums in cases of undue hardship .

in kentucky , benefits are terminated after two months of non - payment of premiums for children in the separate schip program .

upon payment of a missed premium , re - enrollment is allowed .

after 12 months of non - payment , payment of the missed premium is not required for re - enrollment .

also , working families with transitional medicaid will lose coverage after two months of missed premiums unless good cause is established .

there are more differences between traditional medicaid and dra with respect to rules for failure to pay service - related cost - sharing .

under traditional medicaid , providers cannot deny care to beneficiaries due to an individual's inability to pay a cost - sharing charge .

however , this requirement does not eliminate the beneficiary's liability for payment of such charges .

in contrast , under dra , states may allow providers to require payment of authorized cost - sharing as a condition of receiving services .

providers may be allowed to reduce or waive cost - sharing on a case - by - case basis .

p.l .

109-432 exempts individuals in families with income below 100% fpl from the dra failure to pay rules for both premiums and service - related cost - sharing .

according to state regulations , kentucky requires all providers to collect applicable cost - sharing from medicaid beneficiaries at the time of service delivery or at a later date .

no provider can waive cost - sharing , but only pharmacy providers can deny services for failure to pay ( as per a state law ) .

finally , under schip , states must specify consequences applicable to nonpayment of premiums and / or service - related cost - sharing , and must institute disenrollment protections ( eg , providing both reasonable notice and an opportunity to pay policies ) .

