problems for patients associated with dramatic increases in the cost of prescription medications have generated a great deal of interest among the media , interest groups , and legislators alike .

although no broad consensus exists regarding the causes of — and thus solutions to — the rapid increase in many pharmaceutical prices , policymakers have explored a number of options , including the recycling of unadulterated surplus drugs .

currently , many health care institutions , especially long - term care facilities ( ltcfs ) , routinely dispose of medications that otherwise have a useful life .

this practice typically occurs when drugs are dispensed to patients but remain unused because the patient switches medication , is discharged , or dies .

studies have estimated that more than one billion dollars worth of drugs are discarded each year in the united states .

one way to counter this costly practice is to recycle the unused medications .

however , the ability to implement recycling programs may be constrained by federal and / or state law .

current regulation of pharmaceuticals and those who dispense them consists of a complex system of federal and state laws .

there are three federal laws discussed below that may impede the practice of recycling medications .

at the state level , state controlled substances laws , pharmacy laws , and other rules promulgated by state boards of pharmacy govern practices relating to the manufacture , distribution , and possession of medicines .

nevertheless , state legislatures that have implemented drug recycling programs appear to tailor them to conform to existing regulations .

state laws vary greatly regarding who may return and accept the medications , which medications may be recycled , and the procedures in place to safeguard against adulteration or unlawful possession of the medications .

federal laws regulating pharmaceuticals pose potential obstacles to the implementation of drug recycling programs .

specifically , many of the medications covered by recycling programs are considered controlled substances and thus are subject to the requirements of the controlled substances act ( csa ) .

furthermore , most , if not all , of the drugs in question also require a prescription in order to be dispensed , and therefore are regulated by the federal food , drug , and cosmetics act ( ffdca ) — thus adding another layer of federal statutory regulations .

additionally , programs to recycle medications may also encounter logistical problems relating to billing under the health insurance accountability and portability act ( hipaa ) .

in recent years , several states have attempted to combat waste associated with discarding unused medications by creating drug recycling programs .

these programs aren't "as simple as returning 'leftovers.' .

rather , most state legislation typically specifies who may return the unused medication , who may accept the medication , what types of medications may be returned , and to whom the medications may be redistributed .

this section provides examples of current practices regarding such recycling programs .

most laws specify who may return , who may accept , and / or who may receive unused medications .

some states allow patients to donate , while others restrict the practice to pharmacies , doctors and wholesale distribution centers .

iowa , which falls in the former category , allows any person to donate unused medications .

in contrast , california law allows donations only from drug manufacturers , licensed health care facilities , and pharmacies .

some states do not place restrictions on the drugs included in their recycling program , while others specify the types they will accept .

for example , nebraska restricts its drug repository program to cancer drugs .

wisconsin began its recycling program as a cancer drug repository , but later expanded it to include prescription drugs and supplies for all other chronic diseases such as diabetes .

states also impose restrictions to ensure that the medications are safe .

safety requirements are fairly uniform across most states .

they typically require that medications be in their original , unopened sealed packaging or in single unit doses that are individually contained in unopened , tamper - evident packaging .

most states also prohibit the return of medications that will expire within six months or appear to be adulterated or misbranded in any way .

despite the precautions states have attempted to build into their recycling programs , some people remain unconvinced that these programs are completely safe .

critics argue that insufficient safety controls may lead to adulterated , dangerous medicines , and drugs that land in the wrong hands .

they also argue that the actual process of repackaging medications can pose safety hazards .

nevertheless , states seem intent on continuing to tailor their legislation in order to conform to existing law , while simultaneously acting as laboratories to test new cost - effective measures .

