programs under the agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954 , referred to as p.l .

480 , historically have been the main vehicles of u.s. international food aid .

title ii of p.l .

480 , administered by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , is the largest u.s. international food aid program .

title ii provides humanitarian donations of u.s. agricultural commodities to respond to emergency food needs or to be used in development projects .

funds available to title ii of p.l .

480 from both regular and supplemental appropriations have averaged $2 billion annually since enactment of the 2002 farm bill ( 2002-2007 ) .

over time , however , other , smaller food aid programs , administered by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , have been authorized by congress — food for progress in 1985 , the bill emerson humanitarian trust in 1998 , and the mcgovern - dole international school feeding and child nutrition program in 2003 .

for usda - administered programs , the annual average funding over the 2002 farm bill period has been $356 million .

most of the farm bill food aid debate focused on p.l .

480 title ii commodity donations .

the 2008 farm bill changes the name of the underlying p.l .

480 legislation from agricultural trade development and assistance act to food for peace act and deletes export market development as one of the objectives of the programs .

this modification of objectives is intended to reflect the approach — de - emphasis of export market development for u.s. agricultural commodities and more emphasis on promoting food security — taken in operating the program in recent years .

issues addressed included policy objectives , funding levels , availability of food aid resources for non - emergency ( development ) projects , and using local / regional commodity purchases to respond more efficiently and effectively to food crises , among others .

the food for progress program ( ffp ) provides commodities to developing countries that have made commitments to expand free enterprise in their agricultural economies .

the 2002 farm bill required that a minimum of 400,000 mt be provided under the ffp program .

however , not more than $40 million of commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) funds may be used to finance transportation of the commodities .

this amount effectively caps the volume of commodities that can be shipped under the program .

 ( in fy2007 , for example , 342,000 mt were shipped under ffp. ) .

the 2008 farm bill conference agreement extends the program without change through 2012 , with the requirement that the secretary of agriculture establish a project in malawi under the ffp .

the mcgovern - dole food aid program provides commodities and financial and technical assistance to carry out preschool and school food for education programs in developing countries .

the program is widely viewed as a model food aid program because of the flexibility with which it provides program components .

by executive order of the president , the mcgovern - dole program is administered by the secretary of agriculture .

the main issues in congressional debate about the future of the program were the manner and level of funding .

some argued for changing the funding from discretionary ( as in current law ) to mandatory and for ramping up funding to $300 million by 2012 .

others proposed maintaining discretionary funding for the program with a substantial increase .

the 2008 farm bill reauthorizes the program through 2012 and establishes the u.s. department of agriculture as the permanent home for the program .

the new law maintains funding for mcgovern - dole on a discretionary basis without an increase , but does authorize $84 million in mandatory money for the program in fy2009 , to be available until expended .

the bill emerson humanitarian trust ( beht ) is a reserve of commodities and cash that is used to meet unanticipated food aid needs or to meet food aid commitments when u.s. domestic supplies are short .

the beht can hold up to 4 mmt of grains ( wheat , rice , corn , sorghum ) in any combination , but the only commodity ever held has been wheat .

usda has recently sold the remaining wheat in the trust ( about 915,000 mt ) so that currently the beht holds only cash — about $294 million .

the cash would be used , according to usda , when usaid determines it is needed for emergency food aid .

the 2008 farm bill reauthorizes the beht through fy2012 .

it removes the 4 million ton cap on commodities that can be held in the trust , and allows the secretary to invest the funds from the trust in low - risk , short - term securities or instruments so as to maximize its value .

the new law replaces the word "replenish" with the word "reimburse" throughout the language to reinforce the notion that resources of the beht may be held in cash as well as commodities .

