the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is charged with preventing the entry of terrorists , securing the borders , and carrying out immigration enforcement functions .

the department of defense's ( dod ) role in the execution of this responsibility is to provide support to dhs and other federal , state and local ( and in some cases foreign ) law enforcement agencies , when requested .

since the 1980s , the dod ( and national guard ) , as authorized by congress , has conducted a wide variety of counterdrug support missions along the borders of the united states .

after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , military support was expanded to include counterterrorism activities .

although the dod does not have the "assigned responsibility to stop terrorists from coming across our borders," its support role in counterdrug and counterterrorism efforts appears to have increased the department's profile in border security .

some states , particularly those along the southern border that are experiencing reported escalations in crime and illegal immigration , are welcoming the increased military role and have taken steps to procure additional military resources .

governor janet napolitano of arizona , for example , sent the dod a request for federal funding to support the state's deployment of national guard troops to the border after reportedly exhausting available state resources for combating illegal immigration and drug trafficking .

others view the increased presence of military support along the borders as undiplomatic , potentially dangerous , and a further strain on already overextended military resources .

nonetheless , the concerns over aliens and smugglers exploiting the porous southern border continue to grow , and some now argue that the military should play a much larger and more direct role in border security .

on may 15 , 2006 , president bush announced that up to 6,000 national guard troops would be sent to the southern border to support the border patrol .

according to the president , the guard will assist the border patrol by operating surveillance systems , analyzing intelligence , installing fences and vehicle barriers , building roads , and providing training .

guard units will not be involved in direct law - enforcement activities and will be under the control of the governors .

the administration has indicated that the vast majority of the force at the border would be drawn from guardsmen performing their regularly scheduled , two - or three - week annual training , pursuant to title 32 of the u.s. code ( see later discussion ) .

initial deployments of guardsmen to the border began in june 2006 under the mission name , "operation jump start. .

as of november 2006 , approximately 5661 guardsmen were participating in the mission .

in the 109 th congress , senate - passed s. 2611 and house - passed h.r .

5122 , as well as h.r .

1986 , h.r .

3938 , and h.r .

3333 , would have authorized , under certain parameters , the use of military forces or the national guard along the border .

the military does not appear to have a direct legislative mandate to protect or patrol the border or to engage in immigration enforcement .

indeed , direct military involvement in law enforcement activities without proper statutory authorization might run afoul of the posse comitatus act .

the military does have , however , general legislative authority that allows it to provide support to federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ( lea ) in counterdrug and counterterrorism efforts , which might indirectly provide border security and immigration control assistance .

military personnel for these operations are drawn from the active and reserve forces of the military and from the national guard .

the national guard is a military force that is shared by the states and the federal government andâ often assists in counterdrug and counterrrorism efforts .

after september 11 , for example , president bush deployed roughly 1,600 national guard troops for six - months under title 10 authority to support federal border officials and provide a heightened security presence .

under "title 10 duty status," national guard personnel operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the pca .

typically , however , the national guard operates under the control of state and territorial governors .

in "state active duty" national guard personnel operate under the control of their governor , are paid according to state law , can perform activities authorized by state law , and are not subject to the restrictions of the pca .

because border security is primarily a federal concern , some states have looked to the federal government for funding to support some of their national guard activities .

under title 32 of the u.s. code , national guard personnel generally serve a federal purpose and receive federal pay and benefits , but command and control remains with the governor .

this type of service is commonly referred to as "title 32 duty status," and examples are discussed below .

according to the administration , the deployment of the 6,000 guardsmen derives its authority from 32 u.s.c .

â§502 ( a ) , which allows the secretary of the army and air force to prescribe regulations for national guard drill and training and â§502 ( f ) , described below .

federal funding may be provided to a state for the implementation of a drug interdiction program in accordance with 32 u.s.c .

â§112 .

under this section , the secretary of defense may grant funding to the governor of a state who submits a "drug interdiction and counterdrug activities plan" that satisfies certain statutory requirements .

the secretary of defense is charged with examining the sufficiency of the drug interdiction plan and determining whether the distribution of funds would be proper .

while the emphasis is certainly on counterdrug efforts , a state plan might include some related border security and immigration - related functions that overlap with drug interdiction activities .

arizona's drug interdiction plan , for example , recognizes related border issues created by human smuggling and terrain vulnerabilities with respect to the illegal entry of aliens into the united states .

by approving the state of arizona's drug interdiction plan , the secretary of defense has enabled the arizona national guard to engage in some border security measures .

section 502 ( f ) of title 32 has been used to expand the operational scope of the national guard beyond its specified duties .

this provision provides that "a member of the national guard may ... without his consent , but with the pay and allowances provided by law ... be ordered to perform training or other duty " in addition to those he is already prescribed to perform ( emphasis added ) .

this is the provision of law that was used to provide federal pay and benefits to the national guard personnel who provided security at many of the nation's airports after september 11 and who participated in katrina and rita - related disaster relief operations .

states , such as arizona , have argued that the "other duty" language should be liberally applied ( like it was for hurricane katrina and rita ) to include activities associated with border security efforts .

some question , however , whether domestic operations , in general , are a proper use of this title 32 authority .

in 2004 , congress passed another law that could arguably provide federal funding for national guard personnel conducting border security operations under title 32 .

chapter 9 of title 32 of the u.s. code authorizes the secretary of defense to provide federal funding at his discretion to a state , under the authority of the governor of that state , for the use of their national guard forces if there is a "necessary and appropriate" "homeland defense activity. .

a "homeland defense activity" is statutorily defined as "an activity undertaken for the military protection of the territory or domestic population of the united states ... from a threat or aggression against the united states. .

although a deployment of national guard troops for border security purposes could arguably be an activity "undertaken for the military protection" of a "domestic population," it is unclear whether the porous nature of the border or illegal entry of aliens is the type of "threat" or "aggression" that would be "necessary and appropriate" for national guard troops .

the state of arizona requested federal funds for its national guard under chapter 9 for the performance of homeland defense - border security activities .

