under existing law ( atomic energy act [aea] of 1954 , as amended [p.l .

83-703 ; 42 u.s.c .

ยง2153 et seq .

] ) , all significant u.s. nuclear cooperation with other countries requires a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement .

significant nuclear cooperation includes the transfer of u.s. - origin special nuclear material subject to licensing for commercial , medical , and industrial purposes , and the export of reactors and critical parts of reactors .

section 123 agreements are required for the export of commodities under nrc export licensing authority ( 10 c.f.r .

110 ) .

such agreements , which are "congressional - executive agreements" requiring congressional approval , do not guarantee that cooperation will take place or that nuclear material will be transferred , but rather set the terms of reference and authorize cooperation .

the aea includes requirements for an agreement's content , conditions for the president to exempt an agreement from those requirements , presidential determinations and other supporting information to be submitted to congress , conditions affecting the implementation of an agreement once it takes effect , and procedures for congress to consider and approve the agreement .

section 123 of the aea requires that any agreement for nuclear cooperation meet nine nonproliferation criteria and that the president submit any such agreement to the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations .

the department of state is required to provide the president with an unclassified nuclear proliferation assessment statement ( npas ) , which the president is to submit , along with the agreement , to those two committees .

the state department is also required to provide a classified annex to the npas , prepared in consultation with the director of national intelligence .

the npas is meant to explain how the agreement meets the aea nonproliferation requirements .

the president must also make a written determination "that the performance of the proposed agreement will promote and will not constitute an unreasonable risk to , the common defense and security. .

under the aea , congress has the opportunity to review a nuclear cooperation agreement for two time periods totaling 90 days of continuous session .

the president must submit the text of the proposed agreement , along with required supporting documents ( including the unclassified npas ) to the house foreign affairs committee and the senate foreign relations committee .

the president is to consult with the committees "for a period of not less than 30 days of continuous session. .

after this period of consultation , the president is to submit the agreement to congress , along with the classified annex to the npas and a statement of his approval of the agreement and determination that it will not damage u.s. national security interests .

this action begins the second period , which consists of 60 days of continuous session .

in practice , the president has sent the agreement to congress at the beginning of the full 90-day period , which begins on the date of transmittal .

typically , the 60-day period has immediately followed the expiration of the 30-day period .

the president transmits the text of the proposed agreement along with a letter of support with a national security determination , the unclassified npas , its classified annex , and letters of support for the agreement from the secretary of state and the nuclear regulatory commission .

if the president has not exempted the agreement from any requirements of section 123a. , it may enter into force after the end of the 60-day period unless , during that time , congress adopts a joint resolution disapproving the agreement and the resolution becomes law .

if the agreement is an exempted agreement , congress must adopt a joint resolution of approval and it must become law by the end of the 60-day period or the agreement may not enter into force .

at the beginning of this 60-day period , joint resolutions of approval or disapproval , as appropriate , are to be automatically introduced in each house .

during this period , the committees are to hold hearings on the proposed agreement and "submit a report to their respective bodies recommending whether it should be approved or disapproved. .

if either committee has not reported the requisite joint resolution of approval or disapproval by the end of 45 days , it is automatically discharged from further consideration of the measure .

after the joint resolution is reported or discharged , congress is to consider it under expedited procedures , as established by section 130.i .

of the aea .

congress has used procedures outside the above - described process to adopt legislation approving some nuclear cooperation agreements ( see appendix c ) .

section 202 of p.l .

110-369 , the united states - india nuclear cooperation approval and nonproliferation enhancement act , which president bush signed into law october 8 , 2008 , amended section 123 of the aea to require the president to keep the senate foreign relations committee and the house foreign affairs committee "fully and currently informed of any initiative or negotiations relating to a new or amended agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation. .

the aea sets out procedures for licensing exports to states with which the united states has nuclear cooperation agreements .

 ( sections 126 , 127 , and 128 codified as amended at 42 u.s.c .

2155 , 2156 , 2157. ) .

each export of nuclear material , equipment , or technology requires a specific export license or other authorization .

the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) is required to meet criteria in sections 127 and 128 in authorizing export licenses .

these criteria are as follows: application of iaea safeguards to any material or facilities proposed to be exported , material or facilities previously exported , and to any special nuclear material used in or produced through the use thereof ( these are not full - scope safeguards , but safeguards required under article iii.2 of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty [npt] ) .

nothing exported can be used for any nuclear explosive device or for research on or development of any nuclear explosive device .

recipient states must have adequate physical security on "such material or facilities proposed to be exported and to any special nuclear material used in or produced through the use thereof. .

recipient states are not to retransfer exported nuclear materials , facilities , sensitive nuclear technology , or "special nuclear material produced through the use of such material" without prior u.s. approval .

recipient states may not reprocess or alter in form or content exported nuclear material or special nuclear material produced though the use of exported nuclear material without prior u.s. approval .

the foregoing conditions must be applied to any nuclear material or equipment that is produced or constructed under the jurisdiction of the recipient by or through the use of any exported sensitive nuclear technology .

section 128 requires that recipient nonnuclear weapon states must have full - scope iaea safeguards .

the president must judge that the proposed export or exemption will "not be inimical to the common defense and security" or that any export of that type "would not be inimical to the common defense and security because it lacks significance for nuclear explosive purposes. .

the executive branch may also consider other factors , such as "whether the license or exemption will materially advance the nonproliferation policy of the united states by encouraging the recipient nation to adhere" to the npt ; whether "failure to issue the license or grant the exemption would otherwise be seriously prejudicial" to u.s. nonproliferation objectives ; and whether the recipient nation has agreed to conditions identical to those laid out in section 127 .

section 126b .

 ( 2 ) contains a provision for the president to authorize an export in the event that the nrc deems that the export would not meet section 127 and 128 criteria .

the president must determine "that failure to approve an export would be seriously prejudicial to the achievement of u.s. nonproliferation objectives or otherwise jeopardize the common defense and security. .

in that case , the president would submit his executive order , along with a detailed assessment and other documentation , to congress for 60 days of continuous session .

after 60 days of continuous session , the export would go through unless congress were to adopt a concurrent resolution of disapproval .

section 128b .

 ( 2 ) contains a provision for the president to waive termination of exports by notifying congress that the state has adopted full - scope safeguards or that the state has made significant progress toward adopting such safeguards , or that u.s. foreign policy interests dictate reconsideration .

such a determination would become effective unless congress were to adopt a concurrent resolution of disapproval within 60 days of continuous session .

additionally , section 129b .

 ( 1 ) forbids the export of "nuclear materials and equipment or sensitive nuclear technology" to any country designated as a state sponsor of terrorism .

section 129b .

 ( 3 ) allows the president to waive this provision .

section 131 of the aea details procedures for subsequent arrangements to nuclear cooperation agreements concluded pursuant to section 123 .

such arrangements are required for forms of nuclear cooperation requiring additional congressional approval , such as transfers of nuclear material or technology and recipient states' enrichment or reprocessing of nuclear materials transferred pursuant to the agreement .

subsequent arrangements may also include arrangements for physical security , storage , or disposition of spent nuclear fuel ; the application of safeguards on nuclear materials or equipment ; or "any other arrangement which the president finds to be important from the standpoint of preventing proliferation. .

before entering into a subsequent arrangement , the secretary of energy must publish in the federal register a determination that the arrangement "will not be inimical to the common defense and security. .

a proposed subsequent arrangement shall not take effect before 15 days after publication of both this determination and notice of the proposed arrangement .

the secretary of state is required to prepare an unclassified nuclear proliferation assessment statement ( npas ) if , "in the view of" the secretary of state , secretary of energy , secretary of defense , or the nuclear regulatory commission , a proposed subsequent arrangement "might significantly contribute to proliferation. .

the secretary of state is to submit the npas to the secretary of energy within 60 days of receiving a copy of the proposed subsequent arrangement .

the president may waive the 60-day requirement if the secretary of state so requests , but must notify both the house foreign affairs committee and senate foreign relations committee of any such waiver and the justification for it .

the secretary of energy may not enter into the subsequent arrangement before receiving the npas .

section 131 specifies requirements for certain types of subsequent arrangements .

section 131b .

describes procedures for the executive branch to follow before entering into a subsequent arrangement involving the reprocessing of u.s. - origin nuclear material or nuclear material produced with u.s. - supplied nuclear technology .

these procedures also cover subsequent arrangements allowing the retransfer of such material to a "third country for reprocessing" or "the subsequent retransfer" of more than 500 grams of any plutonium produced by reprocessing such material .

the secretary of energy must provide both the house foreign affairs committee and senate foreign relations committee with a report describing the reasons for entering into the arrangement .

additionally , 15 days of continuous session must elapse before the secretary may enter into the arrangement , unless the president judges that "an emergency exists due to unforeseen circumstances requiring immediate entry" into the arrangement .

in such a case , the waiting period would be 15 calendar days .

if a subsequent arrangement described in the above paragraph involves a facility that has not processed spent nuclear reactor fuel prior to march 10 , 1978 ( when the nuclear nonproliferation act of 1978 was enacted ) , the secretaries of state and energy must judge that the arrangement "will not result in a significant increase of the risk of proliferation. .

in making this judgment , the secretaries are to give "foremost consideration ... to whether or not the reprocessing or retransfer will take place under conditions that will ensure timely warning to the united states of any diversion well in advance of the time at which the non - nuclear weapon state could transform the diverted material into a nuclear explosive device. .

for a subsequent arrangement involving reprocessing in a facility that has processed spent nuclear reactor fuel prior to march 10 , 1978 , the secretary of energy will "attempt to ensure" that reprocessing "shall take place under conditions" that would satisfy the timely - warning conditions described above .

section 131f .

specifies procedures for congressional approval of subsequent arrangements involving the storage or disposition of foreign spent nuclear fuel in the united states .

section 133 states that , before approving a subsequent arrangement involving certain transfers of special nuclear material , the secretary of energy must consult with the secretary of defense "on whether the physical protection of that material during the export or transfer will be adequate to deter theft , sabotage , and other acts of international terrorism which would result in the diversion of that material. .

if the secretary of defense determines that "the export or transfer might be subject to a genuine terrorist threat," that secretary is required to provide a written risk assessment of the risk and a "description of the actions" that he or she "considers necessary to upgrade physical protection measures. .

section 129a .

of the aea requires that the united states end exports of nuclear materials and equipment or sensitive nuclear technology to any nonnuclear weapon state that , after march 10 , 1978 , the president determines to have detonated a nuclear explosive device ; terminated or abrogated iaea safeguards ; materially violated an iaea safeguards agreement ; or engaged in activities involving source or special nuclear material and having "direct significance" for the manufacture or acquisition of nuclear explosive devices , and "has failed to take steps which , in the president's judgment , represent sufficient progress toward terminating such activities. .

section 129a .

also requires that the united states halt exports to any nation the president determines to have materially violated the terms of an agreement for cooperation with the united states ; assisted , encouraged , or induced any nonnuclear weapon state to obtain nuclear explosives or the materials and technologies needed to manufacture them ; or retransferred or entered into an agreement for exporting reprocessing equipment , materials , or technology to a nonnuclear weapon state , unless in connection with an international agreement to which the united states subscribes .

the president can waive termination of exports if he determines that "cessation of such exports would be seriously prejudicial to the achievement of united states nonproliferation objectives or otherwise jeopardize the common defense and security. .

the president must submit his determination to congress , which is then referred to the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate foreign relations committee for 60 days of continuous session .

the determination becomes effective unless congress adopts a joint resolution opposing the determination .

section 57.b .

 ( 2 ) of the atomic energy act allows for limited forms of nuclear cooperation related to the "development or production of any special nuclear material outside of the united states" if that activity has been authorized by the secretary of energy following a determination that it "will not be inimical to the interest of the united states. .

the secretary may only make such a finding with "the concurrence of the department of state , and after consultation with the nuclear regulatory commission [nrc] , the department of commerce , and the department of defense. .

authorizations of such activities are also known as "part 810 authorizations," after 10 code of federal regulations ( c.f.r. ) .

part 810 .

part 810 regulations describe activities that are "generally authorized" by the secretary of energy and activities that require "specific authorization" by the secretary .

some "generally authorized activities" are limited to a list of "generally authorized destinations. .

these regulations also detail "reporting requirements for authorized activities. .

part 810 authorizations mostly involve unclassified nuclear technology transfer and services , such as nuclear reactor designs , nuclear facility operational information and training , and nuclear fuel fabrication .

such an authorization is not required for exports of components and materials licensed by nrc governed by 10 c.f.r .

part 110 .

civilian nuclear cooperation agreements under section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 , as amended ( hereinafter atomic energy act or aea ) , are not required for an 810 authorization or for transmission of nuclear - related information , except for restricted data .

such agreements are , however , required for such forms of nuclear cooperation as the transfer of u.s. - origin special nuclear material subject to licensing for commercial , medical , and industrial purposes ; the export of reactors and critical parts of reactors ; and other commodities under nrc export licensing authority ( 10 c.f.r .

110 ) .

the nrc may also authorize activities governed by part 810 authorizations under a 123 agreement or under a subsequent arrangement to such an agreement .

it is worth noting that part 810.9 includes "[w]hether the united states has an agreement for cooperation in force covering exports to the country or entity involved" as a factor for the secretary of energy to use in determining that an activity "will not be inimical to the interest [sic] of the united states. .

moreover , the list of "generally authorized destinations" is "based principally on the united states agreements for civil nuclear cooperation," according to guidance from the national nuclear security administration .

on december 19 , 2018 , senators markey and rubio introduced s. 3785 , the no nuclear weapons for saudi arabia act of 2018 , and representatives sherman and messer introduced the companion bill , h.r .

7350 .

the bills would require a joint resolution of approval for a 123 agreement with saudi arabia .

in addition , the bills' text includes the sense of congress that no 123 agreement should be approved until saudi arabia has "been truthful and transparent with regard to the death of jamal khashoggi" and prosecuted those responsible , "renounced uranium enrichment and reprocessing on its territory," concluded an iaea additional protocol , and made "substantial progress on the protection of human rights , including the release of political prisoners. .

the bills require the president to submit a report assessing progress on the above actions along with a proposed agreement .

the text also includes a statement of policy that the united states should oppose sales of nuclear technology to saudi arabia through the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) until saudi arabia has renounced enrichment and reprocessing .

on december 19 , 2018 , representative brad sherman introduced h.r .

7351 , the nuclear cooperation agreements reform act of 2018 , which would amend the atomic energy act to require nonexempt nuclear cooperation agreements to include several additional provisions .

these provisions include a legally binding "commitment" from the cooperating government stipulating that "no enrichment or reprocessing activities , or acquisition or construction of such facilities , [would] occur within the territory over which the cooperating party exercises sovereignty" ; "a guaranty by the cooperating party that no nationals of a third country" would be "permitted access to any reactor , related equipment , or sensitive materials transferred under" the agreement without prior u.s. consent ; a "commitment to maintain" or enact "a legal regime providing for adequate protection from civil liability that will allow for the participation of united states suppliers in any effort by the country to develop civilian nuclear power" ; and a stipulation that the united states can demand the return of transferred items if the cooperating government "violates or abrogates any provision" of its iaea safeguards agreement .

h.r .

7351 would also require a cooperating party to sign , ratify , and implement an additional protocol to its iaea safeguards agreement ; implement a number of export control - related measures ; comply with "all united nations conventions to which the united states is a party and all [un] security council resolutions regarding the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction" ; and be party to , as well as fully implement , "the provisions and guidelines" of the biological weapons convention and the chemical weapons convention , as well as "all other international agreements to which the united states is a party regarding the export of nuclear , chemical , biological , and advanced conventional weapons , including missiles and other delivery systems. .

in addition , the bill would prohibit nuclear cooperation agreements with a country designated as a destination of diversion concern pursuant to the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-195 ) .

the bill would also prohibit such agreements with a country that is not "closely cooperating with the united states to prevent state sponsors of terrorism" from "acquiring or developing" nuclear , chemical , or biological ( nbc ) weapons "or related technologies" or "destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons. .

h.r .

7351 would also limit the duration of a nuclear cooperation agreement to 15 years , as well as prohibit nuclear - related exports to a country identified in the most recent version of a report mandated by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 ( p.l .

105-85 ) as possessing or seeking to "acquire or develop" nbc weapons , ballistic missiles , or cruise missiles .

moreover , the bill would amend the aea's congressional notification provisions concerning ongoing nuclear cooperation agreement negotiations by requiring the president to "consult" with the senate foreign relations committee and the house foreign affairs committee concerning such initiative or negotiations beginning not later than 15 calendar days after the initiation of any such negotiations , or the receipt or transmission of a draft agreement , whichever occurs first , and monthly thereafter until such time as the negotiations are concluded .

these consultations would include the provision of "current working drafts and proposed text put forward for negotiation by the parties for inclusion in such agreement. .

the bill would also require the president to submit a report to the house foreign affairs and senate foreign relations committees "on the extent to which each country that engages in civil nuclear exports ... requires nuclear nonproliferation requirements as conditions for export comparable to those" in the aea as amended by the bill , which would also stipulate that the report include "the extent to which the exports of each such country incorporate united states - origin components , technology , or materials that require united states approval for re - export" ; "the civil nuclear - related trade and investments in the united states by any entity from each such country" ; and a list of "any united states grant , concessionary loan or loan guarantee , or any other incentive or inducement to any such country or entity related to nuclear exports or investments in the united states. .

h.r .

7351 contains provisions concerning u.s. foreign assistance .

for example , the bill would prohibit "assistance ( other than humanitarian assistance ) under any provision of law ... to a country that has withdrawn" from the npt .

h.r .

7351 would also require the united states to "seek the return of any material , equipment , or components transferred under" a nuclear cooperation agreement with such a country , as well as the return of any "special fissionable material produced through the use" of such transferred items .

in addition , the bill would prohibit any assistance under the foreign assistance act of 1961 [faa] , the arms export control act [aeca] , the foreign military sales act [fmsa] , the food for peace act , the peace corps act , or the export - import bank act of 1945 to any country if the secretary of state determines that the government of the country has repeatedly provided support for acts of proliferation of equipment , technology , or materials to support the design , acquisition , manufacture , or use of weapons of mass destruction or the acquisition or development of missiles to carry such weapons .

this section of the bill includes a reporting requirement and a presidential waiver provision .

h.r .

7351 would also require the u.s. government to "take into consideration whether" proposed recipients of assistance pursuant to the aeca , faa , or fmsa , have additional protocols to their iaea safeguards agreements .

the bill would also permit joint resolutions approving nuclear cooperation agreements to "include any other provisions to accompany such proposed agreement for cooperation.' .

lastly , h.r .

7351 would require congress to enact a joint resolution of approval for subsequent arrangements to nuclear cooperation agreements .

appendix a .

key dates for bilateral civilian nuclear cooperation ( "section 123" ) agreements appendix b. enrichment and reprocessing restrictions although some experts have advocated requiring governments to forgo enrichment and reprocessing ( a nonproliferation commitment sometimes referred to as the "gold standard" ) as a condition for concluding a nuclear cooperation agreement , the atomic energy act ( aea ) does not include such a requirement .

in recent years , the united states has attempted to persuade certain countries with which it is negotiating nuclear cooperation agreements to forgo enrichment and reprocessing and conclude additional protocols to their international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards agreements ; past u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements have not included these additional components .

the aea does mandate that u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements require u.s. consent for any "alteration in form or content" ( to include enrichment or reprocessing ) of u.s. - origin material or any material processed in a plant containing transferred u.s. nuclear technology .

such agreements also require u.s. consent for any retransfer of material or technology .

the united states has argued that its december 2009 nuclear cooperation agreement with the united arab emirates ( uae ) could set a useful precedent for mitigating the dangers of nuclear proliferation .

for example , president barack obama's may 21 , 2009 , letter transmitting the agreement to congress argued that the agreement had "the potential to serve as a model for other countries in the region that wish to pursue responsible nuclear energy development. .

similarly , then - state department spokesperson p.j .

crowley described the agreement as "the gold standard" during an august 5 , 2010 , press briefing , although the obama administration generally did not use this term when describing its nuclear cooperation policies .

the u.s. - uae agreement's status as a potential model is grounded in two nonproliferation provisions not found in other u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements .

first , the agreement requires the country to bring into force the additional protocol to its safeguards agreement before the united states licenses "exports of nuclear material , equipment , components , or technology" pursuant to the agreement .

second , the agreement states that the uae shall not possess sensitive nuclear facilities within its territory or otherwise engage in activities within its territory for , or relating to , the enrichment or reprocessing of material , or for the alteration in form or content ( except by irradiation or further irradiation or , if agreed by the parties , post - irradiation examination ) of plutonium , uranium 233 , high enriched uranium , or irradiated source or special fissionable material .

the u.s. - uae agreement also provides the united states with the right to terminate nuclear cooperation and to require the return of any nuclear "material , equipment or components ... and any special fissionable material produced through their use" if , after the agreement's entry into force , the uae "possesses sensitive nuclear facilities within its territory or otherwise engages in activities within its territory relating to enrichment of uranium or reprocessing of nuclear fuel. .

notwithstanding its characterization of the u.s. - uae agreement , the obama administration announced in december 2013 after an interagency review that renouncing domestic enrichment and reprocessing would not be a prerequisite to concluding a nuclear cooperation agreement for all countries , and each partner country would be considered individually .

the u.s. nuclear cooperation agreement with vietnam , which the two governments concluded in 2014 , did not include a provision requiring the country to forgo enrichment and reprocessing , although the agreement's preamble includes a political commitment stating that vietnam intends to rely on international markets for its nuclear fuel supply , rather than acquiring sensitive nuclear technologies .

appendix c. nuclear cooperation agreements approved outside atomic energy act process congress has used legislation to approve nuclear cooperation agreements that did not use the legislative process mandated by the atomic energy act ( aea ) of 1954 , as amended .

australia on may 5 , 2010 , president barack obama submitted a renewed u.s. - australia nuclear cooperation agreement to congress for approval .

h.r .

6411 , which the house adopted on november 30 , 2010 , would have approved the agreement even if there had not been sufficient legislative days remaining in the 111 th congress ; the senate did not adopt its version of the bill ( s. 3844 ) .

these bills were not needed because the 111 th congress contained a sufficient number of days for the agreement to enter into force .

china in 1985 , president ronald reagan submitted the first u.s. - china nuclear cooperation agreement to congress , which adopted a joint resolution , p.l .

99-183 , requiring that the president make certain nonproliferation - related certifications in order for the agreement to be implemented .

p.l .

99-183 required a presidential certification and a report followed by a period of 30 days of continuous session of congress .

p.l .

101-246 , the foreign relations authorization act for fiscal years 1990 and 1991 , imposed sanctions on china , including suspending nuclear cooperation and requiring an additional presidential certification on beijing's nuclear nonproliferation assurances .

before a summit with china , president william clinton on january 12 , 1998 , signed the required certifications regarding china's nuclear nonproliferation policy and practices .

clinton also issued a certification and waived a sanction imposed under p.l .

101-246 .

congressional review ended on march 18 , 1998 , allowing the agreement to be implemented .

india p.l .

109-401 , which became law on december 18 , 2006 , permitted the president to waive several provisions of the aea with respect to a nuclear cooperation agreement with india .

on september 10 , 2008 , president george w. bush submitted to congress a determination that p.l .

109-401 's requirements for such an agreement to proceed had been met .

president bush signed p.l .

110-369 , which approved the agreement , into law on october 8 , 2008 .

norway the president submitted an extension of the u.s. - norway nuclear cooperation agreement to congress on june 14 , 2016 .

p.l .

114-320 , which became law on december 16 , 2016 , approved the agreement "[n]otwithstanding the provisions for congressional consideration" in the aea , thereby addressing concerns that that there was an insufficient number of legislative days remaining in the 114 th congress for congressional consideration .

