broadcasters are currently transmitting analog tv signals using radio frequency channels that will be vacated as they switch to digital broadcast technology .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 , title iii ) requires broadcasters to end analog broadcasting by february 17 , 2009 , freeing the spectrum—usually referred to as the 700 mhz band —for other uses .

some of the channels have been assigned for public safety communications ; licenses for a few channels have been auctioned ; and the remaining licenses are slated for auction no later than january 2008 .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has assigned a value of about $12.5 billion for the auction ; many industry estimates are significantly higher .

funds from the auction will initially be deposited in a fund created for that purpose , the digital television transition and public safety fund .

the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) is responsible for managing the fund and for disbursements , which total approximately $10 billion .

the deficit reduction act allocates $7.363 billion of auction proceeds toward closing the budget deficit , to be paid to the u.s. treasury on september 30 , 2009 .

nine programs authorized by the act to receive auction funds are: a program that would expend up to $1,500 million on coupons for households toward the purchase of tv set top boxes that can convert digital broadcast signals for display on analog sets ; a grant program of up to $1,000 million for public safety agencies to deploy systems on 700 mhz spectrum they will receive as part of the transition ; payments of up to $30 million toward the cost of temporary digital transmission equipment for broadcasters serving the metropolitan new york area ; payments of up to $10 million to help low - power television stations convert full - power broadcast signals from digital to analog ; a program funded up to $65 million to reimburse low - power television stations in rural areas for upgrading equipment ; up to $106 million to implement a unified national alert system and $50 million for a tsunami warning and coastal vulnerability program ; contributions totaling no more than $43.5 million for a national 911 improvement program ; and up to $30 million in support of the essential air service program .

for some of these programs , the ntia is authorized to borrow money from the treasury , to be repaid from auction proceeds .

one of the first steps the fcc takes in preparing for an auction is to develop a band plan that allocates the spectrum for specific purposes ( for example , high - speed transmission , which benefits from bandwidth of at least 10 mhz per license ) and to decide the number of licenses and the geographic coverage for each license ( for example , 200 licenses for metropolitan areas ) .

these decisions begin the process of shaping the auction: the size of the bandwidth has an impact on the type of service it can be used for , and the geographic coverage of licenses can be used to encourage , for example , small companies seeking a local license or large companies seeking to expand their national coverage by acquiring a regional or national license .

the fcc also establishes criteria for participation in the auction , for example , requiring documentation of financial resources .

it also draws up service rules , which are a statement of the regulator's expectations for how the license will be used .

service rules usually include a timetable for putting the license to use , that is , the rules impose deadlines for the license - holder to build out a network so that a specified number of people or areas are served .

the fcc makes its proposed plans known through a series of notices , which are made available for public comment , before announcing its decision about the auction in a final report and order .

the rules for the auction of licenses in the 700 mhz band are in a second report and order adopted july 31 , 2007 .

key points are summarized below .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) amended the communications act of 1934 with a number of important provisions affecting the availability of spectrum licenses .

the licensing improvement section of the act laid out the general requirements for the fcc to establish a competitive bidding methodology and consider , in the process , objectives such as the development and rapid deployment of new technologies .

the law prohibited the fcc from making spectrum allocations decisions based "solely or predominately on the expectation of federal revenues...." the emerging telecommunications technologies section directed the ntia to identify not less than 200 mhz of auctionable radio frequencies used by the federal government that could be transferred to the commercial sector .

the fcc was directed to allocate and assign these released frequencies over a period of at least 10 years , and to reserve a significant portion of the frequencies for allocation after the ten - year time span .

similar to the requirements for competitive bidding , the fcc was instructed to ensure the availability of frequencies for new technologies and services , and also the availability of frequencies to stimulate the development of wireless technologies .

the fcc was further required to address "the feasibility of reallocating portions of the spectrum from current commercial and other non - federal uses to provide for more efficient use of spectrum" and for "innovation and marketplace developments that may affect the relative efficiencies of different spectrum allocations. .

the advanced wireless services ( aws - 1 ) auction that was concluded in september 2006 is one result of spectrum reassignment as required in this section .

subsequent modifications of the communications act have not substantively changed the above - noted provisions regarding spectrum allocation .

it appears that , in 1993 , congress foresaw that inclusive policies for access to airwaves would have to take into account developments in technology and cultural changes that were , at the time , glimpsed but not fully imagined .

