there are an estimated 4 billion incandescent light bulbs ( sometimes referred to as "lamps" ) in use in the united states .

the basic technology in these bulbs has not changed substantially since they were first introduced over 125 years ago .

they convert less than 10% of the energy they use into light and over 90% into heat .

some critics refer to traditional incandescent bulbs as "resistance heaters that also give off light. .

doe estimates that about 10% of the average u.s. residential electricity bill is spent on lighting .

illuminating u.s. homes and businesses consumes nearly 300 billion kilowatt - hours of electricity each year , equivalent to the output from about 100 large power plants .

the environmental impacts of the electricity production used to power that lighting — including greenhouse gas emissions — are well documented .

given rising attention to energy prices , energy insecurity , and climate change , congress passed the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( hereafter referred to as the "energy independence act" ) to address , among other things , the efficiency of current incandescent light bulbs .

by one projection , the new standards will cumulatively save more than $40 billion on electricity costs and offset about 750 million metric tons of carbon emissions by the year 2030 .

the energy independence act sets new performance requirements for certain common light bulbs .

the tier i requirements , set to take effect in 2012-2014 , require these bulbs to be 25% to 30% more efficient than today's products ( see table 1 ) .

stricter tier ii standards will be defined in an upcoming doe rulemaking that may require that lamps produced in 2020 use at least 60% less energy than today's bulbs .

some bulbs are not covered by the requirements .

there are 22 categories of special - use incandescent bulbs that are exempted from the standards , including appliance bulbs , plant lights , infrared bulbs , bug lights , rough - service lamps , and reflector ( i.e , recessed or flood ) bulbs .

the doe is required to undertake an additional rulemaking no later than june 2009 to set new standards for reflector lights .

doe is also directed to monitor sales of key categories of excluded bulbs to ensure that the exemptions are not exploited .

incandescent bulbs are not banned or prohibited by the new law .

instead , a performance standard is set for non - excluded categories of bulbs , requiring them to meet minimum energy efficiency requirements .

if bulbs cannot meet the standards as defined above , suppliers are not allowed to continue selling them .

the law does not specify technology winners and losers .

rather , the intent of the standard is to draw more efficient light bulbs into the market .

manufacturers are introducing advanced incandescent bulbs , such as halogen lamps with special coatings , that meet the standards or are very close to doing so .

in october 2007 , philips lighting company introduced the halogená energy saver incandescent bulb series that reportedly meets tier i standards .

the 70-watt bulb in this product line , for example , looks similar to "regular" light bulbs and can be used in table lamps , floor lamps , and ceiling fixtures .

it provides high - quality light , equivalent to the output from many traditional 100-watt bulbs .

other new incandescent products will likely be introduced by the effective dates of the law .

general electric ( ge ) , for example , says that it will have an incandescent bulb that uses half the energy of today's bulbs by 2010 and only a quarter by 2012 .

non - incandescent products , including compact fluorescent lamps ( cfls ) and light emitting diode ( led ) bulbs , can already meet tier i standards .

energy efficient light bulbs can save significant quantities of electricity compared to traditional incandescent bulbs .

table 2 summarizes the characteristics of several types of bulbs .

although a cfl bulb is more expensive to purchase than a traditional incandescent bulb , its electricity savings recover the higher purchase price in several months , depending on use .

the led example in the table is not directly comparable to the other options because it produces a different type of light than incandescent and fluorescent bulbs .

consumers today have a wide range of product options to meet their lighting needs .

both traditional and efficient lighting products are now available at large retail stores and on the internet , as well as at some local supermarkets .

these options often require consumers to decide what types of lighting best suits their needs .

traditional incandescent bulbs are preferred by some consumers because of their familiarity , low purchase price , and relatively high quality light .

these bulbs are quiet , dimmable , and turn on instantly .

despite their high energy use and relatively short lifetimes , there is a reason this technology has survived for over 125 years .

advanced incandescent technology is now entering the market and could address the shortcomings of incandescent bulbs .

fluorescent lights have been used in commercial and industrial settings since the 1930s due to their lower operating costs .

they were slower to enter residential markets until compact versions became available in the 1980s and 1990s .

early brands had poor light quality and higher purchase costs , which gave many consumers a negative first impression of cfls .

two decades of market pull and technology push strategies has led to improved quality and cheaper cfls today .

there are now many varieties of cfls that meet "energy star" certification requirements defined by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the doe .

in 2007 , nearly 300 million energy star certified cfls were sold in the united states , doubling previous year sales , and accounting for 20% of the light bulb market .

there are inexpensive , high - quality cfls available in retail stores and through the internet , but brands can vary significantly in quality .

as described more fully below , cfls have tradeoffs , including the fact that they contain small quantities of mercury .

leds are ubiquitous .

they are found in computers , radios , televisions , traffic lights , exit signs and holiday lights .

however , they have only recently become available for general illumination .

manufacturers are developing new types of led bulbs for general lighting and expect rapid cost reductions .

although led bulbs are beginning to match cfl and incandescent alternatives in light quality , purchase costs are still an order of magnitude higher .

leds produce light in a way that is fundamentally different from incandescent or fluorescent bulbs .

leds used for general illumination are expected to be more efficient than cfls in the near future , but remain slightly less so today .

leds can produce almost any color light and last about five times longer than cfls .

they turn on instantly , contain no mercury , and — because they have no filament or fragile bulb — are not easily damaged by vibration or external shock .

but leds are not widely available in general illumination markets .

besides high cost , leds can experience problems in cold ( below 15°f ) or hot ( above 120°f ) environments .

with light that is highly directional or focused , leds currently seem better for task lighting than for general illumination .

some consumers complain that led light is too cold or blue .

these issues may be addressed as the technology matures .

some consumers complain about the quality of cfl products .

they report that cfls generate harsh , unflattering light or that they don't last as long as advertised .

some of these objections may be due to experience with earlier bulbs that had poor color temperature rendition or that were used incorrectly .

some objections involve personal preference ; cfls may not be appropriate for every lighting application .

cfls are now available with a broad range of size , shape , brightness , and color temperature characteristics .

consumers have also reported objections to noise and flicker in cfl bulbs .

most of these problems have been solved with the introduction of improved electronic ballasts , although some low quality brands may still exhibit these problems .

there is concern about mercury in cfl bulbs .

used and disposed of properly , cfls can actually reduce mercury in the environment due to the lower demand for coal - fired electricity — which emits that element to the atmosphere .

still , the epa recommends special precautions in using and disposing of cfl bulbs .

for a more complete discussion of cfls and mercury , see crs report rs22807 , compact fluorescent light bulbs ( cfls ) : issues with use and disposal , by [author name scrubbed] .

another concern involves difficulty dimming cfl bulbs .

there are new varieties of cfls designed to be used with dimming switches .

these versions cost more than standard cfls and usually have only three settings ( off , low , and high ) compared to a full range of light output in incandescent bulbs .

some consumers also complain about the time lag between when the light is turned on and when the bulb illuminates .

again , modern electronic ballasts have at least partially addressed this issue , but most cfls still need to warm up before reaching full illumination .

advanced cfl products may overcome this consumer concern .

on march 13 , 2008 , the light bulb freedom of choice act ( h.r .

5616 ) was introduced to repeal the new lighting performance standards unless the government accountability office finds that ( 1 ) consumers would obtain a net financial savings by switching to the more efficient bulbs , ( 2 ) no health risks would be introduced by the switch , and ( 3 ) total u.s. co 2 emissions would decline by 20% by 2025 as a result of the switch .

