although the advent of digital technology has brought about higher quality for audio and video content , creators of such content and policy makers are concerned that , without adequate content protection measures , unlawful digital copying and distribution of copyrighted material may endanger the viability of the motion picture , television , and music industries .

as a result , technological measures have been proposed that are aimed at protecting copyrighted media from , among other things , unauthorized reproduction , distribution , and performance .

one of these content protection schemes is the audio protection flag ( apf or "audio flag" ) , which would protect the content of digital radio transmissions against unauthorized dissemination and reproduction .

one form of drm technology that may be used to protect the content of digital audio transmissions from unauthorized distribution and reproduction is the "audio flag. .

the flag has two primary aspects: a physical component and rules and standards that define how devices communicate with flagged content transmitted from digital audio sources .

for instance , a satellite digital audio radio stream of a particular broadcast music program could contain an audio flag ( the mechanism ) that prohibits any reproduction or further dissemination of the broadcast ( the standard ) .

the audio flag , according to its proponents , would operate in a similar manner as the broadcast video flag that has been proposed for digital television transmissions .

functionally , the audio flag system would work by embedding a special signal within transmitted digital audio data , informing the receiving device of certain copyright restrictions on the use of the content by the listener — for example , limiting the number of copies of a recording that the user may make .

those advocating the use of an audio flag for digital radio programming include musicians , songwriters , record labels , and other providers of audio content that could be broadcast to the public through digital transmissions .

the copyright act bestows several exclusive rights upon the creator of a work ( or the individual having a legal interest in the work ) that permit the copyright holder to control the use of the protected material .

these statutory rights allow a copyright holder to do or to authorize , among other things , reproducing the work , distributing copies or phonorecords of the work , and publicly performing the work .

parties holding a copyright interest in content transmitted through digital radio services are interested in ensuring that such content is protected from unauthorized reproduction and distribution by the broadcast recipient ; the audio flag , in their view , is an effective way to achieve this objective and enforce their rights .

proponents of audio flag technology also suggest that it would help prevent certain digital radio services ( like satellite radio ) from becoming a music download service through the creation of recording and storage devices that allow for further reproduction and distribution of audio broadcasts .

some copyright holders argue that these broadcasters must either pay additional royalties for the privilege of offering what appears to be a music download service , or comply with an audio flag regime that will effectively prevent broadcasters from allowing the recording in the first place .

critics of the audio flag proposal raise concerns that such a government - mandated measure may stifle technological innovation and restrict the rights of consumers to record broadcast radio — conduct that , according to audio flag opponents , is protected by the audio home recording act of 1992 , as well as "fair use" principles in copyright law .

legislation that expressly delegates authority to the fcc to mandate audio flags for digital radio transmissions would appear to be necessary before the fcc could take such steps , in the wake of a decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit in 2005 that vacated an fcc order requiring digital televisions to be manufactured with the capability to prevent unauthorized redistributions of digital video content .

the court ruled that the fcc lacked the statutory authority to establish such a broadcast video flag system for digital television under the communications act of 1934 .

two bills were introduced in the 109 th congress that would have delegated such authority ; these may represent legislative approaches that could be taken in the 110 th congress .

this bill would have empowered the fcc to promulgate regulations governing the licensing of "all technologies necessary to make transmission and reception devices" for digital broadcast and satellite radio .

the bill directed that any such digital audio regulation shall prohibit unauthorized copying and redistribution of transmitted content through the use of a broadcast flag or similar technology , "in a manner generally consistent with the purposes of other applicable law. .

title iv , subtitle c of s. 2686 would have granted the fcc the authority to issue "regulations governing the indiscriminate redistribution of audio content with respect to — digital radio broadcasts , satellite digital radio transmissions , and digital radios. .

it also directed the fcc to establish an advisory committee known as the "digital audio review board," composed of representatives from several industries , including information technology , software , consumer electronics , radio and satellite broadcasting , audio recording , music publishing , performing rights societies , and public interest groups .

the board would have been responsible for drafting a proposed regulation that reflects a consensus of the members of the board and that is "consistent with fair use principles," although the bill did not define whether such "fair use" has the same connotation as that used in the copyright law .

