the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) was created by the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) to provide an incentive for the development and rehabilitation of affordable rental housing .

these federal housing tax credits are awarded to developers of qualified projects via a competitive application process administered by state housing finance authorities ( hfas ) .

developers either use the credits or sell them to investors to raise capital for real estate projects , which , in turn , reduces the debt or equity contribu tion that would otherwise be required of developers .

with lower financing costs , tax credit properties can potentially expand the supply of affordable rental housing .

the lihtc is estimated to cost the government an average of $9.9 billion annually .

two types of lihtcs are available depending on the nature of the construction project .

the so - called 9% credit is generally reserved for new construction , while the so - called 4% credit is typically used for rehabilitation projects and new construction that is financed with tax - exempt bonds .

each year , for 10 years , a tax credit equal to roughly 4% or 9% of a project's qualified basis ( cost of construction ) is claimed .

the applicable credit rates have historically not actually been 4% and 9% .

instead , the credit rates have fluctuated in response to market interest movements so that the program has delivered a subsidy equal to 30% of the present value of a project's qualified basis in the case of the 4% credit , and 70% in the case of the 9% credit .

for both the 4% and 9% credit it is the subsidy levels ( 30% or 70% ) that are explicitly specified in the internal revenue code ( irc ) , not the credit rates .

since 1986 , the 4% rate has ranged between 3.15% and 3.97% , and the 9% credit between 7.35% and 9.27% .

since 2008 , however , there has been a floor under the 9% credit below which the new construction credit rate cannot fall .

a simplified example may help in understanding how the lihtc program is intended to encourage affordable housing development .

consider a new affordable housing apartment complex with a qualified basis of $1 million .

since the project involves new construction it will qualify for the 9% credit and generate a stream of tax credits equal to $90,000 ( 9% × $1 million ) per year for 10 years , or $900,000 in total .

under the appropriate interest rate the present value of the $900,000 stream of tax credits should be equal to $700,000 , resulting in a 70% subsidy .

the subsidy is intended to incentivize the development of affordable housing that otherwise may not be financially feasible or attractive relative to alternative investments .

the situation would be similar if the project involved rehabilitated construction except the developer would be entitled to a stream of tax credits equal to $40,000 ( 4% × $1 million ) per year for 10 years , or $400,000 in total .

the present value of the $400,000 stream of tax credits should be equal to $300,000 , resulting in a 30% subsidy .

the process of allocating , awarding , and then claiming the lihtc is complex and lengthy .

the process begins at the federal level with each state receiving an annual lihtc allocation in accordance with federal law .

state housing agencies then allocate credits to developers of rental housing according to federally required , but state created , allocation plans .

the process typically ends with developers selling allocated credits to outside investors in exchange for equity .

a more detailed discussion of each level of the allocation process is presented below .

in late 2017 , there was a revision to the internal revenue code ( p.l .

115-97 ) that substantially changed the federal tax system .

the revision did not directly alter the lihtc program ; however , the reduction in corporate taxes , along with the limits on deducting net operating losses that were part of the act , led affordable housing advocates at the time to voice concern about a reduction in the demand for lihtcs .

most recently , the 2018 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-141 ) made two changes to the lihtc program .

as was discussed in the " the allocation process " section , the act modified the so - called "income test" to allow for income averaging across tenants , and also increased the amount of credits available to states each year by 12.5% for years 2018 through 2021 .

these changes may have helped alleviate some concerns stemming from the 2017 tax revision's potential effect on lihtc development .

still , it is not yet clear what , if any , impact there may be on the affordable housing supply in the long run as the result of these recent changes to the federal tax code .

