bse ( bovine spongiform encephalopathy or "mad cow disease" ) is a fatal neurological disease of cattle , believed to be transmitted mainly by feeding infected cattle parts back to cattle .

more than 187,000 cases have been reported worldwide , 183,000 of them in the united kingdom ( uk ) where bse was first identified in 1986 .

the annual number of new cases has declined steeply since 1992 .

humans who eat contaminated beef are believed susceptible to a rare but fatal brain wasting disease , variant creutzfeldt - jakob disease ( vcjd ) .

about 160 people have been diagnosed with vcjd since 1986 , most in the uk and none linked to any canadian or u.s. meat consumption .

bse has been reported in 11 north american - born cattle .

 ( a 12 th case was a u.k. import into canada. ) .

the first native case was an alberta , canada , beef cow reported in may 2003 .

seven more cases have been found on canadian soil , five of them in 2006 , most recently in august 2006 .

the first u.s. case was in a canadian - born dairy cow found in washington state in december 2003 .

the other two u.s. cases were a 12-year - old texas - born and - raised beef cow , found in november 2004 but not confirmed until june 2005 , and a 10-year - old alabama beef cow found in late february 2006 .

in epidemiological investigations of the three u.s. cases , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) was unable to track down all related animals of interest , but those that were located tested negative for the disease .

despite a beef recall , some meat from the first u.s. bse cow may have been consumed , usda said , adding , however , that the highest - risk tissues never entered the food supply .

no materials from the other two u.s. cows entered the food supply , usda also said .

in the recent alabama case , authorities were unable to determine the cow's herd of origin .

animal health officials initially indicated that all of the north american cases were caused by the consumption of bse - contaminated feed .

however , usda reportedly now believes that the two native - born u.s. cattle had "atypical" bse , which differs from other cases .

if these cases are determined to be "spontaneous," that may affect future control strategies .

usda had asked an expert international review team ( irt ) to assess its response to the first ( december 2003 ) u.s. case , and to comment on the adequacy of existing bse protections .

the irt generally concluded ( in february 2003 ) that the investigation had conformed to internationally accepted scientific standards , but urged additional actions , including an intensive surveillance program to measure the magnitude of the bse problem in north america .

the irt had concluded that other infected animals probably were imported here , some of their parts rendered into ingredients fed to cattle , and amplified within the cattle herd , indigenously infecting some of them .

while agreeing with some of the conclusions , usda also responded that the irt's recommendations were based on the premise of a higher incidence of bse in the united states than was indicated by current studies .

usda officials have continued to rely heavily on the findings in a detailed quantitative analysis ( using computer simulation ) conducted for them by the harvard center for risk analysis and tuskegee center for computational epidemiology .

this work concluded that bse was very unlikely to become established or spread in the united states .

a major issue for congress has been how best to regain lost markets like japan and korea .

among other issues have been whether expanded federal actions are needed to further protect the public and the cattle herd ; the validity of the evolving science behind such actions ; and the costs and benefits of such actions for consumers , taxpayers , and industry .

besides the safeguards discussed above , congress has also examined such bse - related issues as the need for improved labeling and / or traceability of livestock and livestock products , and funding for the government's bse activities .

crs report rl32199 , bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad cow disease" ) : current and proposed safeguards , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32932 , bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad cow disease" ) in north america: a chronology of selected events , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs21709 , mad cow disease and u.s .

beef trade , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32012 , animal identification and meat traceability , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22955 , country - of - origin labeling for foods , by [author name scrubbed .

aphis : http: / / www.aphis.usda.gov / newsroom / hot_issues / bse.shtmlfsis : http: / / www.fsis.usda.gov / fact_sheets / bovine_spongiform_encephalopathy_bse / index.aspfda : http: / / www.fda.gov / oc / opacom / hottopics / bse.htmlcanada: http: / / www.inspection.gc.ca / english / anima / heasan / disemala / bseesb / bseesbindexe.shtmloie : http: / / www.oie.int / eng / info / en_esb.ht .

