nicaragua is a central american nation bordering both the caribbean sea and the pacific ocean between costa rica and honduras .

slightly smaller than the state of new york , nicaragua has a population of roughly 5.4 million .

with a per capita income level of $1,000 ( 2006 ) , nicaragua is classified by the world bank as a lower middle income developing country .

nicaragua is still largely an agricultural country , but its non - traditional exports ( textiles , tobacco products , vegetables , gold ) have expanded rapidly in the last few years .

nicaragua's key development challenge is to boost growth rates to a level that can reduce poverty , which is especially severe in rural areas .

nicaragua has had a conflicted and anti - democratic past , dominated from 1936 until 1979 by the somoza dictatorship .

anastasio somoza and his two sons who succeeded him , though corrupt and authoritarian , were staunch anti - communists who maintained good relations with the united states .

in 1979 , the somoza government was toppled by a revolution led by the sandinista national liberation front ( fsln ) , a leftist guerrilla group that had opposed the regime since the early 1960s .

that revolution resulted in the loss of some 50,000 lives .

during the 1980s , nicaragua was embroiled in a decade - long struggle between its leftist sandinista government , which confiscated private property and maintained ties with rebel forces in neighboring el salvador , and u.s. - backed counter - revolutionary forces .

since democratic elections were held in 1990 , nicaragua has adopted pro - market economic reforms , held free and fair elections , and worked toward building democratic institutions .

despite progress on those fronts , successive governments have made limited inroads in combating corruption and addressing the country's high levels of poverty and inequality .

on january 10 , 2007 , sandinista leader and former president daniel ortega was inaugurated to a five - year presidential term .

ortega's previous presidency ( 1985-1991 ) was marked by a civil conflict pitting the government against u.s. - backed "contras. .

ortega , who had lost the last three presidential elections , won only 37.9% of the vote in the november 2006 elections , but nicaraguan law allowed him to avoid a run - off vote since he was more than 5% ahead of the next closest candidate , eduardo montealegre , then head of the nicaraguan liberal alliance ( aln ) .

ongoing disputes between powerful leaders , endemic corruption , and weak institutions have undermined the consolidation of democracy in nicaragua .

the 2006 elections followed more than a year of political tensions among then - president enrique bolaã±os , ortega and the leftist sandinista party , and allies of rightist former president arnoldo alemã¡n .

alemã¡n and ortega , once longtime political foes , negotiated a power - sharing pact ( "el pacto" ) in 1998 that has since influenced national politics .

in addition to a tendency to have caudillos like ortega and alemã¡n dominate national politics , nicaragua is known to have high levels of corruption .

according to transparency international's 2007 corruption perception index , nicaragua is one of ten latin american countries where corruption is perceived as rampant .

currently , some opposition leaders are urging the ortega government to publicly disclose how it is using the aid nicaragua receives from venezuela , including funds earned through the re - sale of venezuelan oil bought on preferential terms through petrocaribe .

they are concerned that the president of nicaragua's state - owned oil company , which distributes the venezuelan oil , is also the treasurer of the sandinista party .

finally , the politicization of government entities , including party influence over the judiciary , is an obstacle to governance in nicaragua .

since no single party won an outright majority in nicaragua's 90-member national assembly in the november 2006 legislative elections , president ortega and the sandinistas ( fsln ) must form alliances in order to enact legislation the fsln has generally relied on an informal alliance with the constitutionalist liberal party ( plc ) , dominated by jailed former president alemã¡n , to pass legislation .

in december 2007 , however , the plc broke with the ortega government by voting against its plan to increase the power of the country's citizen power councils ( cpcs ) , which are funded by the executive branch , over the existing municipal authorities .

the plc has since aligned with eduardo montealegre , who , until recently was head of the aln , to contest the ruling fsln and its allies in the november 2008 municipal elections .

those elections will test the strength of the fsln , which currently holds 87 of the country's 153 municipalities .

despite initial concerns about the impact of ortega's november 2006 re - election on u.s. - nicaraguan relations , the bilateral relationship , though tense at times , appears to be generally intact .

one cause of tension has been president ortega's tendency to vacillate between anti - u.s. rhetoric and reassurances that he will respect private property and pursue free - trade policies .

in september 2007 , ortega denounced the united states in a speech before the united nations as "the imperialist global empire. .

rhetoric aside , ortega's interest in cooperating with the united states has been reflected in his pledge to hand over 651 soviet - made surface - to - air missiles in exchange for military and medical equipment .

ortega has continued cooperating with the imf , which approved a new three - year poverty reduction package for nicaragua in october 2007 .

his government is also implementing the cafta - dr .

the united states provides significant foreign assistance to nicaragua , and the two countries cooperate on counternarcotics , trade , and security matters .

the united states responded to hurricane mitch in 1998 by granting temporary protected status ( tps ) to eligible nicaraguan migrants living in the united states .

in may 2007 , the u.s. government extended the tps of an estimated 4,000 eligible nicaraguans through january 5 , 2009 .

in response to hurricane felix , a category 5 hurricane that hit nicaragua in september 2007 , the united states provided hurricane assistance to nicaragua to help with the recovery efforts .

the united states provided nicaragua with $50.2 million in foreign aid in fy2006 and $36.9 million in fy2007 , while an estimated $28.6 million is being provided in fy2008 .

the administration has also requested , but congress has not yet considered , some $2 million in fy2008 supplemental assistance for nicaragua as part of the administration's mã©rida initiative to boost the region's capabilities to interdict the smuggling of drugs , arms , and people , and to support a regional anti - gang strategy .

for fy2009 , the administration has requested $38 million for nicaragua , not including p.l .

480 food aid .

nicaragua could also receive roughly $6.7 million of the $100 million in mã©rida initiative funds for central america included in the fy2009 budget request .

the fy2009 request includes increases in funds for security reform and combating transnational crime , democracy and civil society programs , and trade capacity building programs to help nicaragua benefit from cafta - dr .

in addition to traditional development assistance , nicaragua benefits from its participation in the mca , a presidential initiative that increases foreign assistance to countries below a certain income threshold that are pursuing policies to promote democracy , social development , and sustainable economic growth .

in 2005 , the bush administration signed a five - year , $175 million compact with nicaragua to promote rural development .

the compact , which entered into force in may 2006 , includes three major projects in the northwestern regions of leã³n and chinandega .

those projects aim to promote investment by strengthening property rights , boost the competitiveness of farmers and other rural businesses by providing technical and market access assistance , and reduce transportation costs by improving road infrastructure .

during a recent visit to nicaragua , john danilovich , director of the millennium challenge corporation , asserted that , despite some political differences , he believes that the united states and nicaragua can work together to combat poverty .

u.s. democracy programs aim to reform government institutions to make them more transparent , accountable and professional ; combat corruption ; and promote the rule of law .

the united states provided some $13 million to support the november 2006 elections in nicaragua .

some 18,000 observers monitored the elections .

following the november 2008 municipal elections , usaid is expected to help increase the capacity and transparency of local governments .

other ongoing programs seek to increase citizen advocacy and the role of the media .

u.s. officials have expressed some concerns regarding respect for human rights in nicaragua .

according to the state department's march 2008 human rights report on nicaragua , civilian authorities generally maintained effective control of security forces , but there were some reports of unlawful killings involving the police .

some of the most significant human rights abuses included harsh prison conditions , arbitrary arrests and detentions , and widespread corruption in and politicization of government entities , including the judiciary and the supreme electoral council .

human rights problems related to labor issues include child labor and violation of worker rights in some free trade zones .

in october 2007 , human rights watch asserted that nicaragua's current ban on all abortions , which includes cases where the mother's life is at risk , has put pregnant women's health at risk .

nicaragua is a significant sea and land transshipment point for cocaine and heroin being shipped from south america to the united states , according to the state department's february 2008 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) .

trafficking occurs on both the country's atlantic and pacific coasts , with increasing trafficking occurring on the pacific coast since 2006 .

the incsr report asserts that nicaraguan law enforcement were "very successful" in their counternarcotics efforts in 2007 .

seizures and arrests increased dramatically , with 153 kilograms of heroin and 13 metric tons of cocaine seized ( compared to 23.4 kilograms of heroin and 9.72 metric tons of cocaine in 2006 ) and 192 traffickers arrested ( up from 67 ) .

it also asserts that corruption , particularly within the judiciary , has been an obstacle to nicaragua's counterdrug efforts .

the ortega administration has asked the united states for more assistance to deal with drug gangs .

the fy2009 budget request includes an increase in u.s. counternarcotics aid to nicaragua .

as noted above , other assistance could be provided through the proposed mã©rida initiative .

nicaragua's national assembly approved the cafta - dr in october 2005 and passed related intellectual property and other reforms in march 2006 .

the agreement went into effect in nicaragua on april 1 , 2006 .

compared to other cafta - dr countries , nicaragua has attracted textile and apparel investors because of its relatively low wage costs .

in addition , nicaragua is the only cafta - dr country allowed to export a certain amount of apparel products composed of third country fabric to the united states duty - free .

foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in nicaragua totaled roughly $282 million in 2006 , an 18.5% increase over 2005 .

in 2007 , fdi rose again to some $335 million .

cafta - dr has also helped to accelerate u.s. - nicaraguan trade .

in 2006 , nicaraguan exports to the united states totaled about $1.53 billion , up 29.2% from 2005 .

they rose again in 2007 to roughly $1.6 billion , with particularly strong growth in exports of apparel , sugar , coffee , cigars , cheese , and fruits and vegetables .

for the same period , nicaraguan imports from the united states rose 20.6% in 2006 to $752 million as compared to 2005 , and by 18.5% in 2007 to $890 million .

key nicaragua imports from the united states include machinery , grains , fuel oil , textile fabric , plastics , pharmaceuticals , and motor vehicles .

resolution of property claims by u.s. citizens has been a contentious issue in u.s. - nicaraguan relations since the sandinista regime expropriated property in the 1980s .

the nicaraguan government has gradually settled many claims through compensation , including the claims of 4,500 u.s. citizens .

fewer than 700 claims registered with the u.s. embassy remain unresolved .

the ortega government's willingness to continue processing those claims was rewarded in july 2007 by the administration's renewal of a waiver that allows nicaragua to continue receiving u.s. foreign assistance despite the past expropriation of property owned by u.s. citizens .

