the 8 th amendment , applicable to the federal government and to the states through the 14 th amendment , bars the use of "excessive sanctions" in the criminal justice system .

it states specifically that "[e]xcessive bail shall not be required , nor excessive fines imposed , nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. .

underlying this provision is the fundamental "precept of justice that punishment for [a] crime should be graduated and proportioned to [the] offense. .

the u.s. supreme court has stated that only "the worst of the worst" may be executed for their crimes .

however , the court has provided minimal guidance for the "worst of the worst" category of offenders and / or offenses .

the court has held that the death penalty is a disproportionate , and therefore unconstitutional , punishment for some non - homicide crimes .

in more recent cases , the court reinforced and refined its proportionality analysis utilizing an "evolving standards of decency" standard .

using this standard , the court found that the imposition of the death penalty on juvenile offenders and the mentally retarded is unconstitutional .

in coker v. georgia , the court held that the state may not impose a death sentence upon a rapist who does not take a human life .

the court announced that the standard under the 8 th amendment was that punishments are barred when they are "excessive" in relation to the crime committed .

a "punishment is 'excessive' and unconstitutional if it: ( 1 ) makes no measurable contribution to acceptable goals of punishment and hence is nothing more than the purposeless and needless imposition of pain and suffering ; or ( 2 ) is grossly out of proportion to the severity of the crime. .

according to the court , to ensure that applying these standards not be or appear to be the subjective conclusion of individual justices , attention must be given to objective factors , predominantly "to the public attitudes concerning a particular sentence — history and precedent , legislative attitudes , and the response of juries reflected in their sentencing decisions...." while the court thought that the death penalty for rape passed the first test , it felt it failed the second .

georgia was the sole state providing for death for the rape of an adult woman , and juries in at least nine out of 10 cases refused to impose death for rape .

aside from this view of public perception , the court independently concluded that death is an excessive penalty for an offender who rapes but does not kill , stating that rape cannot compare with murder "in terms of moral depravity and of injury to the person and the public. .

although the court in coker did not explicitly hold the death penalty unconstitutional for all crimes not involving homicide , many have read the decision as such , since the court based its holding largely on the distinction between crimes that cause death and crimes that do not .

the court reasoned that because the crime of rape does not result in death , punishing rape by death would be unconstitutionally excessive .

the court utilized the same type of proportionality analysis in enmund v. florida by applying its reasoning from coker to hold that the death penalty is a disproportionate punishment for the crime of felony / murder , imposed on the getaway driver in a robbery gone wrong , because robbery , like rape , "does not compare with murder , which does involve the unjustified taking of human life. .

the court stated that "[a]s was said of the crime of rape in coker , we have the abiding conviction that the death penalty , which is 'unique in its severity and irrevocability,' is an excessive penalty for the robber who , as such , does not take human life. .

thus , the court seemed to say that for a crime to be proportional to the punishment of death , the crime committed must cause death .

since coker and enmund , the court has refined its proportionality analysis , first articulated in weems v. united states , to determine which punishments are unconstitutionally excessive .

in weems , the court explained that the cruel and unusual punishment clause is "progressive , and is not fastened to the obsolete , but may acquire meaning as public opinion becomes enlightened by a humane justice. .

as such , in determining what is constitutional under the 8 th amendment , the court generally looks to "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society. .

the "evolving standards of decency" principle appears to be a flexible rule of construction intended to evolve with societal norms as they develop so that the court may reflect these norms in its constitutionality review .

this principle now appears to be the primary framework within which the court reviews constitutional claims challenging the application of the death penalty .

the court employed this framework in both atkins v. virginia and roper v. simmons , cases that narrowed the category of offenders eligible for capital punishment to exclude the mentally retarded and juvenile offenders .

the court's methodology in deciding these cases had a different focus from its prior jurisprudence regarding the constitutionality of capital statutes .

in both roper and atkins , the court examined objective indicia of national consensus to determine whether the "evolving standards of decency" demonstrated that the death penalty was unconstitutional under the circumstances .

in atkins and roper , the court employed a three - part analysis to determine whether , under "evolving standards of decency," imposing the death penalty would have been so disproportionate as to be "cruel and unusual" under the 8 th amendment .

in both cases , the court first looked for a national consensus as evidenced by the acts of the state legislatures .

the court then assessed the proportionality of the punishment to the relevant crimes , considering whether the death penalty was being limited , as required , to the most serious classes of crimes and offenders , and whether its application would serve the goals of retribution and deterrence .

lastly , the court looked to international opinion to inform its analysis .

on may 22 , 2007 , in louisiana v. kennedy , the louisiana supreme court held that the u.s. supreme court's decision in coke r prohibiting the death penalty does not apply when the victim is a child under the age of 12 .

the defendant was convicted and sentenced to death for the aggravated rape of his 8-year - old stepdaughter .

the louisiana court explained that capital sentences for rape of a child were justifiable under the 8 th amendment .

in reaching its conclusion , the court followed the 8 th amendment framework set forth by the u.s. supreme court in atkins v. virginia and roper v. simmons , first examining whether there is a national consensus on the punishment and then considering whether the court would find the punishment excessive .

the louisiana court determined that because five states had adopted similar laws in the past decade , the national trend was toward capital punishment for child rape .

moreover , the court held that because children are uniquely vulnerable , permitting the death penalty for child rape is not unduly harsh , and is proportionate to the crime .

on january 4 , 2008 , the u.s. supreme court announced that it would examine the constitutionality of permitting the execution of a child molester who did not kill his victim .

in kennedy v. louisiana , a divided court held , by a vote of 5 to 4 , that capital punishment for a defendant convicted of a non - homicide child rape is unconstitutional .

writing for the majority , justice kennedy stated that such a punishment would be excessive , violating the 8 th amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment .

following the standard set forth in atkins and roper , the court rested its decision on several rationales .

first , there is a national consensus against the imposition of the death penalty for child rape .

second , evolving standards of decency require that the categories of capital offenses not be expanded , but rather be reserved for the most heinous crimes .

lastly , imposition of capital punishment for the non - homicide crime of child rape does not fulfill the death penalty's social purposes of retribution and deterrence .

in determining objective indicia of national consensus regarding capital punishment for non - homicide child rape , the court looked at legislative enactments and state practices with respect to executions .

the court noted that while six states have made child rape a capital offense , 44 states and the federal government had not .

according to the court , the relatively small number of states which make child rape a capital offense is analogous to the activity in enmund , where the court found a national consensus against the death penalty for felony / murder despite eight jurisdictions allowing capital punishment .

in addition , the court noted that louisiana was the only state since 1964 to sentence a defendant to death for child rape .

the court rejected louisiana's contention that the coker decision itself deterred states from adopting capital child rape statutes and thereby influenced the court's view of a developing national consensus .

the court explained that several state courts recognized that coker ' s holding was limited to the crime of rape against an adult woman and did not expressly prohibit imposition of capital punishment for child rape .

moreover , the court noted that the state failed to cite any reliable data to support its assertion .

the court also concluded that the absence of executions for rape or any other non - homicide crime since 1964 demonstrated that there is a national consensus against capital punishment for the crime of child rape .

as such , the court determined that , viewed in its totality , the limited number of states authorizing the death penalty for child rape , as well as the absence of executions for rape or any other non - homicide crime since 1964 , demonstrates a national consensus against capital punishment for child rape .

after looking at objective evidence of a national consensus , the court moved to a subjective analysis .

while the court acknowledged that rape is a heinous crime causing traumatic and long - lasting anguish which is exacerbated when the victim is a child , it "does not follow though , that capital punishment is a proportionate penalty for the crime. .

the court reasoned that the evolving standards of decency require restraint in the application of capital punishment .

as such , capital punishment should be reserved for a narrow category of crimes and / or offenses .

the court acknowledged the reprehensibility of the crime of rape .

however , the court reasoned that child rape cannot be compared to murder in terms of "severity and irrevocability. .

the majority found that imposition of the death penalty for non - homicide child rape would be counterproductive to the goals of rehabilitation , deterrence , and retribution .

as for retribution , the court questioned whether the death penalty for non - homicide crimes balances the wrong done to the victim .

the court concluded that there was no evidence that a child rape victim's hurt would be diminished when the law allows capital punishment for the perpetrator .

instead , it reasoned that it is likely there would be additional harm as minors would be forced to endure the stressors of reliving the traumatic events repeatedly .

in addition , the court noted systematic concerns in prosecuting child rape cases , including the problem of "unreliable , induced , and even imagined child testimony" that may lead to "wrongful execution" in some cases .

the majority felt that allowing capital punishment for the crime of child rape had additional negative implications that are counterproductive to the goal of deterrence .

for example , victims may be "more likely to shield the perpetrator from discovery , thus increasing underreporting. .

in addition , punishing child rape with death may remove a strong incentive for the rapist to spare the victim's life .

in its analysis , the court distinguished child rape from other death - eligible crimes because it is a crime against an individual person .

it ruled that the death penalty should not be permitted when the victim's life was not taken .

however , the court did not address , and consequently left open , the possibility of imposing the death penalty for non - homicide crimes against the state , such as treason , espionage , terrorism , and drug kingpin activity .

justice alito , writing for the dissent , expressed the view that the majority's decision conflicts with the original meaning of the 8 th amendment and ignores the moral depravity of the crime .

in addition , he felt that the small number of states which enacted child rape statutes was not based on a national consensus against execution of child rapists , but rather on the broad dicta presented in coker .

also , he felt that the 8 th amendment protects an accused's right , and does not authorize the majority to strike down criminal laws on the ground that they are not in the best interest of crime victims or society at large .

