the chief administrative officer of the house of representatives ( cao ) is an elected officer of the house .

elected at the beginning of each congress with the slate of officers nominated by the majority party , the cao's term coincides with the dates of that congress .

initially created in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) to replace the appointed director of non - legislative and financial services , the cao oversees human resources , financial services , technology infrastructure , procurement , facilities management , and other support functions for the house of representatives .

the cao's portfolio complements the legislative operations of the clerk of the house and the security functions of the sergeant at arms .

consolidation of administrative functions of the house under the direction of a single individual began with the creation of the appointed position of director of non - legislative and financial services in the 102 nd congress ( 1991-1992 ) .

following the change in majority party from democratic to republican , the house in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) abolished the position of director of non - legislative and financial services and created an elected position of chief administrative officer of the house to assume his duties .

the cao's office supervises the non - legislative functions of the house of representatives .

cao office divisions are organized along operational and mission lines that include the immediate office of the cao , operations , and customer solutions .

the immediate office includes the office of the chief administrative officer and his support staff .

it is responsible for oversight of the operations and customer solutions divisions and directing studies ordered by the house leadership .

the immediate office also supervises the management of the three house media galleries , which provide facilities for press coverage of the house ; assists members of congress and staff with the distribution of press releases ; issues the cao's semi - annual report on the office's activities and accomplishments ; and issues the "statement of disbursements of the house. .

the immediate office also maintains a public website , http: / / cao.house.gov .

operations is responsible for developing and maintaining facilities and systems that are used by the house of representatives , including financial management , procurement , technology , and human resources .

in addition , operations staff serve as consultants to members' offices on their internal operations and systems .

operations is divided into four groups: administration and financial services , handling procurement , financial counseling , payroll and benefits , budget management , resources management , human resources , and workplace safety ; workforce services , handling employee and organizational development , employee assistance , the house learning center , and house child care ; house information resources , handling technology support , technology infrastructure , business solutions , web solutions , facilities management , informational security , and systems engineering ; and immediate operations office , handling business continuity and disaster recovery , business improvement , portfolio management , and committee hearing rooms renovation .

in addition , operations manages projects that affect all house employees .

these include improving payroll and benefit services , introducing new financial and purchasing systems , upgrading "housenet," and updating the house messaging system .

customer solutions is responsible for facilitating the daily work of congressional staff members through the cao customer solutions center ( ccsc ) , which includes the cao call center , firstcall+ .

customer solutions is divided into three groups: customer solutions delivery , handling the ccsc , the house recording studio , the office supply store , the house gift shop , and photography ; assets , furnishings and logistics , handling acquisition , payments , equipment maintenance , equipment inventory management , warehousing , carpet , drapes , upholstery , cabinetry , finishing , and modular furniture ; and immediate customer solutions office , handling the disbursement of house resources and supplies and the management of customer relationships .

customer solutions is also responsible for office renovations and moving members of the house and their staff to new offices .

this responsibility includes holding equipment fairs to demonstrate new technology and products , and service fairs to highlight support offices , including the architect of the capitol , the library of congress ( including the congressional research service ) , the clerk of the house , and the sergeant at arms .

in march 2007 , speaker nancy pelosi , majority leader steny hoyer , and the then chair of the committee on house administration , the late juanita millender - mcdonald , asked cao daniel beard and his senate counterparts to "undertake a 'green the capitol' initiative to ensure that the house institutes the most up - to - date industry and government standards for green building and green operating procedures. .

since 2007 , the "green the capitol" initiative has worked to reduce the carbon footprint of the house through numerous programs including my green office , installing low voc ( volatile organic compounds ) carpets in house offices , purchasing renewable electricity , using green cleaning products , and working with house food service vendor restaurant associates to use locally sourced food and biodegradable containers and utensils in the cafeterias .

since the creation of the office of the director of non - legislative and financial services in the 102 nd congress ( 1991-1992 ) , seven individuals have served as either the director or as cao of the house on a temporary or permanent basis .

table a - 1 provides a list of directors and caos , including the congress in which they served , and the date of their appointment or election .

