hurricane katrina struck the gulf coast on august 29 , 2005 , causing significant infrastructure damage to 83 gsa owned and leased federal buildings and courthouses in louisiana , alabama , and mississippi , necessitating the eventual relocation of 2,600 federal employees from 28 federal agencies .

sixteen of the damaged federal buildings owned by gsa provided 1.7 million square feet of office space , and the remaining 67 gsa - leased facilities totaled 1.3 million sq .

ft. in rented space .

gsa , through its public buildings service ( pbs ) , is the primary federal real property and asset management agency , with 11 regional offices that oversee gsa owned and leased federal buildings and courthouses .

gsa is also responsible for the design and construction of federal courthouses within gsa's 11 regional districts .

gsa's southeast region 4 includes alabama , florida , georgia , kentucky , south carolina , north carolina , mississippi , and tennessee .

as of september 21 , 2007 , one leased facility remained closed ( see table 1 ) .

the states of arkansas , louisiana , new mexico , oklahoma , and texas comprise gsa's greater southwest region 7 , with one gsa - owned facility remaining closed to the public ( see table 2 ) , as of september 21 , 2007 .

hurricane katrina was responsible for significant infrastructure damage to 83 gsa owned and leased federal buildings and courthouses .

the 109 th congress authorized $38 million to gsa's federal buildings fund for repairs to the damaged federal facilities .

in order to accommodate nearly 2,600 displaced federal tenants from 28 federal agencies , gsa leased temporary office space in baton rouge , la ; lafayette , la ; and jackson , ms. current law authorizes the gsa administrator to enter into an emergency lease agreement during any period declared by the president to require emergency leasing authority .

an emergency lease may not be for more than 180 days , without prior congressional approval of a lease prospectus .

no legislation pertaining to hurricane - damaged federal facilities has been introduced in the 110 th congress .

table 1 indicates the one federal facility that remained closed in gsa region 4 , as of september 21 , 2007 .

table 2 indicates the one federal facility that remained closed in gsa region 7 , as of september 21 , 2007 .

