as public concern over rising spending on prescription drugs continues , members of congress have introduced legislation to amend the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) and permit the importation of fda - approved drugs from lower - priced foreign sources .

lawmakers have also sought to use the appropriations process to counter administrative blocks to drug importation .

following discussions during senate consideration of the family smoking prevention and tobacco control , which has subsequently been sent to the president for signing , the senate leadership agreed to bring up the drug importation provisions that senator dorgan has championed in the last few congressional sessions .

on june 10 , 2009 , the senator introduced s. 1232 , the pharmaceutical market access and drug safety act of 2009 .

the bill contains the same text as s. 525 and h.r .

1298 , which had been introduced earlier in this congress .

this report provides a brief look at the issues addressed in s. 1232 and compares its provisions to current law .

the report concludes by listing other crs reports on drug importation .

current law and the bills introduced over the past several years all seek to balance the availability of imported prescription drugs with the assurance that these imports would be safe and effective .

sponsors of drug importation legislation want to reduce or restrain the financial burden prescription drugs place on u.s. consumers — senator dorgan's website description of his legislative proposal uses the title "reducing the cost of prescription drugs. .

under current law , it is illegal for anyone to import a prescription drug other than its manufacturer .

the law includes provisions for pharmacists and wholesalers to import , but provides that they not become effective until the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) certifies that the importation program would be safe and offer cost savings to u.s. consumers .

secretaries in both the clinton and bush administrations have declined to provide that certification , referring to safety and cost concerns .

the requirement was first established by the medicine equity and drug safety ( meds ) act of 2000 , which added ffdca section 804 , importation of prescription drugs .

despite much debate to change that approach , congress included importation provisions in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) that retained the certification requirement .

the obama administration , however , has indicated an openness to drug importation activities .

the president's budget request for fy2010 contains "a proposal to allow americans to buy safe and effective drugs from other countries," and includes money for fda to "begin working with the various stakeholders to develop policy options related to drug importation. .

current law does not permit individuals to import prescription drugs for their own use .

it directs the secretary to exercise discretion to permit importation by an individual for personal use , if such use does not appear to present an unreasonable risk to the individual .

if a secretary were to certify and allow the importation program , section 804 still would not directly allow individual importation .

it would authorize the secretary to waive , under specific conditions , the provisions that prohibit importation by individuals .

fda has chosen to leniently enforce the current prohibition , and has allowed individuals to bring into the united states a small amount ( i.e. , a 90-day supply ) of non - fda - approved drugs for personal use .

this fda enforcement policy requires that those individuals affirm in writing that the drugs are for their own use , and provide the name and address of their treating physician .

when fda's personal use import policy began , it was not envisioned as a way for consumers to bring lower - priced prescription drugs into the united states .

according to its policy statement on importing drugs for personal use , fda intended this "enforcement discretion" to allow individuals to get treatments not otherwise available in the united states .

s. 1232 , the pharmaceutical market access and drug safety act of 2009 , would rewrite section 804 .

it would eliminate the secretary's certification requirement and allow pharmacists , wholesalers , and individuals to import prescription drugs under a program that would also include potential safeguards regarding drug safety and effectiveness .

s. 1232 is similar to legislation introduced in the 109 th and 110 th congresses .

as discussed below , s. 1232 differs from current law in its approach to ensuring that imported drugs are safe and effective .

the bill also includes provisions to influence industry behavior so that drugs available for import by u.s. consumers would result in cost savings relative to current domestic prices .

finally , it includes administrative arrangements , including financing .

anticipating manufacturers' resistance to practices that might limit the industry's revenue , s. 1232 contains specific provisions designed to influence industry behavior .

s. 1232 would set up a fee mechanism to fund the administrative and regulatory tasks of the importation program .

it also would set specific implementation dates .

two crs reports cover in greater depth the current legal issues surrounding the importation of prescription drugs: crs report rs21711 , legal issues related to prescription drug sales on the internet , and crs report rl32191 , prescription drug importation: a legal overview , both by [author name scrubbed] .

several archived crs products — such as crs report rl32511 , importing prescription drugs: objectives , options , and outlook , by [author name scrubbed] — provide additional policy analysis and historical detail .

