earmark disclosure rules in both the house and senate were implemented with the stated intention of bringing more transparency to congressionally directed spending .

the administrative responsibilities associated with these new rules vary by chamber .

this report outlines the major administrative responsibilities of senators and committees of the senate associated with the chamber's earmark disclosure rules .

senate rule xliv prohibits a vote on a motion to proceed to consider a measure or a vote on adoption of a conference report , unless the chair of the committee or the majority leader ( or designee ) certifies that a complete list of earmarks and the name of each senator requesting each earmark is available on a publicly accessible congressional website in a searchable form at least 48 hours before the vote .

if a senator proposes a floor amendment containing an additional earmark , those items must be printed in the congressional record as soon as "practicable. .

rule xliv , paragraph 5 , explicitly defines congressionally directed spending item , limited tax benefit , and limited tariff benefit as follows: congressionally directed spending item - a provision or report language included primarily at the request of a senator providing , authorizing or recommending a specific amount of discretionary budget authority , credit authority , or other spending authority for a contract , loan , loan guarantee , grant , loan authority , or other expenditure with or to an entity , or targeted to a specific state , locality or congressional district , other than through a statutory or administrative formula driven or competitive award process .

limited tax benefit - any revenue provision that ( a ) provides a federal tax deduction , credit , exclusion , or preference to a particular beneficiary or limited group of beneficiaries under the internal revenue code of 1986 , and ( b ) contains eligibility criteria that are not uniform in application with respect to potential beneficiaries of such provision .

limited tariff benefit - a provision modifying the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states in a manner that benefits 10 or fewer entities .

if the earmark certification requirements have not been met , a point of order may lie against consideration of the measure or vote on the conference report .

a point of order would not apply to floor amendments .

senate earmark disclosure rules apply to any congressional earmark included in either the text of the bill or the committee report accompanying the bill , as well as the conference report and joint explanatory statement .

the disclosure requirements apply to items in authorizing legislation , appropriations legislation , and tax measures .

furthermore , they apply not only to measures reported by committees but also to unreported measures , amendments , house bills , and conference reports .

under senate rule xliv , paragraph 6 , a senator requesting that a congressional earmark be included in a measure is required to provide a written statement to the chair and ranking minority member of the committee of jurisdiction that includes the senator's name ; the name and address of the intended earmark recipient ( if there is no specific recipient , the location of the intended activity should be included ) ; in the case of a limited tax or tariff benefit , identification of the individual or entities reasonably anticipated to benefit to the extent known to the senator ; the purpose of the earmark ; and a certification that neither the senator nor the senator's immediate family has a financial interest in such an earmark .

it is important to note that , when submitting earmark requests , individual committees and subcommittees often have their own additional administrative requirements beyond those required by senate rules ( eg , prioritizing requests or submitting request forms electronically ) .

the senate appropriations committee , for example , has stated that it will require members requesting earmarks to post information regarding their earmark requests on their personal website .

this information must be posted at the time of the request and must include the purpose of the earmark and why it is a valuable use of taxpayer funds .

the committees may also establish relevant policy requirements ( eg , requiring matching funds for earmark requests ) or restrictions ( eg , not considering earmark requests for certain appropriations accounts or disallowing multi - year funding requests ) .

in addition , committees and subcommittees often have deadlines , especially for earmark requests in appropriations legislation .

for this reason , it is important to check with individual committees and subcommittees to learn of any supplemental earmark request requirements or restrictions .

the committee of jurisdiction is responsible for identifying earmarks in the legislative text and any accompanying reports .

therefore , when it is not clear whether a senatorial request constitutes an earmark , the committee of jurisdiction may be able to provide guidance .

when submitting an earmark request , it may be relevant whether the senator wants the earmark to be included in the text of the bill or the committee report accompanying the bill .

committees may make an administrative distinction between these two categories in terms of the submission of earmark requests , and there may be policy implications of an earmark's placement in either the bill text or the committee report .

for example , under executive order 13457 , issued in january 2008 , executive agencies are directed not to commit , obligate , or expend funds that were the result of an earmark included in non - statutory language , such as a committee report .

if , during consideration of a measure , a senator proposes an amendment that contains an additional earmark , the senator shall ensure that a list of earmarks ( and the name of any other senator who submitted a request for each earmark included ) is printed in the congressional record as soon as "practicable. .

under the senate rule , earmark disclosure responsibilities of senate committees and conference committees fall into three major categories: ( 1 ) determining if a spending provision is an earmark ; ( 2 ) compiling earmark requests for presentation , and ( 3 ) certifying that requirements under rule xliv have been met .

committees of jurisdiction may use their discretion to decide what constitutes an earmark .

definitions in senate rules , as well as past earmark designations during the 110 th congress , may provide guidance in determining if a certain provision constitutes an earmark .

senate rule xliv states that before consideration is in order on a measure or conference report , a list of included earmarks and their sponsors must be identified through lists , charts , or some means and made available on a publicly accessible congressional website for at least 48 hours .

the senate appropriations committee has stated that it will make earmark disclosure tables publicly available the same day that a subcommittee reports the bill .

in the case of measures , the list of earmarks ( and senate sponsors ) on the congressional website must be "searchable. .

lists associated with conference reports should also be in a searchable format but only to the extent it is technically feasible .

senate rules state that a committee report containing a list of earmarks ( and their sponsors ) that is available online satisfies the disclosure requirement .

the rule also requires the applicable committee to make the certifications of no financial interest available online .

the rule does not specify how long after consideration any of these required materials must be maintained .

the rule states that consideration of a measure or conference report is not in order until the applicable committee chair or the majority leader ( or designee ) "certifies" that the requirements stated above have been met .

while the rule does not state what constitutes certification , it has been the practice of the committee chair to make a statement on the senate floor or submit a written statement to be printed in the congressional record confirming compliance with rule xliv's disclosure requirements .

an example of a certification letter is provided below .

