on february 17 , 2008 , usda announced that hallmark / westland meat packing co. of california was recalling 143 million pounds of fresh and frozen beef products dating to february 1 , 2006 .

about 50 million pounds were distributed to the school lunch and other federal nutrition programs in at least 45 states .

this largest u.s. meat recall ever came after usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) found that the facility did not always notify it about cattle that had become nonambulatory after they had been inspected , but before slaughter for food .

fsis rules prohibit most nonambulatory cattle because they are more likely to have bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) .

the recall was so - called class ii , indicating a remote possibility that the products could cause adverse health effects , but usda said the recall was necessary because its rules deem the animals unfit for human food .

 ( most large recalls have been class i , with a reasonable probability of serious health consequences or death. ) .

officials asserted , however , that findings of bse are extremely rare in the united states and cited the effectiveness of other bse safeguards — including a ban on feeding most cattle parts back to cattle , and the removal of potentially infectious material from all older animals .

they said most of the recalled beef likely had been consumed , and that school and other domestic feeding sites had been instructed to hold and destroy all remaining products .

the agency suspended inspection at the plant , which was not expected to reopen , on february 4 , 2008 , three days after it voluntarily ceased operations .

the matter came to light when the humane society of the united states ( hsus ) released videotapes of what it described as employees inhumanely handling downer cattle before slaughter .

usda inspectors reportedly had failed to detect that these animals became nonambulatory after they received antemortem inspection — causing some to question the use or effectiveness of recent increased appropriations from congress for more aggressive enforcement of the federal humane methods of slaughter act ( hmsa ; 7 u.s.c .

§§ 1901 et seq . ) .

in early may 2008 , hsus notified the secretary of agriculture that it had collected new evidence of abuse of nonambulatory cows and pigs at livestock auction markets in maryland , pennsylvania , new mexico , and texas .

hsus asserted that mistreatment of so - called downers is "systemic" and not limited to slaughterhouses .

usda promised to address the allegations .

the livestock marketing association ( lma ) issued a statement arguing that the "overwhelming majority" of its members humanely handle their animals out of "both a humane , and economic necessity" and cited its work with the industry to ensure proper handling , but criticized hsus for promoting an anti - meat agenda .

hsus called for expanded government oversight of animal handling throughout the marketing chain .

it also criticized usda for not fulfilling a requirement in § 10815 of p.l .

107 - 171 , the 2002 farm bill , for a report to congress on the scope , causes , and treatment of nonambulatory livestock , and for humane handling regulations if the report deems them necessary .

usda noted that it had collected and published data on the number of such livestock and was completing work on causes and handling practices regarding dairy cattle , to appear in a peer - reviewed journal in 2008 .

federal law requires fsis inspectors to be present at all times meat and poultry slaughter plants are operating .

among other requirements , an inspector must observe every live animal before slaughter , both at rest and in motion , to detect signs of any disease or health problems that might render the animal unfit for human food .

plants must notify fsis when animals first arrive , and the "antemortem" inspection is to be conducted on the day of their slaughter .

although inspectors are not stationed in the antemortem areas for the entire day , they are to return randomly after initial inspection to verify proper handling of the animals .

this contrasts with "postmortem" inspection , where inspectors are stationed constantly along the processing lines inside the slaughter plants to examine each carcass and monitor other processing activities .

the hmsa's key provision states: "no method of slaughtering or handling in connection with slaughtering shall be deemed to comply with the public policy of the united states unless it is humane ... [meaning] ... ( a ) in the case of cattle , calves , horses , mules , sheep , swine , and other livestock , all animals are rendered insensible to pain by a single blow or gunshot or an electrical , chemical or other means that is rapid and effective , before being shackled , hoisted , thrown , cast , or cut. .

to implement the act , fsis issued regulations ( at 9 c.f.r .

parts 313 and 500 ) , and a directive ( 6900.2 ) for inspection personnel covering the proper maintenance of pens and rampways ; how to handle livestock during unloading and movement to the stunning area , including the use of electric prods and other instruments ; and the methods of stunning the animals .

for each , the directive spells out how personnel are to verify compliance and specifically what to do if there is noncompliance .

there are approximately 6,200 federally inspected meat and poultry slaughtering and processing establishments .

more than 900 of them slaughter livestock and all are subject to the hmsa , according to usda ; approximately 600 of them slaughtered nearly 34 million cattle in 2007 .

until early 2004 , fsis required that inspectors consider all seriously crippled livestock ( cattle and other species ) and those commonly known as "downers" to automatically be identified as "u.s .

suspects" — i.e. , possibly having a disease or condition that would require their condemnation .

fsis required that an agency veterinarian examine them both before and after slaughter , and that they be slaughtered separately , before being cleared for food .

after a cow imported from canada was found to have bse in late 2003 , fsis issued a number of rules aimed at keeping bse - infected beef from entering the food supply , including a prohibition on the slaughter of any nonambulatory cattle , regardless of the reason , or of when they became disabled .

specifically , an interim final rule on january 12 , 2004 ( 69 federal register p. 1873 ) , stated , "non - ambulatory disabled cattle shall be condemned and disposed of" in accordance with other fsis regulations , including that they be humanely euthanized .

the interim rule also for the first time explicitly defined nonambulatory disabled livestock to be those "that cannot rise from a recumbent position or that cannot walk , including , but not limited to , those with broken appendages , severed tendons or ligaments , nerve paralysis , fractured vertebral column , or metabolic condition. .

fsis based this rule change on findings in europe , where bse was far more prevalent , that nonambulatory cattle were much more likely to harbor the bse agent than ambulatory cattle , and that "typical clinical signs associated with bse cannot always be observed in non - ambulatory cattle infected with bse because the signs of bse often cannot be differentiated from the typical clinical signs of the many other diseases and conditions affecting non - ambulatory cattle" ( 69 federal register p. 1870 ) .

on july 13 , 2007 , fsis modified its rule to say that "fsis inspection personnel will determine the disposition of cattle that become non - ambulatory after they have passed ante - mortem inspection on a case - by - case basis" ( 72 federal register p. 38729 ) .

in the preamble to the rule , the agency said a notice to its personnel — issued after the january 2004 interim rule — already was directing fsis veterinarians to permit such animals to be slaughtered , so long as the veterinarian could verify that the animal had suffered an acute injury ( eg , a broken leg ) .

however , the agency also reaffirmed its earlier findings that bse clinical signs cannot always be observed in a nonambulatory animal even though bse was much more prevalent in such animals .

thus , its general ban on their use in food — with this noteworthy exception — would be continued by the final rule .

in an effort they said could help to rebuild market confidence , the american meat institute , the national meat association , and the national milk producers federation petitioned fsis on april 22 , 2008 , to again amend the rules to ban nonambulatory disabled cattle from the meat supply under any circumstances .

fsis published a proposed rule to do so in the august 29 , 2008 , federal register with a 30-day public comment period .

the final rule was published in final form on march 18 , 2009 ( 74 federal register , pp .

11463-11466 ) .

the rule , effective april 17 , 2009 , now specifically requires establishments to notify fsis inspectors when cattle become nonambulatory disabled after passing ante - mortem inspection ; all such cattle must be condemned and properly disposed of .

in separate state action , the california governor signed into law a bill ( a.b .

2098 ) that imposes a strict prohibition against a slaughterhouse holding a nonambulatory animal ( not limited to cattle ) without taking immediate action to humanely euthanize it .

the bill , effective january 1 , 2009 , also prohibits stockyards , auctions , market agencies , or dealers from holding a nonambulatory animal without taking immediate action to humanely euthanize the animal or to provide immediate veterinary treatment .

violators are subject to up to one year in jail or a fine of up to $20,000 , or both .

the new measure appears intended to strengthen an existing state law on the treatment of nonambulatory animals .

meat industry representatives challenged the new law in federal court ( national meat association v. brown , no .

1:08-cv - 01963-ljo - dlb , california eastern district ) , winning a preliminary injunction on february 19 , 2009 , against the law's enforcement in swine slaughterhouses .

in the 111 th congress , senate supporters of a ban on downer cattle sought to include such a provision in economic stimulus legislation ( h.r .

1 ) , but it was removed by conferees on the measure .

the provision ( section 104 ) in the senate - passed version of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( h.r .

1 ) would have permanently prohibited the use of federal funds to pass through usda inspection any nonambulatory disabled cattle for use as human food , regardless of the reason or time the animal became nonambulatory .

because cattle must pass usda inspection before they can be processed into human food , such a provision would remove the economic incentive to slaughter downers .

however , section 104 exempted from the definition of such cattle those that are less than five months old or weigh less than 500 pounds — essentially , veal calves .

this provision , not in the house - passed version of the stimulus package , generally would have written into statute somewhat less restrictive language than what usda has promulgated through regulatory action .

specifically , the senate definition of nonambulatory cattle was similar to usda's definition , in its meat inspection regulations , of all nonambulatory disabled livestock , which are those "that cannot rise from a recumbent position or that cannot walk , including , but not limited to , those with broken appendages , severed tendons or ligaments , nerve paralysis , fractured vertebral column , or metabolic condition. .

however , the usda definition does not exempt veal calves .

in the 110 th congress , a number of committees held hearings during 2008 on hallmark and related matters .

several bills were offered seeking to address humane treatment and / or other inspection issues .

for example , s. 394 and h.r .

661 would have required usda to regulate "the humane treatment , handling , and disposition of all nonambulatory livestock by covered entities , including a requirement that nonambulatory livestock be humanely euthanized. .

such entities would have been expanded beyond slaughter establishments to include stockyards , market agencies , and dealers .

the bill would have applied not only to cattle but also to any sheep , swine , goats , horses , mules , or other equines .

another bill , s. 2770 , would have banned the slaughter of nonambulatory livestock for human food ; establish gradually increasing penalties for plants that do so or that fail to comply with the hmsa ; and require usda to publish , in final form , rules it proposed in 2006 to disclose the names of all retailers that received recalled meat or poultry .

past congresses had attempted to address humane oversight in a number of past , mainly appropriations , acts .

after a number of major news stories reported continuing abuses at slaughterhouses in 2000 , congress , in the 2001 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

107 - 20 ) , directed usda to spend not less than $1 million to enforce the act .

usda in turn allocated $1.25 million to hire 17 newly established district veterinary medical specialists exclusively to oversee enforcement .

lawmakers next included , in the 2002 farm law ( in § 10305 ) , a resolution urging usda to fully enforce the act and to report the number of violations to congress annually .

usda's fy2003 appropriation ( in p.l .

108 - 7 ) included an increase of $5 million for fsis to , as a senate report stated , hire "50 additional inspection personnel to work solely on hmsa enforcement through full - time ante - mortem inspection , particularly unloading , handling , stunning and killing of animals at slaughter plants. .

the senate appropriations committee noted in its report ( s.rept .

107 - 223 ) that it was "extremely concerned" that fsis did not have adequate inspection personnel dedicated to checking for or reporting hmsa violations , and it questioned the effectiveness of simply instructing all inspectors to stop production when a violation is observed .

subsequent appropriations continued and then increased designated funding for hmsa enforcement , which now is at 63 positions and $5 million annually .

appropriators also have provided a total of at least $10 million over several years since fy2005 to incorporate fsis's "humane animal tracking system" into its field computer systems .

