peru has had a turbulent political history , alternating between periods of democratic and authoritarian rule .

political turmoil dates back to peru's traumatic experience during the spanish conquest , which gave rise to the economic , ethnic and geographic divisions that characterize peruvian society today .

since its independence in 1821 , peru has had 13 constitutions , with only nine of 19 elected governments completing their terms .

peru's most recent transition to democracy occurred in 1980 after 12 years of military rule .

the decade that followed was characterized by a prolonged economic crisis and the government's unsuccessful struggle to quell a radical maoist guerrilla insurgency known as the shining path ( sendero luminoso ) .

in 1985 , leftist alan garcã­a of the american popular revolutionary alliance ( apra ) was elected president .

during his first term ( 1985-1990 ) garcã­a's antagonistic relationship with the international financial community and excessive spending on social programs led to hyperinflation .

his security policies were unable to defeat the shining path .

by 1990 , the peruvian population was looking for a change and found it in the independent candidate alberto fujimori .

once in office , fujimori implemented an aggressive economic reform program and stepped up counterinsurgency efforts .

when tensions between the legislature and fujimori increased in 1992 , he initiated a "self coup," dissolving the legislature and calling a constituent assembly to write a new constitution .

this allowed him to fill the legislature and the judiciary with his supporters .

president fujimori was re - elected in 1995 , but his popularity began to falter as the economy slowed and civic opposition to his policies increased .

he was increasingly regarded as an authoritarian leader , due in part to the strong - handed military tactics his government used to wipe out the shining path that resulted in serious human rights violations .

president fujimori won a third term in 2000 , but the elections were marred by irregularities .

within weeks of taking office , a bribery scandal broke that , combined with allegations of human rights violations committed by his top aides , forced fujimori to agree to call new elections in which he would not run .

an interim government served from november 22 , 2000 to july 28 , 2001 , when the newly - elected government of alejandro toledo took office .

toledo's presidency ( 2001-2006 ) was characterized by extremely low approval ratings but high economic growth rates ; 5.9% in 2005 and 8% in 2006 .

toledo was able to push through several reforms , including a tax reform measure and a free trade agreement with the united states .

despite the economic improvements , toledo's presidency was marred by allegations of corruption and recurrent popular protests .

peru enjoys strong ties with the united states , characterized by extensive economic linkages and significant counternarcotics and security cooperation .

since the presidency of alejandro toledo in 2001 , peru has focused on strengthening those ties .

some 200,000 u.s. citizens visit peru annually and over 400 u.s. companies are represented in peru .

president garcã­a met with president bush at the white house in october 2006 and again on april 23 , 2007 , at which time the leaders discussed their shared commitment to fighting the production and consumption of illicit drugs and to securing congressional approval of the ptpa .

on december 14 , 2007 , presidents bush and garcia met again for the signing of h.r .

3688 , the implementation bill for the ptpa .

issues in u.s. - peruvian relations include democratic development , human rights , counternarcotics , and trade issues , which are at the forefront of the bilateral agenda .

the united states provided $141.7 million in foreign aid to peru in fy2006 and another estimated $138.9 million in fy2007 .

the fy2008 request for peru is for $93.2 million , with the most significant cuts occurring in counternarcotics funds traditionally provided through the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) .

beginning in fy2008 , alternative development programs previously supported by aci funds will be shifted to the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

aci has been the primary u.s. assistance program to help colombia and its neighbors address drug trafficking and related economic development issues .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 ) stipulates that funding from the development assistance and global health and child survival ( formerly child survival and health ) accounts be made available for peru at no less than the amount allocated in fy2007 .

it also provides funding for environmental programs in peru at fy2006 levels .

the joint explanatory statement to the consolidated appropriations act recommends providing $30 million in economic support funds and $36.8 million in aci funds to peru in fy2008 .

the u.s. agency for international development has four main goals for peru: strengthening democracy ; increasing governance in isolated areas where drug traffickers operate ; reducing poverty ; and decreasing maternal mortality and other health threats .

peru was recently selected to participate in the millennium challenge account ( mca ) threshold program .

that program will focus on combating corruption , strengthening the rule of law , and improving resource management in peru .

the government of peru has taken steps to expand and enforce its labor laws and to prosecute those accused of past and current human rights violations .

according to human rights watch , while the peruvian government has made some progress in holding those accused of past abuses responsible for their actions , many are still able to avoid prosecution .

the state department's country reports on human rights practices covering 2006 says that while the peruvian government generally respects the rights of its citizens , ongoing problems include abuse of detainees and inmates by police and prison guards ; poor prison conditions ; trafficking in persons ; child labor in the informal sector ; and failure to enforce labor laws , among others .

human rights groups have also expressed concerns that a law passed in december 2006 to regulate the activities of non - governmental organizations operating in peru unnecessarily restricts freedom of expression and association in the country .

peru is a major illicit drug - producing and transit country , accounting for 28% of global cocaine production .

in 2006 , according to united nations figures , coca cultivation increased by 7% in peru even though the government increased its coca eradication efforts by 4% from 2005 levels .

the united states and peru signed a five - year cooperative agreement for 2002-2007 that links alternative development to coca eradication more directly than past programs have .

peru is the second largest coca cultivating country in the world after colombia , but receives less than one quarter of the funding colombia receives through the andean counter drug initiative .

in fy2008 , counternarcotics assistance to peru is estimated to total $66.8 million , down from the $106.5 million allocated in fy2006 , and an estimated $103.3 million in counternarcotics funding provided in fy2007 .

recent aid reductions appear to be due to overall budget cutbacks rather than any u.s. government dissatisfaction with peru's counternarcotics efforts .

the united states is peru's largest trading partner .

since december 2001 , exports from peru have received preferential duty treatment through the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) , later amended by the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( atpdea ) in august 2002 .

these trade preferences were scheduled to end on december 31 , 2006 .

however , the acts have been extended twice , and are now scheduled to expire on february 29 , 2008 .

atpdea gives duty - free market access to selected peruvian goods without requiring reciprocal trade concessions or addressing issues such as intellectual property rights .

on december 7 , 2005 , the united states and peru concluded negotiations on the u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement ( ptpa ) .

president bush notified the congress of the united states' intention to enter into the ptpa on january 6 , 2006 , and the agreement was signed on april 12 , 2006 .

the ptpa was ratified by the peruvian legislature in june 2006 .

whereas the atpdea provides temporary trade preferences to some goods from peru , the ptpa is a comprehensive trade agreement that will permanently eliminate tariffs and other barriers on u.s. - peru bilateral goods and services trade .

after several members of congress indicated that some of the provisions in the agreement would have to be strengthened , the bush administration and congress reached an agreement on may 10 , 2007 on a new trade framework that includes core labor and environmental standards .

on june 27 , 2007 , peru's congress approved the amendments to the ptpa .

ptpa implementing legislation ( h.r .

3688 ) passed the house on november 8 , 2007 , by a vote of 285 to 132 ; the senate on december 4 by a vote of 77 to 18 ; and was signed by president bush on december 14 , ( p.l .

110-138 ) .

during its second session , the 110 th congress is likely to be interested in implementation of the ptpa .

