by long tradition , most regular appropriations bills are considered by the house of representatives under the terms of an open rule reported by the house committee on rules and adopted by the house ( or under terms similar to an open rule ) .

this means that when the bill is brought to the house floor , the number of amendments that can be offered to it and the debate on those amendments are largely unrestricted .

in the last decade , however , the house has moved away from this pure open rule tradition and begun to adopt unanimous consent ( uc ) agreements that comprehensively regulate the consideration of regular appropriations bills shortly after an open rule brings them to the floor .

when considering a spending bill under an open rule , the legislation is read by paragraph in the committee of the whole .

members are free to propose amendments to each pending paragraph , so long as their amendments comply with the chamber's standing rules .

any first degree amendment offered under an open rule is itself subject to further amendment , and debate is largely unrestricted .

by offering a pro forma amendment to "strike the last word," each member may gain five minutes to speak on each pending paragraph of the bill or amendments to it .

although consideration of regular appropriations bills under an open rule provides a forum that maximizes deliberation , it also means that the time spent considering such measures is uncertain and open to wide variation .

time spent on floor consideration of a given spending bill will depend on how many amendments are offered , and how long members choose to engage in debate .

to provide scheduling predictability and to facilitate progress in a busy chamber , it has become common for the house , following a period of initial consideration of a regular appropriations bill under an open rule , to adopt a uc agreement negotiated by the appropriations committee , party leaders , and interested members that comprehensively regulates further debate and amendment of the legislation .

such uc agreements supplant the open rule , limit the amendments that may be offered to a finite list , restrict debate , and bar certain time - consuming procedures otherwise in order .

the practice of bringing up a regular appropriations bill under an open rule , and shortly thereafter replacing the rule with a comprehensive uc agreement structuring further debate and amendment , was largely unseen prior to the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) .

the practice is now routine .

in 2008 , only one regular appropriations bill was considered on the house floor and no comprehensive uc agreement was entered into during its consideration .

in 2007 , however , eight regular appropriations bills that came to the house floor under an open rule were subsequently regulated by such a uc agreement .

in 2006 , seven of nine regular appropriations bills considered under an open rule were subsequently regulated by such a consent agreement .

in 2005 , seven out of ten bills brought up under an open rule were .

the time between the adoption of an open special rule for a regular appropriation bill and its being supplanted by a comprehensive uc agreement is often short — in most cases , both occur on the same day .

in fact , party leaders often notify members of their intention to craft such a uc agreement even before a bill comes to the house floor .

unanimous consent agreements regulating the further consideration of regular appropriation bills limit the universe of possible amendments as well as the time for considering those amendments .

in this way , such uc agreements act in a manner similar to a structured special rule , albeit with an important difference: every member can have a say in the content of a uc agreement and , in a real sense , dictate its terms .

under an announced policy that is generally strictly adhered to , the speaker will not normally recognize a member to propound such a unanimous consent request unless that request has been cleared in advance by the bipartisan floor and committee leadership .

structured special rules , by contrast , are privileged for consideration and adopted at the will of a majority of the house .

in short , such uc agreements are largely accepted ( and presumably increasingly common ) because they provide all parties with something they want — party leaders get increased certainty about the floor schedule , the appropriations committee is able to move its bills forward more readily , and members are permitted to offer the amendments of their choice .

unanimous consent agreements regulating the further consideration of regular appropriations bills in the house have several common features that differ significantly in effect from consideration under an open rule .

such uc agreements routinely: limit the amendments that can be offered to those listed in the unanimous consent agreement by sponsor and subject , or by amendment number .

occasionally , a uc agreement will give the majority bill manager blanket authority to offer amendments on the subject of funding levels .

by contrast , under an open rule , members may freely offer amendments to each pending paragraph of the bill so long as those amendments comply with house rules and practice .

in addition , members are not required to give notice of their amendments under an open rule .

specify that each amendment may be offered only by the named member or the member ' s designee and that those amendments shall be considered as read .

by contrast , under an open rule , any member might conceivably offer any amendment .

ordinarily , amendments that have not been preprinted in the congressional record must be read aloud unless their reading is waived by unanimous consent .

forbid division of an amendment in the house or committee of the whole .

ordinarily , as a matter of right , any member may demand that an amendment be divided — and its pieces voted on separately — if the amendment consists of two or more separate , substantiative provisions .

bar second - degree amendments to the amendments .

under an open rule , when an amendment is offered , as many as three other amendments may then be offered: an amendment to the amendment , a substitute for it , and an amendment to the substitute .

permit one pro forma amendment offered by each of the chair and ranking member of the appropriations committee and the appropriations subcommittee on each amendment .

specify that only the chair and ranking member of the committee on appropriations or their designees may offer pro forma amendments at any point in the reading of the bill .

under an open rule , each member , not just the floor managers , would be able to "strike the last word," to obtain five minutes to debate each amendment .

as has been noted , under an open rule , each member may offer a pro forma amendment on the pending paragraph of the bill during its reading .

structuring the uc agreement in this way puts control of debate time almost exclusively in the hands of committee leaders instead of rank - and - file members .

specify the time for debate on each amendment , often 10 minutes equally - divided between a proponent and an opponent , although longer periods may be specified .

under an open rule , the proponent and opponent of an amendment each have a right to five minutes of time , and debate may continue significantly beyond 10 minutes as other members offer pro forma amendments .

a statement that " an amendment shall be considered to fit the description stated in this [uc agreement] if it addresses in whole or in part the object described. .

normally in the committee of the whole , a member would need unanimous consent to modify his or her amendment .

under a structured special rule , such modifications would not be in order at all .

this language of the uc agreement allows members to freely negotiate changes in a given amendment as long as it addresses the subject contemplated , fostering progress on the bill .

in order to further expedite consideration , such uc agreements sometimes grant the bill manager blanket authority to package amendments on the list en bloc .

in these instances , it is common for the agreement to permit members to insert remarks on their amendments in the congressional record .

other provisions: although less common , such uc agreements sometimes waive points of order against amendments or deem certain amendments to be automatically adopted .

it should be noted that unanimous consent agreements of this type do not provide complete certainty of how long floor consideration of a given spending measure will last , because they do not regulate time spent on every procedural step that may occur , including voting on the amendments themselves ; the bill managers "striking the last word" and yielding to other members for debate ; any separate votes requested after the committee of the whole rises and reports the bill back to the house ; consideration and voting on the motion to recommit ; voting on final passage , and any general "slippage" of time .

other procedural events , including , but not limited to , points of order , appeals , quorum calls , and motions to rise , might also extend floor consideration of a given regular appropriations measure and also might add some uncertainty to the proceedings .

