individuals were first able to establish health savings accounts ( hsas ) in 2004 .

these accounts allow people to pay for out - of - pocket medical expenses on a tax - advantaged basis .

individuals must have a qualifying high - deductible health plan ( hdhp ) to establish an hsa .

after establishing an hsa , individuals ( or employers ) can contribute money to the account up to an annual maximum .

although commonly discussed in combination , hsas should not be confused with health reimbursement accounts ( hras ) .

even though hras are also used to pay for unreimbursed medical expenses on a tax - advantaged basis , only employers may establish and contribute to an hra .

in addition , employees usually forfeit any remaining hra funds at the termination of employment .

data covering enrollment and / or cost sharing during the first few years of hdhps and their associated hsas are now available from at least five separate sources .

only one source provides data on hsas .

two sources provide data on hdhps whose owners are eligible to open an hsa .

the remaining two sources provide data that include individuals with hras .

before analysts can evaluate the effects of hsas , they must decide which data source ( s ) to use .

this primer provides basic guidance in that direction .

the primer also provides the most recent data available from each source on enrollment , premiums , and deductible .

 table 1 identifies the five data sources .

the various data sources include two separate surveys of firms , a survey of individuals , data on all policies reported to an association , and a sample of irs tax returns .

the data sources are listed in alphabetical order .

which data source to use depends primarily on the question being asked .

if the policy question truly requires information on hsas — that is , the actual accounts rather than the associated hdhps — then only the irs data are suitable .

the irs data , which are broken down by tax reporting units , provide the total number of tax deductions taken and the aggregate value of the deductions .

two disadvantages of the irs data are a total lack of information on the associated hdhps and that the data are released well after the other data sources .

two sources combine data on hsa - eligible hdhps and hras .

these data can be used if separate analyses of hsas or hras are not necessary .

the employee benefit research institute ( ebri ) provides enrollment estimates for privately insured individuals aged 21 to 64 with either an hra or an hsa - eligible hdhp , while mercer , a human resources consulting firm , provides enrollment estimates for account holders who are adults working in firms with at least 10 employees with either an hra or an hsa - eligible hdhp .

the ebri data are based on a survey of individuals and contain information on the workers' ages , incomes , health status , and opinions of their health plan options .

the mercer survey is of firms and contains information on firm size .

choosing between these two data sources comes down to a choice between an individual - level analysis ( ebri ) or a firm - level analysis ( mercer ) .

finally , two additional data sources provide information on hsa - qualified hdhps .

the data from america's health insurance plans ( ahip ) are obtained from insurance plans and measure all covered lives in the plans .

both individual and group plans are analyzed .

the data form virtually a census of such policies among ahip member companies .

thus , the ahip data are based on a large number of enrollees in high - deductible health plans .

along with the average premiums and deductibles , information on enrollees' age and state of residence is also available .

the kaiser family foundation / health research and education trust ( kff / hret ) survey is of firms with at least three employees .

 table 2 presents the most recent available data on enrollment .

four of the sources contain data on enrollment .

the enrollment estimates differ greatly .

these differences occur because each source measures a unique concept .

ahip reports that 10,009,000 individuals ( including children ) were covered by an hsa - eligible hdhp , and ebri reports that 11,200,000 individuals between 21 and 64 were enrolled in either an hsa - eligible hdhp or an hra in 2009 .

mercer reports that 9% of all covered employees ( in firms with at least 10 employees ) have either an hsa - eligible hdhp or hra , also in 2009 .

the irs data do not measure enrollment but state that 810,729 tax returns claimed an hsa deduction in 2008 .

although the various enrollment measures are not directly comparable to each other because they represent different concepts , the number of individuals who claim deductions for hsa contributions in 2008 is the smallest number .

this is as expected for two reasons: ( 1 ) the number of hsas has been growing over the 2008 to 2010 period , and ( 2 ) not all individuals contribute money to the hsa — and of those who do , not all claim an hsa deduction .

ahip provides the most complete information on premiums and deductibles ; the average values are available for the small group and large group markets , and for three age groups in the individual market .

no other data source provides breakdowns for more than one of these markets .

in all cases , values for individual ( and not family ) insurance plans are reported in table 2 .

in general , individuals in small group markets are more costly to insure because the risk of major illness is spread across fewer individuals and because there are fewer economies of scale .

small group market deductibles should therefore be higher than large group market deductibles , assuming benefits and other policy characteristics are comparable across group size .

the ahip data display the expected pattern for hsa - eligible hdhps , although the difference is not particularly large .

the average deductible for small group policies is $2,329 , and the average deducible for a large group policy is $2,203 .

hsas have been available since 2004 , and at least five data sources can be used to uncover some basic facts about the recent experience .

nevertheless , the data sources differ in the insurance markets analyzed ; whether the information covers hsas , hsa - eligible hdhps , or hsa - eligible hdhps and hras ; and whether the information is provided by employers , insurance companies , or individuals .

great caution should be exercised in any attempt to combine data from these different sources .

a more fruitful strategy would be to decide on a specific question and use only the source which best answers that question .

