in the nearly 17 years since latvia gained independence , the country's political scene has been characterized by the creation and dissolution of numerous parties and shifting alliances among them .

latvia has had 14 governments since independence , none of them serving out a full parliamentary term .

many of the parties lack a clear ideological profile and have shallow roots in society .

critics assert that the parties are in large part interest groups struggling for the narrow , business interests of their members and financial backers .

high - level corruption remains a significant problem in latvia , as elsewhere in the region .

nevertheless , due to a broad policy consensus among the elites and in society at large , latvia has followed a consistent general course—building democratic institutions , strengthening the rule of law , establishing a free - market economy , and integrating into nato and the european union ( eu ) .

latvia's current government is led by prime minister ivars godmanis of the first party - latvia's way ( lpp - lc ) .

it was formed in december 2007 , after the fall of the previous government .

aside from the lpp - lc , the government consists of the people's party , the union of greens and farmers ( zzs ) , and the nationalist for fatherland and freedom - latvian national independence movement ( tb - lnnk ) .

the coalition holds a slender 53-seat majority in the 101-member saeima ( parliament ) .

in september 2007 , the previous prime minister , aigars kalvitis , heading a government composed of the same parties as the current government , tried to fire aleksejs loskutovs , the head of latvia's independent corruption monitoring and prevention bureau , allegedly for financial irregularities .

the move was widely viewed in latvia as an effort to quash high - profile corruption investigations against powerful supporters of the government .

street demonstrations forced the parliament to drop the effort and the government fell in december 2007 .

latvia last held parliamentary elections in october 2006 .

new elections do not have to be held until 2010 , but the thin and shrinking majority of the government may force an earlier vote .

the loskutovs affair has underlined latvia's ongoing corruption problem , and , more generally , the tendency for key decisions in latvia to be made non - transparently by a small number of self - interested insiders .

latvian president valdis zatlers was elected by the saeima in july 2007 .

zatlers is an orthopedic surgeon and was the director of the latvian traumatology and orthopedics center .

he had no prior political affiliation or experience before his election .

his election was a surprise to many latvians .

he was reportedly a compromise choice of the ruling coalition when they could not agree on other candidates .

although the latvian presidency has few powers in latvia's parliamentary system , the president plays an important rule in representing latvia abroad and symbolizing the state's moral principles rather than narrow party interests .

his predecessor , vaira vike - freiberga , was widely believed to have fulfilled these functions very well , and was latvia's most popular politician until term limits forced her retirement .

zatlers's reputation suffered a blow shortly after his election , when it emerged that he had taken gratuities from his patients and had not paid taxes on those payments .

he said that he had forgotten to report the income and paid the taxes .

however , he may have recovered his position somewhat by criticizing the government during the loskutovs affair .

after reestablishing its independence in 1991 , latvia's key foreign policy goals were to join nato and the european union .

it joined both of them in 2004 .

latvia continues to try to bring its armed forces up to nato standards , spending the 2% of gdp recommended by nato .

latvia lags behind most eu members in many areas , and receives substantial eu funding to address such issues as border security , public infrastructure , and the environment .

latvia has had to put off plans to adopt the euro as its currency until at least 2012 or 2013 , due to an inflation rate well above the eu's strict criteria for euro zone membership .

latvia enjoys a close relationship with its baltic neighbors and the nordic countries .

it has acted as an advocate for democratic and pro - western forces in belarus , ukraine , moldova , georgia , and other countries bordering russia .

latvia supported the unsuccessful efforts of ukraine and georgia to receive a membership action plan at the april 2008 nato summit in bucharest .

it supported the summit communique's commitment to eventual ukrainian and georgian membership in nato .

latvia and russia have had sometimes difficult relations .

russia has expressed irritation at nato's role in patrolling the airspace of latvia and the other two baltic states , and the non - participation of latvia and the other baltic states in the conventional forces in europe ( cfe ) treaty , which moscow claims could lead to the deployment of large nato forces on its northwest border .

in december 2007 , russia suspended its implementation of the cfe treaty .

russia claims that latvia violates the human rights of its ethnic russian minority , which , along with other russian - speaking groups , make up 37.5% of the country's population .

while international organizations have generally rejected these charges , many russian - speakers are poorly integrated into latvian society .

when latvian independence was restored in 1991 , only those persons who has been citizens when the soviet union took over the country in 1940 or their descendants were recognized as latvian citizens .

this policy excluded most russian - speakers .

in part due to naturalization ( which requires passing a latvian language test ) , 57.5% of ethnic russians living in latvia now have latvian citizenship .

the others remain stateless or hold russian citizenship .

over 18% of latvia's permanent residents lack latvian citizenship .

noncitizens cannot hold public office or vote in elections .

russia has also criticized laws that demand latvian - language competency for many jobs and require that most secondary education take place in the latvian language .

latvia has expressed concern about russia's use of its energy exports for political purposes .

latvia is virtually entirely dependent on russia for oil and natural gas .

latvia and the united states are concerned about the north european gas pipeline project , which will transit the baltic sea floor between russia and germany , bypassing central european countries .

latvian and u.s. officials have called for the establishment of a variety of energy supply routes between the caspian sea region and europe , in order to provide greater energy security to latvia and other countries in the region .

russia has reduced the role of latvia in its oil transit trade .

the russian - government controlled transneft oil pipeline company cut off all oil shipments to the latvian oil terminal at the port of ventspils , after having decreased shipments in late 2002 .

the move was a blow to latvia , as ventspils has been important to its economy .

transneft diverted the oil shipments to its own baltic pipeline system and the russian port of primorsk , which it controls .

transneft claims that there is no demand for using ventspils , a claim viewed with skepticism by outside observers .

most saw the move as a power play by transneft to secure a controlling share of the firm ventspils nafta , which operates the oil terminal .

however , russian - latvian relations have improved in some areas .

in december 2007 , a russian - latvian border treaty entered into force .

latvian business interests have reportedly benefitted from an increase in transit business from russia in the past year , as russian traffic has declined with neighboring estonia due to deteriorating relations between moscow and tallinn .

the united states and latvia have enjoyed excellent relations .

the united states refused to recognize the soviet annexation of latvia in 1940 and hailed the restoration of the country's independence in 1991 .

the united states strongly supported latvia's membership in nato and the eu .

the two countries have cooperated in iraq and afghanistan .

from may 2003 until june 2007 ( when the last 120 of its combat troops were withdrawn ) , a total of 1,153 soldiers had served in the country , in a number of rotations .

three latvian soldiers died in iraq .

after withdrawing from iraq , latvia boosted its contribution to the isaf peacekeeping force in afghanistan from 35 to its current level of 100 men .

there are 19 latvian troops in kosovo as part of nato - led peacekeeping force kfor .

latvia receives a modest amount of security assistance from the united states to help it improve its capabilities within nato , including its deployment in afghanistan .

in fy2008 , latvia is expected to receive $2.55 million in u.s. aid , including $1.5 million in foreign military financing and $1.05 million in imet military training assistance .

for fy2009 , the administration requested $4.05 million in military aid , $3 million in fmf and $1.05 in imet .

there have been a few controversies in u.s. - latvian relations .

perhaps the most sensitive issue is latvia's strong desire to join the u.s. visa waiver program .

latvia and many other central and eastern european countries in the same position are upset that their citizens are required to seek visas for u.s. travel , despite the fact that visas are not required for most eu countries in western europe .

brussels has also demanded equal treatment for all eu countries .

in march 2008 , the united states and latvia signed a memorandum of understanding on steps latvia has taken and needs to take to join the visa waiver program .

u.s. officials say latvia could join the program by the end of this year .

another controversy concerned speeches in october 2007 by outgoing u.s .

ambassador to latvia catherine todd bailey that were interpreted in latvia as frank criticisms of corruption and the state of democratic development of latvia , in the wake of the loskutovs affair .

the move raised eyebrows among some commentators in the latvian press , although bailey received backing from state department officials .

the current u.s. ambassador , charles lawson , has also mentioned strengthening latvia's democracy as a key u.s. goal in latvia .

