in general , child support is the cash payment that noncustodial parents are obligated to pay for the financial support of their children .

these payments enable parents who do not live with their children to fu lfill their financial responsibility to their children by contributing to the payment of childrearing costs .

child support orders generally are established when parents divorce or separate , or when the custodial parent applies for cash benefits through the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program ( title iv - a of the social security act ) .

the child support enforcement ( cse ) program , part d of title iv of the social security act , was enacted on january 4 , 1975 ( p.l .

93-647 ) .

the cse program is administered by the office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and receives mandatory funding each fiscal year in the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , the virgin islands , and 62 tribal nations operate cse programs and are entitled to federal matching funds .

the cse program is estimated to handle 50% - 60% of all child support cases ; the remaining cases are handled by private attorneys , collection agencies , or through mutual agreements between the parents .

families receiving tanf benefits , foster care payments ( title iv - e of the social security act ) , or medicaid coverage ( title xix of the social security act ) automatically qualify for cse services free of charge .

collections on behalf of families receiving cash tanf benefits are used , in part , to reimburse state and federal governments for the tanf payments made to the family .

other families must apply for cse services , and states must charge an annual user fee that cannot exceed $25 .

child support collected on behalf of non - tanf families goes to the family , usually through the state disbursement unit .

child support payments collected by cse agencies increased from $1 billion in fy1978 to $28.6 billion in fy2015 .

over the same period , the number of children whose paternity was established or acknowledged increased from 111,000 to 1.484 million .

however , the program still collects only 20% of child support obligations for which it has responsibility if payments on past - due child support ( i.e. , "arrearages" ) are taken into account ( otherwise , 65% ) and collects payments for only 61% of its caseload .

ocse data indicate that in fy2015 , paternity had been established or acknowledged for 96% of the 10.6 million children on the cse caseload without legally identified fathers .

in fy2015 , total cse expenditures amounted to $5.7 billion .

on average , in fy2015 the cse program collected $5.26 in child support payments for each $1 spent on the program .

table 1 , below , provides fy2015 data on the cse program , including total collections and expenditures , caseload numbers , and the number of paternities and child support orders established .

the balance of this report describes each of the major program elements of the cse program .

it also includes a discussion of the related programs: access and visitation grants and the responsible fatherhood program .

the cse program provides seven major services on behalf of children: ( 1 ) parent location , ( 2 ) paternity establishment , ( 3 ) establishment of child support orders , ( 4 ) review and modification of child support orders , ( 5 ) collection of child support payments , ( 6 ) distribution of child support payments , and ( 7 ) establishment and enforcement of medical support .

a noncustodial parent's right to visit with his or her children is commonly referred to as visitation or child access ( and more recently as voluntary parenting time arrangements ) .

state domestic relations or family laws almost universally treat child support and visitation as completely separate issues .

historically , the federal government has agreed that visitation and child support should be legally separate issues , and that only child support should be under the purview of the cse program .

both federal and state policymakers have maintained that denial of visitation rights should not be considered a reason for stopping child support payments .

however , in recognition of the negative long - term consequences for children associated with the absence of their noncustodial parent , as well as evidence that contact between the child and noncustodial parent can make it more likely that child support responsibilities will be met , federal and state policymakers have increasingly promoted efforts that address child support and access and visitation in the same forum .

in order to promote visitation and better relations between custodial and noncustodial parents , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) provided mandatory spending in the amount of $10 million each fiscal year from the federal cse budget account for grants to states for access and visitation programs .

eligible activities include but are not limited to mediation , counseling , education , development of parenting plans , visitation enforcement , and development of guidelines for visitation and alternative custody arrangements .

the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) included a sense of the congress statement specifying that 1. establishing parenting time arrangements ( also known as visitation ) when obtaining child support orders is an important goal that should be accompanied by strong family violence safeguards ; and 2. states should use existing funding sources to support the establishment of parenting time arrangements , including child support incentives , access and visitation grants , and healthy marriage promotion and responsible fatherhood grants .

the federal government has also sought to engage noncustodial parents in the lives of their children through what are known as "responsible fatherhood programs. .

based on the premise that committed , involved , and responsible fathers are important in the lives of their children , these programs seek to promote the financial and personal responsibility of noncustodial parents for their children , and increase the participation of fathers in their children's lives .

some responsible fatherhood programs help noncustodial parents strengthen their parenting skills .

other programs try to discourage young men from becoming fathers until they are married and ready for the responsibility .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) included a provision that provided mandatory funding for a healthy marriage promotion and responsible fatherhood grants program ( in title iv - a of the social security act ) .

for fy2006-fy2010 , that program was provided up to $50 million per year for competitive responsible fatherhood grants .

for fy2011 , funding for those fatherhood grants was increased to $75 million .

since that time , $75 million in mandatory funding for this program each year has been provided through provisions in appropriations acts .

most recently , for fy2017 , the authority and funding for the responsible fatherhood grants program has been provided through two continuing resolutions .

these continuing appropriations are scheduled to expire on april 28 , 2017 .

most responsible fatherhood programs include parenting education ; training in responsible decisionmaking , conflict resolution , and coping with stress ; mediation services for both parents ; problem - solving skills ; peer support ; and job - training opportunities .

grantees include states , territories , indian tribes and tribal organizations , and public and nonprofit community groups ( including religious organizations ) .

