since august , four major storms have directly struck or passed close to haiti , killing hundreds and affecting hundreds of thousands of people .

the storms have caused flooding in all ten of the country's departments .

tropical storm fay struck haiti on august 16 while hurricane gustav struck on august 26 with heavy rains and winds .

in the first days of september , tropical storm hanna brought more torrential rain , causing floods as deep as almost ten feet in gonaives .

hurricane ike did not directly strike haiti , but significantly increased water levels in areas that were already flooded .

overall , almost 500 people have died .

haiti was already experiencing a food crisis ; the impact of the storms has greatly exacerbated the problem , mainly due to flooding .

the storms destroyed approximately one - third of the country's rice crop .

haiti's rice crop is essentially used for domestic consumption , and reportedly is a lifeline for many haitians .

livestock , other crops , seeds , and farm equipment were destroyed as well .

the storms hit during harvest season , meaning that farmers will not have capital from this crop to reinvest in future crops .

some observers worry that additional food shortages and price increases could again lead to riots , like the ones in april of this year that killed several people and contributed to the dismissal of the prime minister .

nearly 70% of the internally displaced persons living in shelters in the wake of the storms were in the department of artibonite , known as haiti's rice bowl .

in the departmental capital of gonaives , at least 80% of the city's 300,000 residents were affected .

nearly half of those affected by the storm are reportedly children .

almost half of the shelters across the country are located in schools .

the haitian ministry of education is working with international organizations to clean and rehabilitate schools and find alternative shelters .

the number of internally displaced people living in shelters dropped from just over 111,000 in mid - september to an estimated 35,000 to 40,000 in mid - october .

nonetheless , some schools will share their space with displaced people until they are able to return to their homes .

moreover , many families who have lost their homes and possessions will not be able to afford school costs for their children .

even though damage to schools delayed the start of the school year by over a month , the un world food program has already resumed school feeding programs throughout most of the country .

prior to the storms , the haitian office for disaster preparedness issued warnings through radio and television , although not all citizens have access to those media .

after the storms , the haitian government declared eight departments to be under a state of emergency , allowing for the release of extra funding from the national budget for relief efforts in those areas .

the government is coordinating emergency response through the civilian protection unit of the ministry of the interior .

the ministry of the interior is coordinating the distribution of relief assistance , working with the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) , the red cross , and a u.s. ship with hospital capability , the uss kearsarge , all of which are providing helicopters for delivering food and water aid to remote and inaccessible areas .

the minister of finance has lifted regulations on incoming aid for several months so that disaster relief assistance will not be subject to the usual customs delays .

all government ministers were dispatched around the country to help assess needs and compose lists of assistance requirements for international donors .

the u.s .

ambassador to haiti , janet sanderson , issued a disaster declaration on september 2 , 2008 , in response to the flooding throughout the country caused by hurricane gustav .

subsequently , u.s. officials from the state department , usaid , and the department of defense ( dod ) met with haitian president rené préval , who said that infrastructure and transportation were key priorities ; many roads and bridges were washed away or heavily damaged by the storms .

préval also requested general assistance for the next six months .

as of october 21 , 2008 , the u.s. government has either provided or pledged over $31 million in humanitarian assistance to affected haitian populations in response to the storms .

this includes: $10 million , usaid / office of u.s. foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) , including support to the american red cross , the international organization for migration , the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) , and the pan american health organization ; $14 million , usaid / food for peace ( ffp ) assistance provided through the u.n. world food program ; $5 million , usaid / haiti assistance , re - directing regular u.s. foreign aid funding toward food and other humanitarian assistance ; $2.6 million , department of defense assistance ( helicopter transport ) ; and ( still to be determined ) , department of homeland security , for coast guard transportation and logistics .

usaid's ofda also authorized the deployment of a three - member support team to haiti to supplement a u.n. disaster team based in the city of gonaives .

the uss kearsarge has delivered almost 2 million pounds of supplies , with supplies ferried by helicopters and boats to affected areas .

ofda has been providing assistance in disaster preparedness and mitigation , including training in disaster management , to the caribbean since 1991 .

from fy2005 to fy2007 , ofda worked in conjunction with the un development program to reduce the risks faced by vulnerable haitian populations due to natural hazards .

a number of observers , including some members of congress , are calling for significantly more assistance to help haiti in its recovery and reconstruction efforts .

representative maxine waters has called for at least $300 million in appropriations in assistance for haiti .

the fy2009 continuing resolution signed into law on september 30 , 2008 ( p.l .

110 - 329 ) provides not less than $100 million for hurricane relief and reconstruction assistance for haiti and other caribbean countries subject to prior consultation with , and the regular notification procedures of , the committees on appropriations .

at a hearing of the house subcommittee on the western hemisphere on "hurricanes in haiti: disaster and recovery" on september 23 , 2008 , several members of congress called for the administration to grant temporary protected status ( tps ) to haitians living in the united states to give haiti time to deal with the effects of the recent hurricanes .

haiti's ambassador to the united states , raymond joseph , maintains that his country is ill - prepared to receive deportees .

bureau of western hemisphere affairs deputy assistant secretary kirsten madison said the state department had not made a recommendation , but did not wish to encourage an exodus of haitians from the island to the u.s. by granting tps , saying that could create another humanitarian disaster .

the state department also noted that the final decision lies with the department of homeland security .

members expressed concerns that the devastation from the storms , if insufficiently addressed , could lead to famine and widespread waterborne diseases , which in turn could contribute to an increase in the number of haitians fleeing their country .

haitian ambassador joseph stated at a capitol hill forum on september 18 that haiti would need $400 million over the next 18 months for hurricane recovery and reconstruction , and that so far the international community had committed $145 million .

it is unclear how much of the $400 million reflects short - term humanitarian needs as opposed to longer - term development needs .

at the request of the haitian government , the world bank and other international partners are conducting a post - disaster needs assessment that will be the basis for early recovery and strategic planning for haiti .

in the aftermath of the hurricanes , the u.n. ocha issued an international flash appeal for $108 million for haiti's recovery .

as of october 23 , contributions and commitments of funds amounted to almost $25 million , while another $16.9 million has been pledged , but not yet committed , by the united states , the european union , and 12 other countries — canada , japan , the united kingdom , switzerland , norway , austria , luxembourg , ireland , greece , andorra , italy , and the netherlands .

the aid is channeled through a variety of u.n. agencies such as the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , the international organization for migration ( iom ) , u.n. development program ( undp ) , and the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) .

the u.s. contribution equals 42.8% of that funding .

minustah is also helping to coordinate disaster assistance , providing support for relief deliveries , and has been involved in rescuing haitians from the floods .

in addition to assistance contributed to the flash appeal , ocha reports that another $25 million in humanitarian assistance has been pledged or provided by the united states and other countries and international organizations .

p.l .

110 - 329 ( h.r .

2638 ) .

consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 .

provides not less than $100 million for hurricane relief and reconstruction assistance for haiti and other caribbean countries subject to prior consultation with , and the regular notification procedures of , the committees on appropriations .

introduced june 8 , 2007 , signed into law september 30 , 2008 .

h.r .

522 ( hastings ) .

would require the secretary of homeland security to designate haiti as a country whose qualifying nationals may be eligible for temporary protected status for an initial 18-month period .

introduced january17 , 2007 , referred to house judiciary committee's subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law february2 , 2007 .

h.con.res .

438 ( lee ) .

expressing the sense of congress with regard to providing humanitarian assistance to countries of the caribbean devastated by hurricanes gustav and ike and tropical storms fay and hanna .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs september 27 , 2008 .

