wheat is grown in almost every temperate - zone country of north america , europe , asia , and south america .

the largest wheat - producing countries are china , india , the united states , russia , canada , and australia .

u.s. wheat production accounts for about 9% - 10% of world production ; but the united states is the world's leading wheat exporter with roughly a 25% share of annual world trade .

however , the international wheat market is very competitive and foreign sales often hinge on wheat variety and product characteristics as well as price .

u.s. wheat is produced as both a winter and a spring crop .

the united states produces all six of the world's major wheat classes—hard red winter ( hrw ) , hard red spring ( hrs ) , soft red winter ( srw ) , hard white , soft white , and durum .

hard wheats generally contain higher protein levels—a desirable trait for bread making , while softer wheats may be preferable for making noodles , crackers , and pastries .

durum wheat is ground into a coarse flour called semolina that is used for making pastas .

in local markets , the demand for a particular wheat class ( and quality ) relative to its nearby supply will determine local prices .

traditional , higher - protein wheats command a premium over lower - protein varieties , often referred to as the "protein premium" ( figure 1 ) .

however , linkages to national and global markets bring additional factors—such as transportation costs , competitors' supplies , and foreign demand—into play in determining the price of a particular wheat type and quality .

wheat is the principal food grain grown in the united states ; however , a substantial portion ( 8% - 10% ) of the annual u.s. wheat crop is used as a feed grain .

as a result , wheat must compete with other cereals for a place at the consumer's dinner table , while also vying with coarse grains and other feedstuffs in livestock feed markets .

almost half of the u.s. wheat crop is exported annually , although the importance of exports varies by class of wheat .

white wheat and hrs wheat rely more than other wheat classes on sales into export markets .

the larger the share of exports to production , the greater the vulnerability to international market forces .

in the u.s. domestic market , flour millers are the major users of wheat , milling about 24% of annual wheat production into flour since 2000 .

in most cases , a wheat buyer at a flour mill will "source" wheat by general location and primary quality attributes such as protein quantity and quality ( i.e. , gluten share ) and baking performance .

price premiums and / or discounts reflecting quality differences often develop and can also influence buyer preferences .

other major wheat processors include breakfast food , pet food , and feed manufacturers .

wheat may be used directly in feed rations when alternate feedstuffs are lacking or when production - related quality damage makes the wheat unmarketable as a food .

wheat milling by - products such as bran , shorts , and middlings are also used by feed manufacturers in the production of animal feeds .

the rise in agricultural prices , combined with high oil prices , have contributed to higher food inflation in the united states and around the world .

u.s. food prices increased by 4% during 2007 , the highest one - year rise since 1990 .

prices for cereals and bakery products were up by 4.4% .

usda predicts that food price inflation for 2008 will be in the range of 3% to 4% , while bakery goods are expected to rise by 5.5% to 6.5% .

inflation concerns were further heightened when the u.s. bureau of labor statistics announced that food prices had jumped by 1.7% during the month of january 2008—the biggest monthly increase in three years .

despite the sharp increases in commodity prices in 2007 , most economists agree that fuel costs have played a larger role in food price inflation than have commodity prices .

in general , retail food prices are much less volatile than farm - level prices and tend to rise by a fraction of the change in farm prices .

this is because the actual farm product represents only a small share of the eventual retail price , whereas transportation , processing , packaging , advertising , handling , and other costs—all vulnerable to higher fuel prices—comprise the majority of the final sales price .

due to trade linkages , high commodity prices ripple through international markets where impacts vary widely based on grain import dependence and the ability to respond to higher commodity prices .

import - dependent developing country markets are put at greater food security risk due to the higher cost of imported commodities .

the overall impact to consumers from higher food prices depends on the proportion of income that is spent on food .

since food costs represent a relatively small share of consumer spending for most u.s. households ( about 10% ) , food price increases ( from whatever source ) are absorbed relatively easily in the short run .

however , low - income consumers spend a much greater proportion of their income on food than do high - income consumers .

their larger share combined with less flexibility to adjust expenditures in other budget areas means that any increase in food prices potentially could cause hardship .

in particular , lower - income households in many foreign markets where food imports are an important share of national consumption and where food expenses represent a larger portion of the household budget may be affected by higher food prices .

humanitarian groups have expressed concern for the potential difficulties that higher grain prices imply for developing countries that are net food importers .

international food aid is the united states' major response to reducing global hunger .

because most u.s. food aid activities are fixed in value by annual appropriations , the amount of commodities that can be purchased declines with rising food prices .

in 2006 , the united states provided $2.1 billion of such assistance , which paid for the delivery and distribution of more than 3 million metric tons of u.s. agricultural commodities .

the united states provided food aid to 65 countries in 2006 , more than half of them in sub - saharan africa .

