passage of the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act ( uigea ) in 2006 as title viii of the safe port act represented the culmination of legislative consideration that began with the recommendations of the national gambling commission published in a 1999 report .

the legislative history of uigea indicates that congress wanted the law , in part , to address the perceived problem of foreign internet gambling operations that made their services available to u.s. customers .

uigea prohibits anyone "engaged in the business of betting or wagering" from knowingly accepting checks , credit card charges , electronic transfers , and similar payments in connection with unlawful internet gambling .

uigea expressly excludes from the definition of the term "business of betting or wagering" the services of financial institutions as well as communications and internet service providers that may be used in connection with the unlawful bet ; however , such entities may nonetheless incur liability under uigea if they are directly engaged in the operation of an internet gambling site .

a violation of uigea is subject to a criminal fine of up to $250,000 ( or $500,000 if the defendant is an organization ) , imprisonment of up to five years , or both .

in addition , upon conviction of the defendant , the court may enter a permanent injunction enjoining the defendant from making bets or wagers "or sending , receiving , or inviting information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers. .

any person or entity that violates uigea and its implementing regulations may also be subject to civil and regulatory enforcement actions .

for example , the attorney general of the united states or a state attorney general may bring civil proceedings to enjoin a transaction that is prohibited under uigea .

however , uigea expressly limits the instances when the attorneys general may bring a civil suit against financial institutions and internet service providers , as follows: they may only bring a civil proceeding against financial institutions to block transactions involving unlawful internet gambling ( unless the institution is directly involved in an unlawful internet gambling business , in which case criminal prosecution is available ) .

the attorneys general may also initiate civil proceedings against internet service providers under uigea only to block access to unlawful internet gambling sites or to hyperlinks to such sites under limited circumstances .

uigea's definition of "unlawful internet gambling" does not specify what gambling activity is illegal ; rather , the statute relies on underlying federal or state gambling laws to make that determination — that is , uigea applies to an internet bet or wager that is illegal in the place where it is placed , received , or transmitted: the term "unlawful internet gambling" means to place , receive , or otherwise knowingly transmit a bet or wager by any means which involves the use , at least in part , of the internet where such bet or wager is unlawful under any applicable federal or state law in the state or tribal lands in which the bet or wager is initiated , received , or otherwise made .

however , this statutory definition expressly exempts certain intrastate and intratribal internet gambling operations , including state lotteries and indian casinos that operate under state regulations or compacts .

to qualify for the intrastate exception under uigea , a bet must ( 1 ) be made and received in the same state ; ( 2 ) comply with applicable state law that authorizes the gambling and the method of transmission including any age and location verification and security requirements ; and ( 3 ) not violate various federal gambling laws .

the intratribal exception is similar , but slightly different .

compliance with the various federal gambling laws remains a condition and there are also similar security , age , and location verification requirements .

intratribal gambling , however , may involve transmissions between the lands of two or more tribes and need not be within the same state .

uigea further defines the term "bet or wager" to mean "the staking or risking by any person of something of value upon the outcome of a contest of others , a sporting event , or a game subject to chance , upon an agreement or understanding that the person or another person will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome. .

the statutory definition includes lottery participation , gambling on athletic events , and information relating to financing a gambling account , but a "bet or wager" does not include the following: securities transactions ; commodities transactions ; over - the - counter derivative instruments ; indemnity or guarantee contracts ; insurance contracts ; bank transactions ( transactions with insured depository institutions ) ; games or contests in which the participants do not risk anything but their efforts ; or certain fantasy or simulation sports contests .

uigea leaves in place questions as to the extent to which the interstate horseracing act curtails the reach of other federal laws , an issue that was at the center of world trade organization ( wto ) litigation .

the statute instructs the secretary of the treasury and the board of governors of the federal reserve , in consultation with the attorney general , to issue implementing regulations within 270 days of passage .

on september 1 , 2009 , a federal appeals court ruled that uigea is not unconstitutionally vague .

the interactive media entertainment & gaming association had filed a lawsuit alleging that uigea was facially unconstitutional , and sought to enjoin the enforcement of the act and its regulations .

the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit disagreed with interactive's assertion that uigea was void for vagueness because of the lack of an "ascertainable and workable definition" of the statutory phrase "unlawful internet gambling": the supreme court has explained that a statute is unconstitutionally vague if it "fails to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what is prohibited , or is so standardless that it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory enforcement. .

united states v. williams , 128 s. ct. 1830 , 1845 , 170 l. ed .

2d 650 ( 2008 ) .... we reject interactive's vagueness claim .

the act prohibits a gambling business from knowingly accepting certain financial instruments from an individual who places a bet over the internet if such gambling is illegal at the location in which the business is located or from which the individual initiates the bet .

31 u.s.c .

§§ 5362 ( 10 ) ( a ) , 5363 .

thus , the act clearly provides a person of ordinary intelligence with adequate notice of the conduct that it prohibits .

the appellate court noted that uigea "itself does not make any gambling activity illegal," but rather , the definition of "unlawful internet gambling" references federal and state laws related to gambling .

therefore , the court suggested that "to the extent that [there is] a vagueness problem , it is not with the act , but rather with the underlying state law. .

uigea calls for regulations that require "each designated payment system , and all participants therein , to identify and block or otherwise prevent or prohibit restricted transactions through the establishment of policies and procedures" reasonably calculated to have that result .

on october 4 , 2007 , the board of governors of the federal reserve system and the treasury department ( the agencies ) issued proposed regulations implementing uigea .

the proposal invited commentators to suggest alternatives and critiques before the close of the comment period on december 12 , 2007 .

the proposal offered to exempt substantial activities in those payment systems in which tracking is not possible now and in which it may ultimately not be feasible .

it also noted that the two agencies felt that they have no authority to compel payment system participants to serve lawful internet gambling operators .

after taking into consideration the public comments on the proposed rule and consulting with the department of justice ( as required by the uigea ) , the agencies adopted a final rule implementing the provisions of the uigea ; the rule was effective january 19 , 2009 , with a compliance date of june 1 , 2010 ( originally december 1 , 2009 ) .

the enactment of uigea had an immediate impact on internet gambling activities .

for example , neteller , a payment processing company based in the isle of man that reportedly processed more than $10 billion in gambling proceeds between u.s. customers and offshore internet gambling business from 1999 to 2007 , entered into a deferred prosecution agreement with the u.s. department of justice under which it agreed to discontinue u.s. operations , cooperate with investigators , and to pay the u.s. $136 million in sanctions and to return an additional $96 million to u.s. customers .

several offshore internet gambling companies sought similar agreements after the enactment of uigea .

a number of large banking institutions , which underwrote the initial public offers for offshore internet gambling companies on the london stock exchange , were the targets of grand jury subpoenas as well .

some internet gambling companies , however , were undeterred by the new federal law and attempted to rely on fraudulent methods to circumvent uigea's prohibitions .

yet despite their efforts to evade uigea , several of these companies have faced prosecution and been forced to shut down their operations .

for example , on april 15 , 2011 , the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york announced the unsealing of an indictment of 11 defendants , including the founders of the three largest internet poker websites ( poker stars , full tilt poker , and absolute poker ) , that charged them with a variety of federal offenses including bank fraud , conspiracy , violating uigea , money laundering , and operating an illegal gambling business .

for example , the offshore internet poker companies allegedly "arranged for the money received from u.s. gamblers to be disguised as payments to hundreds of non - existent online merchants purporting to sell merchandise such as jewelry and golf balls," thereby tricking u.s. banks and credit card issuers to process their payments .

in addition , the indictment also accused the internet poker companies of "persuad[ing] the principals of a few small , local banks facing financial difficulties to engage in [payment] processing in return for multi - million dollar investments in the banks. .

as part of this enforcement action , the federal bureau of investigation seized five internet domain names that were used by the poker companies to host their illegal poker games ; such domain name seizure "effectively shuttered their doors. .

since passage of uigea in 2006 , there have been several attempts to repeal the law or loosen its restrictions , although no such legislation has been enacted .

several bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that would allow for lawful , government - regulated internet gambling activities .

such legislative proposals have been supported by members of congress who have criticized the current internet gambling restrictions for being , in their view , ineffective at stopping internet gambling by millions of americans , an infringement on individual liberty , and a lost opportunity to collect billions of dollars in tax revenue , among other things .

some interest groups also endorse legislation that would regulate , rather than prohibit , internet gambling because they believe it would help protect american consumers ( adults and minors ) from the risks of fraud and other financial and societal costs associated with online gambling .

what follows is a brief description of the bills in the 112 th congress that would authorize and regulate some forms of internet gambling .

the federal wire act , 18 u.s.c .

1084 , prohibits the use of interstate telephone facilities by those in the gambling business to transmit bets or gambling - related information .

early federal prosecutions of internet gambling generally charged violations of the wire act .

however , one federal appeals court concluded that the wire act applies only to sports gambling , while a subsequent district court concluded that it applies to non - sports gambling as well .

the u.s. department of justice's criminal division has consistently maintained that the wire act applies not only to sports wagering but can also be applied to other forms of interstate gambling , including non - sports internet gambling .

such an expansive view of the wire act by the justice department dissuaded state governments from expressly authorizing and implementing internet gambling within their jurisdictions .

however , in late 2011 , in response to a request by the states of illinois and new york for an opinion regarding whether their proposed use of the internet to sell lottery tickets to in - state adults would violate the wire act , the justice department's office of legal counsel ( olc ) reversed its interpretation of the wire act , opining that "interstate transmissions of wire communications that do not relate to a 'sporting event or contest,' 18 u.s.c .

§1084 ( a ) , fall outside the reach of the wire act. .

some observers predict that this change in position will cause "an explosion of poker , instant lotteries and casino games on the internet , run or licensed by the states. .

in addition , because of the olc's opinion , states may be able to enter into compacts with one another to operate online gambling across state lines .

most states prohibit any gambling that they do not expressly permit .

all states except hawaii and utah authorize some form of gambling by their residents , such as lotteries , bingo , card games , slot machines , or casinos .

seven states ( illinois , indiana , louisiana , montana , oregon , south dakota , and washington ) expressly outlaw internet gambling .

however , in light of growing state budget deficits and state legislators' desire to find ways of raising revenue without increasing taxes , several states are considering measures that would legalize , license , and tax internet gambling within their borders .

such legalization would take advantage of uigea's "intrastate exemption" provision ; states also no longer need to be concerned about prosecution under the wire act for enacting such laws due to the recent department of justice olc opinion .

in april 2011 , the district of columbia authorized the district's lottery commission to offer games of skill or chance including poker via the internet in the district of columbia , becoming the first jurisdiction in the nation to legalize intrastate internet gambling .

however , after some d.c. lawmakers criticized the apparently covert manner in which online gambling was approved ( it was a late - night amendment to a budget law that received no public debate or hearings before passage ) , the council of the district of columbia voted to repeal the law in february 2012 .

in june 2011 , nevada amended its state law to allow certain gaming licensees to conduct internet gambling operations , effective upon passage of federal authorizing legislation or united states justice department notification that federal law permits such activity .

in late december 2011 , the nevada gaming control board approved regulations to allow internet poker within its borders , becoming the first state to do so .

on march 4 , 2011 , the governor of new jersey vetoed a bill that would have permitted intrastate internet gambling , based in part on concerns that the new jersey constitution limits casino gambling to within the boundaries of atlantic city and also the uncertainty regarding the applicability of the federal wire act .

a bill is currently progressing through the new jersey legislature to permit atlantic city casinos to take bets from gamblers via the internet .

the utah legislature passed a bill , signed by the utah governor on march 19 , 2012 , that specifically prohibits internet gambling within its borders and also provides for the state to opt - out of the federal licensing regime that would be created by h.r .

1174 , the internet gambling regulation , consumer protection , and enforcement act , should congress pass the law .

iowa directed its state racing commission to study and report on "the creation of a framework for the state regulation of intrastate internet poker. .

the report , issued in december 2011 , concluded that intrastate online poker could be conducted safely and would raise revenue of $3 million to $13 million per year .

the iowa senate in march 2012 approved a measure that allows the state's casinos and racetracks to offer internet poker .

