like most states , ohio provides various tax incentives to encourage businesses to locate or expand operations in the state .

in 1998 , daimlerchrysler agreed to construct a new assembly plant in ohio in exchange for various benefits , which were valued at $280 million .

one benefit the company was qualified to receive because of the plant construction was ohio's investment tax credit .

this credit was a non - refundable credit against the state's corporate franchise tax for taxpayers who purchased new manufacturing machinery and equipment and installed it in the state .

taxpayers from ohio and michigan then brought suit against daimlerchrysler , ohio , and several other defendants , alleging , among other things , that the investment tax credit violated the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution .

as discussed below , the u.s. district court held that the credit was constitutional , whereas the sixth circuit court of appeals held the opposite .

in 2006 , the supreme court ordered the case be dismissed because the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring suit in federal court .

the commerce clause grants congress the power to regulate interstate commerce .

congress's authority to regulate interstate commerce has been described as plenary and limited only by other constitutional provisions .

on the flip side of the issue , the supreme court has long held that the states may not unduly burden interstate commerce in the absence of federal regulation .

this restriction is founded in what is referred to as the dormant commerce clause .

a state tax provision does not violate the dormant commerce clause if four qualifications are met: ( 1 ) the activity taxed has a substantial nexus with the state , ( 2 ) the tax is fairly apportioned to reflect the degree of activity that occurs within the state , ( 3 ) the tax does not discriminate against interstate commerce , and ( 4 ) the tax is fairly related to benefits provided by the state .

in the cuno case , the only issue with respect to the commerce clause was whether the tax incentive was discriminatory .

there is no simple definition of the term "discriminatory. .

instead , the supreme court has provided general principles , which are then applied to the specific tax at issue .

for example , the court has declared that a "fundamental principle" of the commerce clause is that states may not "impose a tax which discriminates against interstate commerce...by providing a direct commercial advantage to local business. .

another general rule is that a state may use its tax system to encourage intrastate commerce and may compete with other states for interstate commerce so long as the state does not "discriminatorily tax the products manufactured or the business operations performed in any other [s]tate. .

the supreme court has not addressed whether an investment tax credit similar to the one at issue in cuno is discriminatory .

thus , the district court and court of appeals were left to look at the general principles found in the court's decisions and analogize the ohio credit to the tax credits in the prior cases .

as shown by the opposite outcomes of the two lower courts ( discussed below ) , it is possible to come to different conclusions about the meaning of the supreme court's prior cases .

the decisions by the district court and court of appeals broadly represent two viewpoints of the court's jurisprudence .

the district court's decision represents the idea that the purpose of the commerce clause is to prevent economic protectionism by the states ( i.e. , to prevent states from helping in - state businesses by penalizing out - of - state businesses ) .

the court of appeals' decision represents the view that the clause's purpose is to encourage free trade by limiting the state's ability to use its taxing power to coerce taxpayers into conducting business in that state .

as seen in the two opinions , there is support in the supreme court's prior decisions for both interpretations .

the supreme court , in holding that the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring suit in federal court , did not address whether the tax credit violated the commerce clause .

the economic development act of 2005 ( h.r .

2471 and s. 1066 ) would give states the authority to offer incentives like the investment tax credit struck down by the sixth circuit in cuno .

the act would generally allow the states to provide discriminatory tax incentives that are for an economic development purpose , including any legally permitted activity for attracting , retaining , or expanding business activity , jobs , or investment in a state .

some incentives would not be allowed , including those that depend on state of incorporation or domicile , require the recipient to acquire or use services or property produced in the state , are reduced as a direct result of an increase in out - of - state activity , result in a loss of a compensating tax system , require reciprocalâ tax benefits from another jurisdiction , or reduce a tax not imposed on apportioned interstate activities .

the act would apply to all qualifying tax incentives , regardless of their date of enactment .

