the franking privilege , which allows members of congress to transmit mail matter under their signature without postage , has its roots in 17 th century great britain .

the british house of commons in stituted it in 1660 and free mail was available to many officials under the colonial postal system .

in 1775 , the first continental congress passed legislation giving members mailing privileges so they could communicate with their constituents , as well as giving free mailing privileges to soldiers .

congress continues to use the franking privilege to satisfy an articulated public interest in facilitating official communications from elected officials to the citizens whom they represent .

the communications may include letters in response to constituent requests for information , newsletters regarding legislation and member votes , press releases about official member activities , copies of the congressional record and government reports , and notices about upcoming town meetings organized by members .

congress pays the u.s .

postal service for franked mail through annual appropriations for the legislative branch .

each chamber uses a formula to allocate funds to members from these appropriations .

in the senate , the allocation process is administered by the committee on rules and administration ; in the house , by the committee on house administration .

in the senate , each senator's franked mail postage allowance is determined by a formula that gives a maximum allowance equal to the cost of one first - class mailing to every address in the senator's state .

if the total senate appropriation for official mail is less than the amount required for the maximum allowance , each senator's allowance is proportionally reduced .

a senate office that exceeds its allowance may supplement the allowance with official office account funds .

senators are , however , limited to $50,000 for mass mailings ( defined as 500 or more identical pieces of unsolicited mail ) in any fiscal year .

in the house , the franked mail postage allowance is based on the number of addresses in each member's district .

each representative's mail allowance is combined with allowances for office staff and official office expenses to form a member's representational allowance ( mra ) .

members may spend any portion of their mra on franked mail , subject to law and house regulations .

within the limits of their mra , house members are not restricted as to the total amount they may spend on mass mailings .

the franking privilege is regulated by federal law , house and senate rules , orders of the committee on house administration and senate rules and administration committee , and regulations of the senate select committee on ethics and the house commission on congressional mailing standards .

the franking privilege may only be used for matters of public concern or public service .

it may not be used to solicit votes or contributions , to send mail regarding political campaigns or political parties , or to mail autobiographical or holiday greeting materials .

both house and senate regulations specify limitations on the size and formatting of franked mail .

official funds must be used in the preparation of materials sent under the frank ; no private funds may supplement printing , production , or other costs .

mass mailings are further restricted by law and chamber rules and regulations .

each mass mailing sent by a member of congress must bear the following notice: "prepared , published , and mailed at taxpayer expense. .

senators are prohibited from sending mass mailings fewer than 60 days prior to any primary election in which they are a candidate , as well as 60 days prior to any general election , regardless of whether or not they are a candidate .

house members are prohibited from sending mass mailings fewer than 90 days prior to any general or primary election in which they are a candidate , and are prohibited from sending unsolicited mass mailings outside their district .

franking regulations also require disclosure of individual members' mass mailings costs .

in the house , costs are reported quarterly in the statement of disbursements of the house as part of a total mass communications cost .

senate costs appear in the biannual report of the secretary of the senate .

during fy2015 , congress spent $8.3 million on official mail according to the u.s .

postal service , representing slightly less than two - tenths of 1% of the $4.3 billion budget for the entire legislative branch for fy2015 .

house official mail costs ( $6.8 million ) were 82% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.5 million ) were 18% of the total .

during fy2014 , congress spent $16.9 million on official mail .

house official mail costs ( $15.1 million ) were 89% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.8 million ) were 11% of the total .

during fy2013 , congress spent $7.6 million on official mail .

house official mail costs ( $6.2 million ) were 82% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.4 million ) were 18% of the total .

during fy2012 , congress spent $24.8 million on official mail .

house official mail costs ( $23.3 million ) were 94% of the total , whereas senate official mail costs ( $1.5 million ) were 6% of the total .

these expenditures continue a historical pattern of congress spending less on official mail costs during non - election years than during election years .

however , analysis of monthly data on official mail costs indicates that , due to the structure of the fiscal year calendar , comparisons of election - year and non - election - year mailing data tend to overstate the effect of pre - election increases in mail costs , because it also captures the effect of a large spike in mail costs from december of the previous calendar year .

reform efforts during the past 30 years have reduced overall franking expenditures in both election and non - election years .

even - numbered - year franking expenditures have been reduced by over 85% from $113.4 million in fy1988 to $16.9 million in fy2014 , while odd - numbered - year franking expenditures have been reduced by over 90% from $89.5 million in fy1989 to $8.3 million in fy2015 .

house mail costs have decreased from a high of $77.9 million in fy1988 to $6.8 million in fy2015 .

the senate has dramatically reduced its costs , from $43.6 million in fy1984 to $1.5 million in fy2015 .

h.r .

1873 , the ending special mail privileges for congress act , would eliminate the traditional franking privilege of members of congress—the use of the member's signature in lieu of prepayment for the mailing of letters related to official business .

the bill , however , would continue to authorize the use of official funds for the purpose of member official communications with constituents and others , as "congressional mail. .

it would also eliminate , without replacement , the franking privilege of survivors of members of congress .

h.r .

1873 was introduced on april 16 , 2015 , by representative woodall and was referred to the house committee on house administration and the house committee on oversight and government reform .

no further action has been taken .

one piece of legislation was introduced in the 113th congress that would have altered the franking privilege .

h.r .

4872 , the ending special mail privileges for congress act of 2014 , was substantively identical to h.r .

1873 from the 114th congress .

h.r .

4872 was introduced on june 17 , 2014 , by representative woodall and was referred to the house committee on house administration and the house committee on oversight and government reform .

no further action was taken .

s. 3528 would have repealed the authorization providing franking privileges to former speakers of the house .

currently , former speakers are authorized to use the frank for a period of five years after they leave congress .

senator jon tester introduced s. 3528 on september 11 , 2012 .

the bill was referred to the committee on rules and administration .

no further action was taken .

two bills introduced in the 111 th congress— h.r .

2056 and h.r .

5151 —would have altered the congressional franking privilege .

provisions of the two bills are discussed here .

in addition to h.r .

1614 , s. 936 , and s. 1285 described above , two other bills— h.r .

2687 and h.r .

2788 —were introduced in the 110 th congress that would have altered the congressional franking privilege .

h.r .

2687 would have effectively prohibited representatives from mass mailing newsletters , questionnaires , or congratulatory notices .

the prohibition would not have covered certain other types of mass mailings made by members , including federal documents ( such as the congressional record ) or voter registration information .

the legislation would have applied only to representatives ; it would not affect mass mailings made by senators .

current law allows members to send mass mailings in various forms ( newsletters , questionnaires , press releases , notices ) on a variety of topics , including but not limited to the impact of laws and decisions , public and official actions taken by members of congress , proposed or pending legislation or governmental actions , the positions of the members of congress on legislation or other public issues , and other related matters of public concern or public service .

h.r .

2687 was introduced june 12 , 2007 , by representative ray lahood , and was referred to the committee on house administration and the committee on oversight and government reform .

no further action was taken .

previously , representative lahood introduced similar legislation ( h.r .

3121 , 109 th congress ) , which was referred to the committee on house administration and the committee on government reform .

no further action was taken .

h.r .

2788 would have required that each individual piece of franked mail contained in a mass mailing made by a member of the house contain a statement indicating the aggregate cost of producing and mailing the mass mailing .

each piece of franked mail would have contained the statement , "the aggregate cost of this mailing to the taxpayer is _____," with the blank space containing the total cost of producing and franking the mass mailing .

the legislation would not have affected mass mailings made by senators .

current law requires each mass mailing sent by a member of congress to bear the following notice: "prepared , published , and mailed at taxpayer expense. .

h.r .

2788 does not amend the current law ; if enacted , mass mailings made by members of the house would contain both statements .

h.r .

2788 was introduced on june 20 , 2007 , by representative jeff flake , and was referred to the committee on house administration .

no further action was taken .

