center - left presidential candidate alvaro colom of the national union for hope ( une ) defeated general otto pã©rez molina of the right - wing patriot party ( pp ) in the november 4 , 2007 run - off elections , which were considered free and fair .

voter turnout fell to under 50% , down from nearly 60% in the september 9 first round of voting , as anticipated by many observers who note that guatemalan voters are often more interested in local races .

colom received 52.8% of the run - off vote to pã©rez molina's 47.2% .

president - elect colom will take office on january 14 , 2008 .

after his victory , president - elect colom told a local radio station that he plans "to convert guatemala into a social democratic country with a mayan face. .

voting patterns reflected the country's urban - rural divide .

pã©rez molina defeated colom in guatemala city and its surrounding areas , where 25% of guatemalan voters reside .

colom dominated the countryside and won in 20 of the nation's 21 departments .

colom's party , une , gained seats in the country's national assembly , winning 48 of the legislative body's 158 seats .

since his party does not have a majority in the legislature , colom's success will likely depend on his ability to forge alliance with other parties .

guatemala held general elections on september 9 , 2007 , the third wave of democratic elections since the end of its 36-year civil conflict in which an estimated 200,000 people were killed .

the current president , ã“scar berger , of the grand national alliance ( gana ) , was barred from seeking reelection by a constitutional prohibition .

both the european union and the organization of american states sent electoral observers to monitor the elections .

although the electoral campaigns were marred by violence , both missions expressed satisfaction that the elections were relatively free and fair and that voter turnout was largely unimpeded .

rural voting increased due to an increased number of polling stations .

however , there were irregularities such as the burning of one polling station in el cerinal , southeast of guatemala city .

the missions also expressed concern about the lack of information available in mayan languages as well as the low number of women elected to congress .

president ã“scar berger won the november 2003 elections and took office on january 14 , 2004 .

during berger's presidency , the guatemalan economy has expanded , but drug trafficking and organized crime have overwhelmed the country's weak institutions .

guatemala's gdp grew by 4.6% in 2006 , the highest rate since 1998 , helped by increased remittances ; high prices for primary exports , such as sugar and cardamom ; and increased investor confidence due in part to implementation of the u.s. dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) .

under berger's leadership , the legislature passed a law against organized crime and secured legislative approval of the creation of an international commission against impunity in guatemala ( cicig ) .

because of gana's minority presence in congress , however , berger has struggled to secure timely passage of needed tax reforms , and the 2007 budget .

some assert that his government has not made significant progress on implementation of reforms agreed upon in the 1996 peace accords .

the guatemalan peace accords were signed in 1996 , but required reforms were not fully implemented and security forces were not purged , leaving intact the institutional framework through which organized crime has infiltrated the political process .

murders have increased , reaching 6,033 in 2006 , higher than any single year during the civil conflict .

the murder rate is disproportionately high in guatemala city , eastern departments , and along the mexican border .

the root problem lies in the lack of employment and educational opportunities ; many youth search for other means of living , including gangs and organized crime .

the majority of violence is attributed to drug trafficking and organized crime , with nearly 90% of cocaine heading for the united states passing through central america .

the infiltration of security forces by organized crime was highlighted earlier this year after the murder of three salvadoran deputies and their driver .

the four police officers accused of the crime were assassinated while in prison .

this situation led to the resignation of several high - ranking security officials .

all levels of the 2007 electoral campaigns were affected by political violence , making this election the bloodiest in guatemala's history since 1985 .

in the period leading up to the september 9 general election there were 119 violent acts resulting in 51 deaths , including the murders of candidate's relatives and party activists .

the torture and killing of one candidate's 14-year - old daughter highlighted the brutality of the campaigns .

this was not an isolated incident with two other candidates' sons killed , bringing the number of relatives killed to six .

the une party , of front runner 'lvaro colom , suffered the most losses with 18 murders , followed by the ruling party gana with 7 murders .

violence appeared to lessen in the period between the first and second round of voting .

during that time five political candidates and supporters were killed .

among those killed was aura salazar , a close advisor of pã©rez molina .

colom's campaign strategist , josã© carlos marroquã­n , resigned in october reportedly due to threats from organized crime groups .

prosecuting murders is rare in guatemala , and to date it is not clear who is responsible for many of them or what role , if any , organized crime and drug traffickers played in the campaign violence .

impunity and violence are two of the biggest issues facing the new president .

guatemala has one of the highest murder rates in latin america due to institutional weaknesses and infiltration of security forces by organized crime .

very few murders are investigated and even fewer are prosecuted .

the past two administrations have struggled to get approval of a joint commission , with the united nations , that would investigate clandestine groups working within the government and security forces .

the establishment of the international commission against impunity in guatemala , known by its spanish acronym cicig , has been one of president berger's successes .

the opposition to cicig came mainly from the guatemalan revolutionary front ( frg ) citing that cicig was a violation of guatemala's sovereignty .

both colom and pã©rez molina , as well as their parties , were vocal supporters of the international commission .

however , two members of the une , 'lvaro colom's party , voted against cicig in the congressional committee on foreign relations .

this was an embarrassment for colom and his party and resulted in the suspension of one of the deputies .

on august 16 , a law was passed that formally established cicig for the next two years .

cicig has been praised by human rights groups and the international community .

concerns persist , however , the guatemalan executive branch will decide which cases will be investigated and the commission will not be able to investigate crimes retroactively , such as war crimes committed during the civil war .

the approval of cicig prompted the u.s. house and senate to approve foreign military financing for guatemala in fy2008 , pending department of state certification that certain human rights conditions have been met .

both presidential candidates are likely to support continued cooperation with the international community to fight impunity and violence in guatemala .

the united states and guatemala have traditionally had close relations .

u.s. interest in guatemala lies in consolidating democracy , securing human rights , establishing security , and promoting trade .

u.s. immigration policy has been a point of tension .

president bush visited guatemala in march 2007 to express support for greater cooperation on counternarcotics and youth gangs .

the united states' immigration policy has been a growing source of tension since tighter u.s. border security has led to increased deportation of guatemalan nationals .

as of july 24 , 2007 , 12,445 guatemalans had been deported from the united states with the total for 2007 expected to reach 24,000 .

this number grew from 11,000 in 2005 and 18,306 in 2006 .

the surge in deportations has strained reintegration programs .

guatemala maintains that deportations have added to gang related problems .

guatemala has an estimated 1.2 million nationals living in the united states , nearly 60% illegally .

they sent back $3.61 billion in remittances in 2006 , equal to 10% of the country's gdp .

since immigration is a bipartisan issue in guatemala , both colom and pã©rez molina are expected to continue to appeal to the u.s. government to revise its immigration policies .

