u.s. aid to the palestinians has changed more dramatically in calendar year 2018 than at any time since 2007 , when it was restructured to respond to the takeover of the gaza strip by the sunni islamist group hamas ( for more background , see appendix a ) .

the trump administration has taken several steps to reduce u.s. funding for programs benefitting palestinians .

the president's statements suggest that the administration may seek to persuade the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) to participate in u.s. - led diplomacy on the israeli - palestinian peace process ( see " 2018 administration actions " below ) .

plo chairman and palestinian authority ( pa ) president mahmoud abbas broke off diplomatic contacts with the administration in december 2017 after president trump recognized jerusalem as israel's capital and announced his intention to relocate the u.s. embassy there from tel aviv .

in august and september 2018 , the administration announced that it would reprogram at least $225 million of fy2017 bilateral economic aid initially allocated for the west bank and gaza ( from the economic support fund , or esf , account , including some amounts designated as esf - overseas contingency operations , or esf - oco ) .

the amounts reprogrammed are estimated to be $231.542 million ( see " reprogramming fy2017 bilateral esf " below ) .

also in september , the administration announced that it was ending all u.s. humanitarian contributions to the u.n .

relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) .

bilateral , nonlethal security assistance from the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account is the only major stream of u.s. funding to the palestinians that has continued unabated .

this assistance helps train and equip pa security forces and officials from the pa's justice sector .

the administration's actions regarding fy2017 esf have raised questions about future - year funding ( including fy2018 and fy2019 ) for the palestinians , such as whether existing aid programs will continue .

media reports suggest that many of the organizations that have implemented esf programs in the west bank and gaza are suspending or preparing to suspend operations unless funding resumes .

the status of esf programs and of unrwa's operations could affect the region's security and its economic and humanitarian situations .

the administration's actions also have sparked debate over how cuts in u.s. bilateral and multilateral assistance will affect u.s. political leverage with the palestinians ( see " political strategy and leverage " below ) , and whether other countries will step in to replace u.s. funding and — potentially — u.s .

influence .

regardless of the administration's actions in 2018 , it is unclear how much fy2017 esf would have been available for the palestinians .

congress suspended all esf that "directly benefits" the pa in march via the taylor force act ( title x of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , or p.l .

115-141 ) .

in october , u.s. government officials clarified that they would have been legally required to withhold $165 million in fy2017 esf even if the administration had not reprogrammed the entire $231.542 million .

the same requirement to suspend esf will apply to future - year funding unless and until palestinian governing entities stop payments to individuals imprisoned for or killed while allegedly committing acts of terrorism , or to these individuals' families .

some reports have suggested that the anti - terrorism clarification act of 2018 ( atca , p.l .

115-253 ) , which became law in october 2018 , could indirectly lead to a complete end of u.s. bilateral aid for the palestinians absent further congressional action ( see " anti - terrorism clarification act of 2018: possible complete end to bilateral aid " ) .

changes in u.s. policy on various types of funding for the palestinians have unfolded throughout 2018 .

in an august 28 press briefing , the state department spokesperson said earlier this year…the president directed an overall review of u.s. assistance to the palestinian authority in the west bank and also in gaza… .

the decision was then made , and we sent out a statement to this effect [on august 24] , that that money at this time is not in the best interests of the u.s. national interest and also at this time does not provide value to the u.s. taxpayer .

various statements from president trump , as well as observations from other sources , suggest that u.s. actions on aid may seek to persuade the palestinians to participate in u.s. - led diplomacy on the israeli - palestinian peace process .

in january 2018 , shortly after plo chairman abbas broke off diplomatic contacts with the united states in response to its new policy on jerusalem , president trump said that the hundreds of millions of dollars of aid that palestinians receive "is not going to them unless they sit down and negotiate peace. .

in september , president trump said that he stopped "massive amounts of money that we were paying to the palestinians" and that the united states would not resume payments "until we make a deal. .

later in september , an article examining u.s. aid policy toward the palestinians stated the broad push to cut all funding to palestinian civilians is promoted by jared kushner , the son - in - law of president trump and the top white house adviser on the middle east .

mr. kushner has been working on a peace proposal for the israelis and palestinians , and is seeking maximum negotiating leverage over the palestinians .

for more on this topic , see " political strategy and leverage " below .

congress has the power to appropriate , condition , or prohibit various forms of funding for the palestinians , including bilateral aid and humanitarian contributions to unrwa .

congress also could provide u.s. foreign assistance to other countries ( such as jordan or lebanon ) or organizations to benefit the palestinians receiving unrwa services .

additionally , congressional oversight could focus on potential implications of the administration's funding decisions and other aspects of u.s. aid to the west bank and gaza or contributions to unrwa .

pending legislation includes the fy2019 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bills ( h.r .

6385 , s. 3108 ) .

both bills would carry forward the conditions attached to bilateral aid for fy2018 ( for more information , see appendix a ) , and contain a reporting requirement for unrwa virtually identical to the provision that has been in annual appropriations legislation since fy2015 ( see appendix b ) .

bills introduced earlier this year regarding unrwa include the palestinian assistance reform act ( s. 3425 ) , the unrwa accountability act of 2018 ( h.r .

5898 , ordered to be r eported amended by the house foreign affairs committee on june 28 ) , and the unrwa reform and refugee support act of 2018 ( h.r .

6451 ) .

members in the senate and house introduced versions of the palestinian partnership fund act ( s. 3549 and h.r .

7060 ) in october .

the bill would establish a fund to finance joint economic development , research , and business initiatives ( including in the high - tech industry ) linking palestinian companies with those of the united states , israel and other countries ; and people - to - people exchanges seemingly similar to those in the cmm program , which , as mentioned above , the administration changed in september .

under the bill's provisions as introduced , the state department ( in consultation with usaid and the commerce and treasury departments ) would establish the fund , and congressional leaders would appoint its governing officers .

additionally , the fund's administrators would be precluded from discriminating "against any community or entity in israel , the west bank , or gaza" — presumably including israeli settlements in the west bank — "due to its geographic location. .

the bill would authorize annual contributions to be appropriated from fy2019 through fy2024 — with s. 3529 authorizing $100 million per year and h.r .

7060 authorizing $50 million per year .

the senate committee version of the fy2019 appropriations bill for state , foreign operations , and related programs ( s. 3108 ) would appropriate $50 million in esf for a palestinian partnership fund for that fiscal year .

amounts used from the fund would be subject to vetting on terms similar to those applicable to foreign aid to the palestinians , and would not be available for individuals or groups involved in or advocating terrorist activity .

appendix a .

background on u.s. aid to the palestinians overview significant bilateral u.s. aid to the palestinians began when the palestinians achieved limited self - rule in the west bank and gaza strip in the mid - 1990s .

bilateral aid to the palestinians since 1994 has totaled more than $5 billion .

it was restructured in 2007 , as mentioned above , to account for hamas controlling gaza .

since then , much of the u.s. bilateral aid has gone toward security , economic development , self - governance , and humanitarian needs — with an emphasis on strengthening the west bank - based , fatah - led pa vis - à - vis hamas .

however , at various points , the executive branch and congress have taken various measures to reduce , delay , or place conditions on this aid .

annual appropriations legislation routinely contains the following selected conditions: hamas and terrorism .

aid to hamas or hamas - controlled entities is specifically prohibited , and no aid may be made available for the purpose of recognizing or otherwise honoring individuals who commit or have committed acts of terrorism .

additionally , the secretary of state is required to take all appropriate steps to ensure that economic assistance for the west bank and gaza does not support terrorism , and to terminate assistance to "any individual , entity , or educational institution which the secretary has determined to be involved in or advocating terrorist activity. .

fatah - hamas "unity" government scenario .

generally , no aid is permitted for a power - sharing pa government that includes hamas as a member , or that results from an agreement with hamas and over which hamas exercises "undue influence. .

this general restriction is only lifted if the president certifies that the pa government , including all ministers , has "publicly accepted and is complying with" the following two principles embodied in section 620k of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended by the palestinian anti - terrorism act of 2006 ( pata , p.l .

109-446 ) : ( 1 ) recognition of "the jewish state of israel's right to exist" and ( 2 ) acceptance of previous israeli - palestinian agreements ( the "section 620k principles" ) .

if the pa government is "hamas - controlled," pata applies additional conditions , limitations , and restrictions on aid .

international criminal court action .

esf assistance for the pa is prohibited if "the palestinians initiate an international criminal court judicially authorized investigation , or actively support such an investigation , that subjects israeli nationals to an investigation for alleged crimes against palestinians. .

membership in the united nations or u.n. agencies .

esf assistance for the pa is prohibited if the palestinians obtain "the same standing as member states or full membership as a state outside an agreement negotiated between israel and the palestinians" in the united nations or any u.n. specialized agency other than u.n. educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) .

pa personnel in gaza .

no aid is permitted for pa personnel located in gaza .

plo and palestinian broadcasting corporation ( pbc ) .

no aid is permitted for the plo or for the pbc .

palestinian state .

no funds may be provided to support a future palestinian state unless the secretary of state certifies that the governing entity of the state has committed to peaceful coexistence with israel , is taking measures to counter terrorism , and is working to establish "comprehensive peace in the middle east. .

this restriction can be waived for national security purposes , and does not apply to aid meant to reform the palestinian governing entity so that it might meet these conditions .

vetting , monitoring , and evaluation .

for u.s. aid programs for the palestinians , annual appropriations legislation routinely requires executive branch reports and certifications , as well as internal and government accountability office ( gao ) audits .

these requirements appear to be aimed at , among other things , preventing u.s. aid from benefitting terrorists or abetting corruption , and assessing aid programs' effectiveness .

this vetting process has become more rigorous since 2006 in response to recommendations from gao .

in april 2016 , a gao report found that usaid had generally complied with vetting requirements since the 2006 changes .

the effectiveness of u.s. aid to the palestinians has been challenged by the shifting and often conflicting objectives of israel and various palestinian groups .

for example , israeli security requirements or palestinian factional disputes affect the viability of aid programs to help with palestinian security , infrastructure , or economic development .

additional complications come from coordinating u.s. actions with the activities of other donor states and international organizations such as the european union ( eu ) , united nations , world bank , the office of the quartet representative , and the ad hoc liaison committee .

economic aid as mentioned above , bilateral economic aid to the palestinians is appropriated through the esf account .

project assistance has been provided by usaid and other government agencies to implementing partners ( both for - profit and nonprofit grantees ) operating in the west bank and the gaza strip .

funds have been used for humanitarian assistance , economic development , democratic reform , improving water access and other infrastructure , health care , and education .

in addition to project assistance , since fy2014 the united states has provided some budgetary assistance for the pa through direct payments to its creditors — mainly israeli utility companies and east jerusalem hospitals .

the pa , with a regular annual budget deficit of over $1 billion , is dependent on external sources to meet its financial commitments .

in addition to providing bilateral assistance to the palestinians , the united states has allocated some amounts from various foreign assistance accounts for israeli - palestinian reconciliation or arab - israeli cooperation .

security assistance since hamas forcibly took control of the gaza strip in june 2007 , the office of the u.s. security coordinator ( ussc ) for israel and the palestinian authority has worked in coordination with the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) to sponsor bilateral , nonlethal security assistance programs for west bank - based pa security forces from the incle account .

the pa newly recruited and vetted many of these personnel in the period roughly spanning 2008-2012 .

much of the u.s. - sponsored training has taken place in jordan , at least partly because of israeli conditions on the use of firearms in the west bank .

the ussc is a three - star u.s. general / flag officer , supported as of early 2018 by u.s. and allied staff and military officers from the united kingdom , canada , turkey , italy , and the netherlands .

around 2012 , the ussc / inl program reportedly shifted to a less resource intensive "advise and assist" role alongside its efforts to assist the pa in improving the functioning of its criminal justice system .

the ussc / inl security assistance program exists alongside other assistance and training programs provided to palestinian security forces and intelligence organizations by various countries and the european union ( eu ) .

by most accounts , the pa forces receiving training have shown increased professionalism and have helped improve law and order in west bank cities , despite continuing challenges that stem from squaring palestinian national aspirations with coordinating security with israel .

appendix b .

background on unrwa and u.s .

contributions overview since unrwa's inception in 1949 , the united states has been the agency's largest donor , with more than $6 billion in contributions .

unrwa's mandate is to "provide relief , human development and protection services to palestine refugees and persons displaced by the 1967 hostilities in its fields of operation: jordan , lebanon , the syrian arab republic , west bank and the gaza strip. .

the u.n. general assembly continues to renew unrwa's mandate pending resolution of the status of "palestine refugees" — approximately 5.4 million people who include original refugees from the 1948 arab - israeli war and their descendants in the places listed above .

all other refugees worldwide fall under the mandate of the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) .

unrwa is partly shaped by the context in which it operates .

most of unrwa's employees — other than its senior international staff — are drawn from the palestinian refugee population it serves .

unrwa's website states that its role encompasses "global advocacy for palestine refugees" in addition to the provision of assistance and protection .

unrwa does not have a robust policing capability .

it often faces security concerns along with political pressures from hamas and other actors .

the program budget for unrwa's core programs is funded mainly by western governments , international organizations , and private donors via voluntary contributions .

core programs include providing food , shelter , education , medical care , microfinance , and other humanitarian and social services to designated beneficiaries .

unrwa also launches emergency appeals and special funds for pressing humanitarian needs .

in fy2017 , the united states contributed a total of $359.3 million: $160 million to the program budget , $103.3 million to an emergency appeal for syria , $95 million to a west bank / gaza emergency appeal , and around $966,000 to an anti - gender - based violence initiative called "safe from the start. .

general issues for congress vetting of unrwa contributions some members of congress have raised concerns that u.s. contributions to unrwa might be used to support terrorists .

section 301 ( c ) of the 1961 foreign assistance act ( p.l .

87-195 ) , as amended , says that "no contributions by the united states shall be made to [unrwa] except on the condition that [unrwa] take[s] all possible measures to assure that no part of the united states contribution shall be used to furnish assistance to any refugee who is receiving military training as a member of the so - called palestine liberation army or any other guerrilla type organization or who has engaged in any act of terrorism. .

to date , no arm of the u.s. government has found unrwa to be out of compliance with section 301 ( c ) .

for 2010 and each year thereafter , the state department and unrwa have had a nonbinding "framework for cooperation" in place , the most recent of which was signed in november 2017 .

each of the documents has agreed that , along with the compliance reports unrwa submits to state biannually , state would use enumerated criteria as a way to evaluate unrwa's compliance with section 301 ( c ) .

legislation and oversight some members of congress have supported legislation or resolutions aimed at increasing oversight of unrwa , strengthening its vetting procedures , and / or capping u.s. contributions .

since fy2015 , annual appropriations legislation ( for fy2019 , section 7048 ( d ) of p.l .

115-141 , as extended by the continuing appropriations act , 2019 , or p.l .

115-245 ) has included a provision requiring the state department to report to congress on whether unrwa is using operations support officers to inspect unrwa installations and reporting any inappropriate use ; acting promptly to address any staff or beneficiary violations of section 301 ( c ) or unrwa internal policies ; implementing procedures to maintain its facilities' neutrality , and conducting regular inspections ; taking necessary and appropriate measures to ensure section 301 ( c ) compliance and related reporting ; taking steps to ensure the content of educational materials taught in unrwa - administered schools and summer camps is consistent with the values of human rights , dignity , and tolerance and does not induce incitement ; not engaging in financial violations of u.s. law , and taking steps to improve financial transparency ; and in compliance with u.n. audit requirements .

in 2012 , public debate intensified in the united states over whether unrwa was perpetuating the refugee issue by providing services to descendants of the original palestinian refugees from 1948 .

that year , the senate appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs approved a reporting requirement in connection with fy2013 appropriations ( s.rept .

112-172 ) that , if enacted , would have required the secretary of state to differentiate between the original 1948 refugees and their descendants .

in a letter to the subcommittee , the state department objected , asserting that this requirement would be "viewed around the world as the united states acting to prejudge and determine the outcome of this sensitive issue. .

another subcommittee report ( s.rept .

113-81 ) , associated with the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , required the state department to fulfill the reporting requirement from s.rept .

112-172 .

the state department produced a classified version of the report in 2015 , and a declassified , partially redacted version became publicly accessible in july 2018 .

regarding this issue , unrwa officials insisted that established "principles and practice — as well as realities on the ground — clearly refuted the argument that the right of return of palestine refugees would disappear or be abandoned if unhcr [instead of unrwa] were responsible for these refugees. .

as part of the public debate , some observers asserted that the unhcr definition for refugees was different from the unrwa definition .

the 2015 state department report contained the following passage: considering descendants of refugees as refugees , and providing them with aid and services , is not unique to palestinian refugees .

in protracted refugee situations , refugee groups experience natural population growth over time .

the un high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) and unrwa both recognize descendants of refugees as refugees for purposes of their operations .

for example , unhcr recognizes descendants of refugees as refugees in populations including , but not limited to , the tibetan refugee population of india and nepal , the burmese refugee population in thailand , the bhutanese refugee population in nepal , the afghan population in pakistan , and the somali population in kenya .

