since embarking on a road of free market reforms nearly three decades ago , china has been one of the world's fastest growing economies .

the actual size of china's economy has been a subject of extensive debate among economists .

china reports that its 2005 gross domestic product ( gdp ) was 18.4 trillion yuan .

using average annual nominal exchange rates ( at 8.2 yuan per dollar ) yields $2.2 trillion , equal to less than one - fifth the size of the u.s. economy .

china's per capita gdp ( a common measurement of living standards ) in nominal dollars was $1,761 , or 4.2% of u.s. levels .

these data would indicate that china's economy and living standards in 2005 were vastly below u.s. levels .

however , economists contend that these figures are very misleading .

first , nominal exchange rates only reflect the price of currencies in international markets , which can vary greatly over time .

secondly , some exchange rate mechanisms , such as between the dollar and the chinese yuan , may be significantly distorted by foreign government intervention .

finally , nominal gdp data fail to reflect differences in prices that exist across nations .

surveys indicate that prices in developing countries ( such as china ) are generally much lower than they are in developed countries ( such as the united states and japan ) , especially for non - traded goods and services .

thus , a measurement of a developing country's gdp expressed in nominal u.s. dollars will likely understate ( often significantly ) the actual level of goods and services that gdp can buy domestically .

economists have attempted to factor in national price differentials by using a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) measurement , which converts foreign currencies into a common currency ( usually the u.s. dollar ) on the basis of the actual purchasing power of those currencies ( based on surveys of the prices of various goods and services ) in each respective country .

in other words , the ppp data attempt to determine how much local currency ( yuan , for example ) would be needed to purchase a comparable level of goods and services in the united states per u.s. dollar .

this "ppp exchange rate" is then used to convert foreign economic data in national currencies into u.s. dollars .

one of the largest ppp projects in the world is the international comparison program ( icp ) , which is coordinated by the world bank .

the icp collects price data on more than 1,000 goods and services in 146 countries and territories ( and makes estimates of 39 others ) .

prior to december 2007 , data from the icp and various private economic forecasting firms all seemed to agree that china's economy , measured on a ppp basis , was close to $9 trillion in 2005 , ranking it as the world's second - largest economy , after the united states .

based on these estimates , and projections of continued rapid economic growth , many analysts predicted that china's economy would surpass that of the united states within a few years .

such projections helped fuel the growing debate over whether china posed an economic threat to the united states .

however , newly revised ppp data released by the world bank in december 2007 purport to show that china's economy in 2005 was 40% smaller than previously estimated .

the icp's previous 2005 ppp estimate of china's gdp ( hereinafter referred to as icp 1 ) at $8.8 trillion fell to $5.3 trillion ( down by $3.3 trillion ) under the icp revision ( hereinafter referred to as icp 2 revision ) .

in addition , china's per capita gdp on a ppp basis dropped from $6,765 to $4,091 ( see table 1 ) .

the size of china's gdp relative to that of the united states fell from 71.3% under icp 1 to 43.1% under icp 2 revision , while per capita gdp relative to the united states dropped from 16.2% to 9.8% .

finally , the new revision decreased china's 2005 share of world gdp from 14.2% to 9.7% ( the u.s. share rose from 20.5% to 22.5% ) .

according to the icp , the major difference between the old and new estimates of china's economy is that the latter reflects , for the first time , the inclusion of recent price survey data provided by china .

previously , the icp estimated china's ppp data based on a 1986 comparative survey of prices in the united states and china and subsequent extrapolations of that data .

icp 2 revision significantly increased price level estimates within china's economy .

the new data estimated that chinese prices were on average 42% of u.s. levels ( compared to 26% under the previous estimate ) , which is reflected in the change in the estimate of china's ppp exchange rate from 2.1 yuan to the dollar to 3.4 .

the revised data indicate it will likely take many more years than previously thought before china's gdp and living standards reach u.s. levels .

although china's access to assistance and loans from international development agencies may be unaltered by the icp ppp revision , the data may directly or indirectly effect china's economic policies and its attitudes in international trade discussions .

china may attempt to use the ppp revisions to boost its claim that it is a "poor" country and that , given its development needs and large numbers of people living in poverty , it should not be pressed to adopt economic reforms ( such as changes to its currency policy ) that could prove disruptive , or be expected to adopt policies that slow its economy , such as curtailing its energy use in response to international concerns over global climate change .

as a recent article in the economist put it , "china would probably be quite happy to see its gdp revised down , hoping that america might stop picking on a smaller , poorer economy. .

in february 2008 , the world bank stated that the icp's revised estimate of china's ppp exchange rate data would affect its estimates of poverty levels in china , based on the daily cost of basic needs ( estimated at roughly $1 ppp ) and household surveys on consumption .

the bank estimates that the new ppp revisions would raise the estimated poverty rate in china in 2004 from 10% to 13-17% , or an increase from 130 million to between 169 to 221 million .

thus , previous estimates may have underestimated the number of chinese living in poverty by up to 91 million people .

regardless of how china seeks to present the overall status of its economic development , commentators are speculating on the possible implications of the smaller gdp estimate of china for its socio - economic situation and policies , including: china ' s political stability may be weaker than previously thought — in the past , dissatisfaction with china's economic condition has lead to public unrest ( eg — spring 1989 ) .

the rising number of protests and demonstrations over the last few years may reflect , in part , the dissatisfaction of china's poor with their lack of economic progress .

a 2005 article in people ' s daily described china's growing income disparity as a "yellow alert" that could become a "red alert" in five years if the government failed to take proper actions .

a 2005 united nations report stated that the income gap between the urban and rural areas was among the highest in the world and warned that this gap threatened social stability .

the report urged china to take greater steps to improve conditions for the rural poor , and bolster education , health care , and the social security system .

the new ppp measurement may increase pressure within china to expand efforts to promote development in the rural areas where over 800 million people reside .

according to a recent article in the atlantic monthly , some chinese question why the government does not use its massive foreign exchange reserves to help alleviate poverty and respond to increasing income disparities across the country , rather than invest those funds overseas assets , such as in u.s. treasuries .

such a reallocation of china's investment portfolio might have repercussions for the u.s. economy .

lower prospects for democracy — prior to the release of the icp revision report , some analysts had speculated that , once china reached a certain level of economic development and possessed a large and educated middle class , it would follow the examples of taiwan and south korea and begin to institute democratic reforms .

the lower estimate of china's economy and living standards may dampen expectations in the west that china might soon move to adopt political reforms .

lower commitment to market reforms and trade liberalization — in an effort to reduce income disparities and improve conditions for china's poor , there may be a return to some of the "command economy" methods of the past .

the recent decision to impose strict price controls on basic food items and other household necessities might be seen as a temporary retreat from market reforms .

finally , the icp study may also alter how the u.s. government and the u.s. business community perceive china .

the possible new view of china includes: reevaluation of the chinese government ' s budget — the ppp data may affect how u.s. policymakers evaluate china's spending levels on policies that affect u.s. policy .

for example , the u.s. defense department's annual report on china's military spending includes conversions of china's budget data by the chinese people's liberation army ( pla ) from nominal u.s. dollars into ppp levels .

the report estimated the pla's 2003 budget in $30.6 billion in nominal dollars and $141 billion on a ppp basis .

the world banks's ppp revision could significantly decrease this estimate and other measurements of chinese military spending as well as various public spending programs .

smaller export market potential — as a senior fellow at the council on foreign relations wrote , "u.s. businesses and entrepreneurs hoping to crack the chinese and indian markets must come to terms with a middle class that is significantly smaller than thought .

companies with growth plans tied to the indian and chinese markets could face disappointing results. .

however , it is important to note the limitations of ppp estimates of gdp — and where and when they provide useful insight in economic analysis .

although the estimated size of china's economy decreases under the ppp revisions , other aspects on china's economy remain significantly large .

for example , trade and international financial data are generally unaffected by the reduction in china's ppp gdp .

it is estimated that in 2007 , china overtook the united states to become the world's second - largest exporter ( after the european union ) .

similarly , in 2006 china was the world's fifth - largest recipient of foreign direct investment , the largest steel producer , the second - largest consumer of oil , and by some accounts , the largest emitter of carbon dioxide ( co2 ) .

in addition , since 2006 , china has been the world's largest holder of foreign exchange reserves ( $1.5 trillion at the end of 2007 ) .

thus , despite the icp results , china remains a major trade and economic power and a major potential global player in international finances and investment flows .

