the popular russian president vladimir putin — in his second and constitutionally - limited final term in office — was faced in 2007 with the decision of either stepping down at the expiration of his second term or with abolishing constitutional term limits .

after he announced in april 2005 that he would not change the constitution , a period of political uncertainty set in that lasted until december 10 , 2007 , when putin publically endorsed his first deputy prime minister , dmitriy medvedev ( pronounced dee - mee - tree mehd - vyed - yehf ) , as his choice to be the next president .

both putin and medvedev reassured russians that the "putin plan" would continue , and russians received further assurances a few days later when putin accepted medvedev's request to serve as prime minister under a medvedev presidency .

medvedev had become better known by russians after putin appointed him first deputy prime minister in late 2005 and tasked him with implementing various high - budget "national projects" to implement social service and other reforms .

medvedev had long served under putin during the latter's rise to power , and since 2000 medvedev also held the chairmanship of gazprom — the world's largest gas firm — to ensure government control over its operations .

he had never run for elective office .

four candidates were able to register for the march 2 , 2008 , presidential election .

three of the four candidates — medvedev , gennadiy zyuganov , and vladimir zhirinovskiy — were nominated by parties with seats in the duma .

according to the election rules , other prospective candidates had to gather two million signatures of support within a few weeks .

one prospective self - nominated candidate , well - known oppositionist mikhail kasyanov , was denied registration , after repeated examinations of his signature lists by the central electoral commission ( cec ) alleged a higher - than - permitted number of invalid signatures .

oppositionist garry kasparov alleged that his united civil front group was repeatedly turned down in its attempts to rent halls for a meeting to nominate him as its candidate .

oppositionist boris nemtsov , nominated by the union of right forces party , received approval from the cec on december 22 , 2007 , to gather signatures , but he ended his campaign four days later , stating that the government had predetermined who would be president .

a prospective candidate from the tiny pro - putin democratic party , the little - known andrey bogdanov , was able to gather two million signatures and was approved as a candidate .

medvedev refused to debate the other candidates , "whose programs ... obviously have no chance of being implemented. .

debates between the other candidates often were broadcast only late at night or early morning .

the russian non - governmental organization golos ( "voice" ) concluded that in many regions where its representatives carried out pre - election monitoring , medvedev received overwhelming television coverage .

zyuganov and zhirinovskiy filed several complaints with the courts alleging unequal coverage by state television , which appeared to spur slightly more coverage for zyuganov .

among the main events during the campaign were long - term development programs set out by putin at a state council ( a presidential advisory body composed of regional governors ) meeting on february 8 , 2008 and by medvedev at an economic forum in the city of krasnoyarsk on february 15 .

both speeches juxtaposed the economic and political disorder of the 1990s to present - day stability and prosperity , and called for further health , education , and other reforms through the year 2020 .

medvedev's speech was viewed by some observers in russia as more liberal in tone than putin's , although both mostly covered similar topics .

medvedev highlighted reforms to the judicial system as a "key priority" to make the courts "genuinely independent from the executive and legislative branches of power. .

he called for "protect[ing] the real independence of the media," to enable them to expose corruption and provide for free expression .

he lamented that "the state itself often fails to protect [private] ownership rights," and asserted that "respect for private property must become one of the pillars upon which the state's policy is built. .

he stated that economic development requires that all citizens have equal access to healthcare , education and other social support .

he also called for giving "more people the possibility of ... acquiring their own home and land," so that a large middle class eventually may be created .

according to the final report of the central electoral commission ( cec ) , medvedev won 70.28% of almost 75 million votes cast , very similar to ( but slightly less than ) the percentage of the vote received by putin in the 2004 presidential election ( 71.31% ) .

some observers suggested that zyuganov benefitted from his runner - up results , since he gained a greater percentage of the vote than the communist party — which he heads — received in the december 2007 duma election .

zhirinovskiy benefitted too , according to this thinking , because he also received a higher percentage than his party received in the duma election .

bogdanov , on the other hand , appeared to have secured fewer votes than the number of spoiled ballots and less than one - half of the votes he might have expected if those who signed his voter registration petitions had later voted for him .

he conceded defeat quickly and expressed the view that the election had been conducted properly .

zhirinovskiy's representative on the cec reportedly stated that the results reflected the will of the people , and zhirinovskiy pledged that his party would support the new president .

zyuganov claimed that election "rigging" had probably denied him an extra 5% - 10% of the vote .

the organization for security and cooperation in europe's office of democratic institutions and human rights ( osce odihr ) declined to monitor the russian presidential election because of russian government restrictions on its proposed work ( it had similarly declined to monitor the december 2007 legislative election ) .

a small 22-member monitoring group from the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe ( pace ) concluded that the election "had more the character of a plebiscite" on putin's rule than a competitive election , but that medvedev was given "a solid mandate ... by the majority of russians. .

the monitors raised concerns that an onerous registration process for independent candidates and uneven media coverage contributed to a electoral process that was not free and fair .

a pre - election report by pace also criticized medvedev's decision not to engage in debates .

u.s. analyst michael mcfaul termed the election "the least competitive election in russia's post - communist history. .

amendments to the electoral legislation in 2005 banned electoral observers from non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , permitting only representatives of the candidates and of media to observe voting .

however , golos sent its "press correspondents" as observers to hundreds of voting precincts , although they were blocked from monitoring in some localities .

besides medvedev , only zyuganov mounted a serious monitoring effort , sending representatives to about 58% of polling stations , according to golos .

golos monitors witnessed local government officials at the premises of most territorial electoral commissions during vote counting .

in his congratulations to medvedev , putin on march 3 stated that the duo would start to restructure the government even before medvedev's inauguration , planned for may 7 .

putin also asked medvedev to immediately assume leadership over the state council .

medvedev in turn stated that the election results were an endorsement of putin's policies and a mandate for the duo to continue them "for years to come. .

putin immediately convened a cabinet meeting and directed the ministries to work out detailed plans as early as may to implement the 2020 development goals .

he also called for the ministries to "immediately submit concrete proposals" on carrying out national project goals on urban policy , agricultural lands , and social sector reforms .

he called for plans to promote finished goods processing of natural resources , to strengthen the home mortgage system and banking system , and to streamline rules for setting up and running small businesses .

he reminded the ministers that he recently had ordered increases in various social benefits , and stated that revenues must be found to cover these expenses .

some observers suggest that putin will retain the levers of power and medvedev will be a "ceremonial" president .

putin himself asserted on february 14 that he would have substantial constitutional powers as a prime minister , including "formulating ... and presenting budgets to the legislature , formulating ... monetary and credit policy , tackling social , health care , educational and environmental issues , creating conditions to ensure the country's defense capability ... and carrying out foreign economic policies... .

there are enough powers [for me]. .

these observers also speculate that medvedev was chosen with the expectation that he would not touch the personal assets of — or otherwise reverse policies benefitting — the putin - era "siloviki" ( literally , "strong ones," referring to many of putin's associates with ties to the security agencies ) .

other observers argue that since medvedev prevailed during in - fighting in the kremlin , he may well have a strong will as president .

they predict that , just as putin moved against some of the so - called oligarchs late in his first term in office , medvedev also may move slowly to assert himself vis - à - vis the "siloviki. .

a few analysts suggest that the power - sharing arrangement with putin may prove workable and may bolster possible democratization .

russian analyst dmitriy trenin argues that if putin strengthens the ministerial system vis - à - vis the presidency , other institutions may also attempt to garner some autonomy , such as the legislature and the judicial system , creating a better balance of powers between these institutions .

the election also may have strengthened the constitutional norm of two presidential terms .

putin asserted on february 14 that he would hold the prime ministership as long as he felt he was meeting his own objectives and as long as medvedev was president , apparently not considering that he and medvedev would ever clash or that medvedev would exercise his constitutional power to dismiss the prime minister .

alexander voloshin , putin's former chief of staff , has predicted that the two leaders will eventually clash , even if only because of the different institutions they head .

some observers have raised concerns that inter - bureaucratic clashes will come to paralyze the government .

a few have even warned that during a similar period of dual power centers in 1993 , then - president boris yeltsin used military forces to defeat a strong legislative speaker .

medvedev faces several domestic problems at the outset of his presidency .

it may be hard for medvedev to build on or sustain the economic boom that occurred during most of putin's presidency , since the world economy may be facing problems and the russian economy needs restructuring .

rising inflation is one pressing economic concern .

other domestic problems include increasing terrorism and civil disorder in the north caucasus area .

an approved opposition march was held in st. petersburg on march 3 , but a similar unsanctioned demonstration in moscow the same day was forcibly dispersed , perhaps a troubling sign after the election .

instead , moscow officials sanctioned a large march by the pro - putin nashi ( "ours" ) youth group , which picketed the u.s. embassy to protest alleged western meddling in russia's affairs .

medvedev has not traveled extensively abroad or had extended responsibility for foreign affairs within the putin administration .

on march 3 , he announced that he would focus on foreign policy .

he has accepted invitations to visit belarus , turkmenistan , venezuela , and germany .

some international problems may have ameliorated recently , providing medvedev with some breathing room , including russia's vote in the un security council on march 3 favoring new sanctions against iranian uranium enrichment and possibly improved relations with georgia .

however , among the first international issues confronting the president - elect , medvedev on march 4 urged ukrainian president viktor yushchenko to quickly pay the country's gas debt .

before the russian election , president bush stated that he and a future u.s. president should work to have a personal relationship with a new russian president , "a trustworthy relationship , to be able to disagree and yet maintain common interests in other areas. .

areas of common u.s. - russian interest , bush stated , include non - proliferation and iranian nuclear issues .

he wondered who would represent russia at the next group of 8 summit ( g8 ; conclave of major industrial democracies ) , appearing to oppose calls by some u.s. observers to oust russia from the g8 .

on march 4 , president bush called medvedev to urge the continuation of cooperation on counter - terrorism , counter - proliferation , transnational crime , and other issues , and reportedly stated that he had "read with interest" medvedev's campaign commitments on human rights , independent media , the rule of law , and combating corruption .

issues on which the united states and russia disagree include u.s. missile defenses in eastern europe , kosovo's independence , and nato enlargement .

putin on february 14 , 2008 , threatened to consider targeting poland and the czech republic if they move forward with hosting elements of u.s. intermediate ballistic missile defenses , and to target ukraine if it joins nato .

medvedev visited serbia in february 2008 and backed its opposition to independence for kosovo .

medvedev's chairmanship of gazprom heavily involved economic relations with europe , so medvedev is likely to continue to focus on such ties , including by influencing the future chairman .

some observers stress that gazprom has acted as a trusted agent of the putin government in using energy as a political weapon , and that this probably will not change under medvedev .

signs of such a continued policy include gazprom's reduction of gas supplies to ukraine on march 3 .

more broadly , german chancellor angela merkel met with medvedev and putin in moscow on march 8 and reportedly suggested that "there will be continuity" in russia's relations with the west , and that "i do not think that the controversies [in relations] will just disappear. .

other observers argue that medvedev may work toward better energy and other ties with europe .

some observers suggest that medvedev's reformist statements and career might augur his eventual emergence as a reformist president of russia and to improved u.s. - russia ties .

russian analyst alexey pushkov argues that u.s. policy analysts erroneously have focused on the possible negative ramifications of increased authoritarianism in russia under putin , rather than on russia's growing economic stability .

others are less sanguine .

andrey illarionov , putin's former economic advisor , calls russia a unique historical "siloviki dictatorship," and argues that medvedev has used his legal background to reverse democratization in the country .

he warns that recent russian actions such as cyber attacks on estonia , the radiation poisoning of alexander litvinenko in england , and the closure of the british council offices in russia are typical of such a regime .

