the constitutional transfer of power and authority from an incumbent american president to a successor is a momentous occasion in american government .

in the present day , this transfer of authority is a complex and multifaceted undertaking , as the outgoing administration concludes its affairs and the incoming administration gets organized .

in recent decades , presidential transition activities have begun informally months before the general election ; the major candidates usually have asked individuals or small groups to begin to formulate transition plans in the event of an electoral victory .

preparations generally have accelerated after the election , as the attention of the president - elect and his supporters has turned from campaigning to governing .

the president - elect and his team have approximately 11 weeks between election day and inauguration day to organize the new administration , and to make plans for pursuing its policy agenda .

the incoming president must also prepare to assume national security and homeland security responsibilities from the incumbent — among a host of other duties and expectations .

while a formal transition process is essential to ensure continuity in the conduct of the affairs of the executive branch , the concept of a federally funded , institutionalized transition process is relatively new .

before enactment of the pta in 1964 , the methods for transferring information and responsibility between administrations were developed in an ad hoc fashion .

in addition , the political party organization of the incoming president was the primary source of funding for transition expenses .

many facets of presidential transitions continue to be developed anew , according to the preferences and priorities of each outgoing and , in particular , each incoming president .

now , however , the pta provides a basic framework for funding and support of this process .

from enactment of the pta in 1964 through the presidential transition of 2008-2009 , most pta - authorized support was provided after the election of the incoming president and vice president .

in the years since , congress has expanded support for the presidential transition process to include authorization and funding for pre - election activities and support .

the pre - election presidential transition act of 2010 amended the pta and included several other provisions to provide additional support to eligible candidates for pre - election transition planning .

these provisions had effect for the first time during the 2012 presidential election .

the edward "ted" kaufman and michael leavitt presidential transitions improvements act of 2015 ( ptia ) — enacted on march 18 , 2016 — incorporated some provisions of the 2010 law , with modifications , into the pta .

it also further amended the pta with provisions for pre - election transition support for presidential candidates .

since the pta was passed in 1964 , the funding authorized for its implementation has grown .

as originally enacted , the pta authorized funding not to exceed $900,000 for any one transition "for carrying out the purposes" of the act .

in 1976 , this provision was amended to authorize "not more than $2,000,000 ... for the purposes of providing services and facilities to the president - elect and vice president - elect" and "not more than $1,000,000 ... for the purposes of providing services and facilities to the former president and former vice president. .

in 1988 , this provision was amended once again , and the authorized amounts were increased to $3.5 million and $1.5 million , respectively .

the 1988 amendments also directed that the "amounts authorized to be appropriated [by these provisions] be increased by an inflation adjusted amount , based on increases in the cost of transition services and expenses which have occurred in the years following the most recent presidential transition. .

section 4 of the pre - election transition act of 2010 authorized "such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions" of that act .

a general provision of the pta authorizes the general services administration ( gsa ) administrator ( administrator ) to spend pta - authorized funds for the provision of most of the specified "services and facilities ... in connection with ... obligations incurred by the president - elect or vice - president - elect" between the day following the general election and 180 days after the inauguration .

as discussed in detail below , a number of exceptions to this general provision authorize expenditures for specified pre - election transition - related services and facilities for "eligible candidates. .

the president - elect , vice president - elect , or eligible candidate ( as defined below ) may designate an assistant to act on his or her behalf in connection with the support provided by the administrator under the pta .

up to 10% of the expenditures under the pta may be made upon certification by the president - elect , vice president - elect , or the designated assistant "that such expenditures are classified and are essential to the national security," and that they are consistent with pta provisions .

appointees: the pta recommends that the president - elect submit the "names of candidates for high level national security positions through the level of undersecretary of cabinet departments" to the agency with national security clearance functions .

it further recommends that this action be taken as soon as possible after the presidential election , and it requires the responsible agency or agencies to carry out background investigations of these candidates for high - level national security positions "as expeditiously as possible ... before the date of the inauguration. .

transition team members: a separate transition - related provision of law that is not included in the pta is worth noting here .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 included a provision that facilitates pre - election security clearances for transition team members .

this provision , which was amended by the pre - election presidential transition act of 2010 , allows each eligible candidate to submit , before the general election , security clearance requests for "prospective transition team members who will have a need for access to classified information" in the course of their work .

the law directs that resulting investigations and eligibility determinations "to permit appropriate prospective transition team members to have access to classified information shall be completed , to the fullest extent practicable , by the day after the date of the general election. .

the pta requires that the president - elect and vice president - elect disclose certain financial and personnel information as a condition for receiving services and funds under the act .

they must disclose to the administrator "the date of contribution , source , amount , and expenditure thereof" of all non - federal funds ( such as private contributions ) received before or after the general election , "for use in the preparation of the president - elect or vice - president - elect for the assumption of [their] official duties. .

they must submit a report with such disclosures to the administrator not later than 30 days after inauguration ; these disclosures are then to be released to the public by the administrator .

in addition , the pta requires , as a condition for receiving services and funds , that the president - elect and vice - president - elect "make available to the administrator and the comptroller general all information concerning such contributions" as may be required for "auditing both the public and private funding" used in pta - authorized activities .

as noted earlier , the pta also sets limitations on transition - related donations as a condition for receiving services and funds under the act .

under these limitations , the president - elect and vice president - elect "shall not accept more than $5,000 from any person , organization , or other entity for the purposes of carrying out activities authorized by" the pta .

the pta also requires that the incoming team disclose to the public ( 1 ) "the names and most recent employment of all transition personnel ... who are members of the president - elect or vice - president - elect's federal department or agency transition teams" ; and ( 2 ) "information regarding the sources of funding which support the transition activities of each transition team member. .

these disclosures , which must be kept up to date , are to be completed before the team contacts applicable departments or agencies .

