the nato summit in riga , latvia , on november 28-29 , 2006 , focused primarily on consolidation of support for existing initiatives .

above all , key allies sought to ensure that member states demonstrate the political will to provide the troops and financing necessary to bring afghanistan to stability , expected to require five years or more .

closely associated with the nato mission in afghanistan was a discussion of military capabilities .

nato's "transformation" involves policies intended to enhance capabilities , develop multinational initiatives and cooperation to solve or deter international conflicts , and find funding mechanisms to ensure an appropriate sharing of the burden among member and partner states .

a third theme of the summit was the evolving role of partnerships .

some allies have doubts about new rounds of enlargement ; partnerships are in part a means to develop closer association with non - member governments that play a substantial role in the international community .

the effort to stabilize afghanistan is nato's most important mission .

nato's international security assistance force ( isaf ) , in place since 2003 , now covers the entire country .

its mission is to subdue a resurgent taliban and provide a secure environment where economic reconstruction and good governance can take hold .

the u.s. - led operation enduring freedom ( oef ) is a separate , counter - terror operation in afghanistan that is attempting to eradicate al qaeda remnants .

the allies believe that the isaf mission is central to the effort to "transform" the alliance in an era of new global threats such as terrorism and proliferation .

although isaf's core is nato member states , the mission has a distinctly broader international signature , as it operates under a u.n. resolution and includes important non - nato states such as australia and japan .

"transformation" also involves new capabilities , such as more deployable forces , and multinational formations using advanced communications and combat technologies , all evident in afghanistan .

there is a growing sense of anxiety in the alliance about afghanistan's future .

a taliban insurgency is underway at a time when public support for the government of president hamid karzai appears to be waning due to corruption and ineffective policies .

for nato , some observers believe that there is an inherent tension in simultaneously undertaking a combat mission and a stabilization and reconstruction effort .

nato secretary general de hoop scheffer has said that "there is no military solution .

the answer is development , nation - building of roads , schools. .

he has repeatedly urged international donors to meet their pledges of assistance .

the central element of isaf's stabilization effort is the provincial reconstruction team ( prt ) , of which nato operates 24 around the country .

prts consist of civil - military teams that provide security and undertake reconstruction projects , such as the building of roads and hospitals .

in addition , they support regional officials sent by the karzai government to extend the authority of kabul .

the success of isaf may depend upon the ability of the karzai government , and its successors , to develop good governance in a country that has long known corruption , violent tribal competition for territory and resources , and minimal central authority .

afghanistan's vigorous and growing narcotics trade , centered around poppy farms and heroin production , is an additional factor that the international community must overcome to stabilize the country .

nato currently has 37,000 troops in isaf ( of which approximately 17,000 are from the united states ) , the bulk of whom are in the south fighting a taliban and warlord insurgency .

nato commanders have asked member states for more troops to quell the insurgency , but governments have been reluctant to send more combat troops in part due to public concern over casualties , which have been increasing , and over availability of troops , as some governments such as italy and france have substantial contingents committed to peace operations in lebanon , kosovo , and elsewhere .

national "caveats" are impeding isaf's mission .

some governments place strictures on how and where their forces may be used .

for example , the german parliament prohibits the country's isaf contingent from going outside relatively stable northern afghanistan , where they are located ; they cannot be used in more restive parts of the country .

some governments restrict the use of certain types of equipment at night .

there is also no mobile isaf emergency force in afghanistan able to move rapidly around the country to reinforce troops wherever violence flares .

at the summit , france and italy lifted their caveats ; their forces may now fight where needed in afghanistan .

timeliness , however , remains an issue .

if there is an urgent need for such forces , will the french or italian commander first call paris or rome to obtain permission to move their forces into harm's way ? .

germany refused to lift its caveats .

nato has operations in other distant theaters that are testing the allies' political will and military capabilities .

kfor ( kosovo force ) in kosovo has been in place since 1999 .

under a u.n. imprimatur , kfor is charged with maintaining a secure environment , supporting an international civil administration , and controlling ethnic violence .

the international community is seeking to resolve kosovo's final status , likely to be a form of independence from serbia , but any solution is unlikely to be fully embraced by the kosovo albanians and the serb minority .

in such circumstances , nato forces , now numbering 17,000 , may remain in some form for a period of time .

nato has other operations as well .

nato supports the african union mission in darfur to protect refugees with assistance in training , logistics , and intelligence .

the allies have a small training mission inside and outside iraq for that country's military officers .

one other mission , active endeavor , is a counter - terror effort in the mediterranean that controls shipping traffic in the search for weapons of mass destruction .

at riga , the allies declared the nato response force ( nrf ) fully operational .

the nrf has 20,000-25,000 soldiers , supplied on rotation by member governments , in a high - readiness state .

the nrf is an insertion force , able to reach its destination within 5-30 days .

one of its key characteristics is flexibility ; nato can create nrf packages sized , for example , for humanitarian assistance , naval operations , or high intensity conflict on land .

the allies did not resolve the issue of what types of missions the nrf should engage ; some believe that it should be used only for combat ; others favor such missions as humanitarian assistance .

the nrf has brought to the forefront the emerging issue of how to fund nato operations .

nato now operates under the principle of "costs lie where they fall," meaning that governments that send troops to an operation pay for their own troops .

because spain was leading the nrf on rotation during the pakistani earthquake , madrid bore costs substantially disproportionate to those of other allied governments .

the current system of paying for operations is therefore a disincentive for some governments to participate .

in addition , some nato members , such as iceland , luxembourg , and belgium , have no or minimal armed forces ; larger states tend to bear much of the burden for operations .

the bush administration and several other allies have proposed that all governments bear a proportional cost of operations , and that some equipment be bought and maintained jointly by the alliance .

at riga , the allies were unable to agree to common funding for the nrf .

in september 2006 , fourteen allies , including the united states , joined to form a "strategic airlift capability" ( sac ) and pledged to buy four large transport planes—the boeing c - 17—in 2007 .

nato operations have long been in need of sufficient air transport , and the joint funding effort is a considerable step towards meeting that need .

at riga , the allies launched an initiative to develop a core of available special operations forces ( sof ) , which they might call upon for operations .

nato is attempting to build forces for irregular , counter - insurgency warfare , for which sof are well - suited .

sof are heavily utilized , for example , in afghanistan .

joint use of such forces can be difficult , given the differing signatures that different governments give such units .

as part of nato's "transformation," the allies are engaging countries that see similar threats and have the political will to contribute to security .

this development is in part the result of the emergence of terrorism and wmd proliferation as global threats , and in part the result of concerted action by the alliance to persuade non - member governments that there is much to be gained from closer consultation and joint operations .

u.s. officials wish to see nato become "a platform for allies to work together to meet common needs," in concert with international organizations such as the u.n. and the eu , and non - member states .

this effort is most evident in afghanistan , where non - member states such as australia , new zealand , and japan have contributed forces or lead provincial reconstruction teams .

it is also evident in nato's operation active endeavor , the counter - terror and counter - proliferation operation in the mediterranean noted above .

not all nato governments are enthusiastic about the partnership program .

some governments , for example , wish to limit israel's association with nato .

they rule out the possibility of contemplating eventual membership for israel in the alliance as long as the arab - israeli conflict endures .

some governments also believe that the idea of advanced partnerships brings israel and some partnership for peace states with authoritarian governments , such as kazakhstan , too close to the alliance .

some also believe that the partnership program dilutes the "atlantic" nature of the alliance .

there was a surprise development in the partnership for peace program at riga .

the bush administration had long opposed serbia's entry into pfp , until belgrade sends accused war criminals from the kosovo conflict to the hague for trial .

however , president bush reportedly answered an appeal from serbian leadership to admit serbia to pfp as a way to mitigate any potential popular response should kosovo soon gain independence .

the eu retains its prohibition against serbian associate status .

some critics believe that the riga summit accomplished little , other than consolidation of existing initiatives .

member governments' forces are clearly stretched , given nato operations in afghanistan , kosovo , and darfur , and non - nato european - led operations in africa and lebanon .

enhancement of capabilities , development of the concept of partnership , and extensive training missions in a range of non - member states have absorbed resources and energy .

in addition , more attention to political discussions is evident at nato: the allies meet with energy specialists to explore enhancement of energy security , and routinely discuss the threats posed by iran and north korea .

energy security is clearly an emerging issue in the alliance .

protection of vulnerable pipelines in such countries as nigeria and kazakhstan or escorting oil tankers in time of conflict are matters under discussion among several allied governments .

senator lugar has proposed that energy security become an article v mission .

congress held a broad range of hearings in the 109 th congress on nato issues , such as the conflict in afghanistan , nato partnerships , capabilities , and political will in the alliance to counter the threats of terrorism and proliferation .

such oversight hearings are again likely in the 110 th congress .

in particular , it is possible that congress will debate the level of u.s. and allied forces in afghanistan , and what types of financial and developmental assistance are necessary to stabilize the country .

nato and energy security remains an emerging issue .

senator lugar and others introduced a bill , s. 2435 , on energy security in march 2006 .

hearings were held , and there may be similar interest in such a bill in the 110 th congress .

in addition , he introduced a bill on nato enlargement , the "nato freedom consolidation act of 2006," s. 4014 , which passed the senate .

no action was taken in the house .

as noted above in the discussion of enlargement , two bills are now before congress on the issue .

