unemployment compensation ( uc ) is a joint federal - state program and is financed by federal taxes under the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) and by state payroll taxes .

the underlying framework of the uc system is contained in the social security act: title iii authorizes grants to states for the administration of state uc laws ; title ix authorizes the various components of the federal utf ; and title xii authorizes advances or loans to insolvent state uc programs .

among its 59 accounts , the federal utf in the u.s. treasury includes the employment security administration account ( esaa ) , the extended unemployment compensation account ( euca ) , and the federal unemployment account ( fua ) ; 53 state accounts ; the federal employees compensation account ; and two accounts related to the railroad retirement board .

federal unemployment taxes are placed in the esaa , the euca , and the fua ; each state's unemployment taxes are placed in the appropriate state's account .

in law , the term reed act refers to a part of the employment security financing act of 1954 , p.l .

83-567 .

this legislation amended titles ix and xii of the social security act ( ssa ) and established the basic structure of the utf .

the amendments to title ix , among other things , provided for the transfer of excess funds in the federal portion of the utf to the individual state accounts under certain conditions .

in practice , there have been two forms of reed act distributions .

the first form , regular reed act distributions , follows the terms as set forth in the reed act .

the second type , special reed act distributions , distributes some of the federal utf funds to the states where these special distributions may follow some but not all of the conditions set by the reed act .

the 1998-2002 reed act distributions were special distributions .

federal law restricts states to using reed act distributions only to cover the cost of state benefits , employment services ( es ) , labor market information , and administration of state uc and es programs .

suggested uses by the department of labor included establishing revolving funds for uc and es automation costs , uc and es performance improvement , costs related to reducing uc fraud and abuse , and improvement in uc claims filing and payment methods .

an appropriation by the state's legislature is necessary before the state's share of this distribution may be used for uc and es administrative expenses .

funds may not be used to extend a temporary unemployment benefit such as the emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program .

under futa , the federal tax on employers finances the states' administrative costs of uc and loans to states with insolvent uc programs .

state uc payroll taxes finance the costs of regular uc benefits .

the extended benefits program is funded 50% by the federal government and 50% by the states , but the 2009 stimulus package ( p.l .

111-5 §2005 ) as amended temporarily provides for 100% federal funding of this program through march 7 , 2012 .

under futa , employers pay a federal tax of 6.0% on wages of up to $7,000 a year paid to each worker .

the law , however , provides a credit against federal tax liability of up to 5.4% to employers who pay state taxes in a timely manner .

accordingly , in states meeting the specified requirements , employers pay an effective federal tax of 0.6% , or a maximum of $42 per covered worker , per year .

at the end of the federal fiscal year , on september 30 th , the net balance of the esaa is determined .

if the amount in this account exceeds 40% of the prior year's appropriation by congress , then an "excess" balance exists .

this excess balance is transferred first to the euca .

when that account reaches its statutory maximum , the remaining excess balance is transferred to the fua .

when all three accounts are at their statutory maximums , any remaining excess balance is distributed to the accounts of the states in the utf based on each state's share of u.s. covered wages .

these distributions are called reed act distributions .

reed act distributions occurred in 1956 through 1958 and 1998 through 2002 .

table 1 lists the distributions .

the most recent reed act distribution that was a regular and not a special reed act distribution was $15.9 million and occurred in 1998 .

the balanced budget act ( bba ) of 1997 , p.l .

105-33 , limited the reed act distributions for the 1999 to 2001 period to special distributions of $100 million each year .

any amounts in excess of the $100 million that — absent the bba amendments — would have been transferred to the states "shall , as of the beginning of the succeeding fiscal year , accrue to the federal unemployment account , without regard" to its statutory limit .

in march 2002 , the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 , p.l .

107-147 , provided for a one - time special reed act distribution of up to $8 billion to state accounts in the utf , where the funds were distributed based upon the formula used for regular reed act distributions , using calendar year 2000 state information .

the law labeled this transfer a "reed act" distribution although it differed from traditional reed act distributions , most notably because the law distributed a set dollar amount which was not determined by the statutory ceilings in the federal accounts and was distributed before the end of a fiscal year .

there was no reed act distribution in 2003 , and no regular reed act distribution is projected through fy2021 .

according to the department of labor , there is no projected distribution through fy2021 on account outstanding loans owed to the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

according to a general account office ( gao , now know as the government accountability office ) report , the $8 billion reed act distribution reduced 2003 unemployment taxes in 22 states and uc administration costs in 17 states .

the center for employment security education and research ( ceser ) , a component of the national association of state workforce agencies ( naswa ) , with the assistance of booz allen hamilton and decern consulting , examined how states used the $8 billion special reed act distribution of 2002 .

this study found that approximately half of the reed act distribution was used to lower state unemployment taxes in 2003 and 2004 from what they would have otherwise been .

the special distribution also led to increases in spending on uc benefits , uc administration , and employment services .

the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 §2003 ) provided for a special utf distribution .

the law provided a special transfer of utf funds from fua of up to a total of $7 billion to the state accounts within the utf as "incentive payments" for changing certain state uc laws .

the maximum incentive payment allowable for a state was calculated using the methods also used in reed act distributions .

that is , funds were to be distributed to the state utf accounts based on the state's share of estimated federal unemployment taxes ( excluding reduced credit payments ) made by the state's employers .

in addition , the act transferred a total of $500 million from the federal esaa to the state's accounts in the utf .

