t his report presents information on the constitutional basis for vetoes , veto override procedure , and veto threats .

it concludes with tables providing the counts of regular vetoes , pocket vetoes , and vetoes of appropriations acts .

the president's veto authority is among the most significant tools in the executive branch's dealings with congress .

the u.s. constitution outlines the veto authority in article i , section 7 .

thirty - seven of 44 presidents have used the veto .

presidents have vetoed 2,572 acts since 1789 ; of these , congress has overridden 110 ( 4.3% ) .

the u.s. constitution ( article i , section 7 ) provides that , for a bill to become law , it must be approved by both houses of congress and presented to the president for approval and signature .

article i , section 7 also provides the president with the power to veto , or "forbid," the bill from becoming law .

the president may sign a bill into law within the 10-day period ( excluding sundays ) , let the bill become law without signature , or veto the bill .

the constitution states that when the president vetoes a bill , "he shall return it , with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated. .

for example , if the president vetoes a bill that was introduced in the senate , the bill will be returned first to the senate where the possible override process would begin .

this type of action is called a "regular" or "return" veto .

if , on the other hand , congress has adjourned within the 10-day period after presentation of the bill to the president ( thereby preventing the return of the bill to congress ) , the president may refuse to sign the bill , and the act does not become law — a practice called a "pocket" veto .

if a bill is pocket vetoed while congress is out of session , the only way for congress to circumvent the pocket veto is to reintroduce the legislation as a new bill , pass it through both chambers , and present it to the president again for signature .

on the other hand , congress may override a regular veto without introducing new legislation through the process described in the u.s. constitution .

according to article 1 , section 7 of the constitution , when the president chooses not to sign a bill and instead returns it to the chamber from where it originated , the chamber enters the message of the president detailing the reasons for his or her refused approval into its journal and then proceeds "to reconsider" the bill .

because the constitution does not state exactly how congress should reconsider a vetoed bill , house and senate procedures govern the specific treatment of acts returned by the president .

passage by a two - thirds margin in both chambers is required to override a veto before the end of the congress in which the veto is received .

if a two - thirds vote is successful in the originating chamber , that chamber informs the other of its decision to override the veto by message .

neither chamber is under any constitutional , legal , or procedural obligation to schedule an override vote .

it is not unusual for congress to make no effort to override the veto if congressional leaders do not believe they have sufficient votes .

a veto threat can also prove to be an effective tool for the president , sometimes forcing congress to modify legislation before presenting the bill to the president .

in addition to public addresses concerning legislation , the president has the ability to issue statements of administration policy ( saps ) to express the administration's view on a bill .

saps are a written form of communication between the administration and congress and are typically issued shortly before floor action on the bill .

the office of management and budget coordinates the creation of saps on behalf of the executive office of the president .

saps communicate varying levels of administration support or opposition to a bill .

importantly , saps are generally the first formal indicator of the administration's intent to veto a bill .

saps containing veto threats contain language indicating either the president's intent to veto , the president being advised to veto by agencies , or the president being advised to veto by the administration's senior advisors .

saps are transmitted by the white house to congress ; they are also available on the white house website .

 table 1 shows that 37 of 44 presidents have exercised their veto authority on a total of 2,572 occasions since 1789 .

of that number , 1,506 ( 58.6% ) were regular vetoes — that is , the rejected legislation was returned to the congressional chamber of origin , while it was in session , with a presidential message of explanation — and 1,066 ( 41.5% ) were pocket vetoes , or rejected while congress was adjourned .

congress has overridden 110 ( 7.3% ) of the 1,506 regular vetoes .

this percentage is skewed downward by the large number of vetoes prior to the 87 th congress ( which began in 1961 ) .

if one counts only the regular vetoes since 1961 ( the beginning of the kennedy administration ) , one finds 241 vetoes and 37 overridden ( 15.4% ) .

george w. bush ( 2001-2009 ) was the first president since john quincy adams ( 1825-1829 ) to serve a full four - year term without using his veto .

no president since thomas jefferson ( 1801-1809 ) has served two full terms without vetoing a bill , as president bush used his veto in july 2006 .

president barack h. obama has vetoed 10 bills since taking office in 2009 .

the three most recent vetoes , which all took place during the second session of the 114 th congress , were of h.r .

3762 , restoring americans' healthcare freedom reconciliation act of 2015 ; s.j.res .

22 , a joint resolution providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5 , united states code , of the rule submitted by the corps of engineers and the environmental protection agency relating to the definition of "waters of the united states" under the federal water pollution control act ; and h.j.res .

88 , disapproving the rule submitted by the department of labor relating to the definition of the term "fiduciary. .

a veto of an appropriations bill can result in a funding gap , which may lead to the closure of federal agencies , the furlough of federal employees , and the interruption of federal programs and services .

despite these potential outcomes , presidents have vetoed 83 appropriations bills since 1789 ; more than half of these vetoes have occurred since 1968 .

for example , presidents carter , reagan , george h. w. bush , and clinton were presented with a total of 387 appropriations acts and vetoed 30 of them ( 7.8% ) .

president barack h. obama has vetoed one appropriations bill .

congressional overrides of vetoes of appropriations are not unusual ; 12 of the 83 vetoes ( 14.5% ) have been overridden ( see table 2 ) .

