public displays of religious symbols , including ten commandments monuments , are subject to review under the establishment clause of the first amendment of the u.s. constitution .

the establishment clause provides that "congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion. .

when a religious symbol is displayed on government property , it might be construed as a governmental act establishing a religion reflected by that symbol .

the primary test courts use to evaluate claims under the establishment clause is known as the lemon test .

under this test , public displays ( 1 ) must have a secular purpose , ( 2 ) must have a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion , and ( 3 ) must not lead to excessive entanglement with religion .

each of these requirements is necessary for a public display of a religious symbol to be upheld as constitutional .

under this test , if a display fails one of the elements but meets the other two , it will nonetheless be struck down as unconstitutional .

the u.s. supreme court traditionally has evaluated the constitutionality of public display of the religious symbols by applying the lemon test , but the applicability has been questioned in some of the cases .

the court has been split in the most recent cases involving public displays of the ten commandments , using different standards for the review of the displays under the establishment clause .

this report analyzes the court's holdings in the ten commandments cases and the distinctions the court made in reaching divergent decisions .

it also briefly addresses other relevant cases in which the court evaluated constitutional issues related to religious displays on public property , including holiday displays .

finally , the report discusses related court decisions regarding public displays , including pleasant grove city , utah v. summum and salazar v. buono .

in 1980 , the supreme court first addressed the constitutionality of public displays of the ten commandments .

in 2005 , the supreme court issued two decisions involving public displays of the ten commandments .

rather than issuing a brightline rule regarding the constitutionality of the displays , the court considered each of the displays in 2005 separately and reached different conclusions under their establishment clause analysis in each case .

the 2005 cases decided by the court concerning the public display of the ten commandments reached divergent conclusions regarding the displays and used different tests to reach those conclusions .

while the court did not use these cases to create a bright - line test for determining whether such displays violate the establishment clause , the decisions can be reconciled by studying the specific facts presented in each case .

the displays at issue in mccreary were created and erected by county officials and placed in prominent locations at the counties' main government buildings .

the counties' actions in promoting and justifying the display were viewed by the court as having religious motivations and implicating government endorsement of a religious message .

on the other hand , the display at issue in van orden was characterized by the court several times in its decision as "passive" and placed in a location where a reasonable observer likely would not infer government endorsement , as it was placed among dozens of other monuments and markers .

the fact that the texas state legislature played no role in creating or erecting the monument in the van orden case also alleviated the appearance of governmental endorsement of a religious message .

what remains unclear from these decisions is the status of the lemon test in the court's establishment clause jurisprudence .

the majority opinion in mccreary relied on the test , but applied a modified version of the test that evaluates whether the purpose and effects prongs of the original lemon test amount to an endorsement of religion .

the court reached its decision in van orden without a consensus in its reasoning , but the plurality opinion did not use the lemon test , noting other decisions where the court used the factors set forth in lemon as "helpful signposts" without relying on the three - part test for its analysis .

the divergent decisions were reached as a result of a split court , and raise the question of what approach the court will take in future cases of such displays .

although these cases did not use a consistent standard for analysis , mccreary and van orden might not be as divergent from establishment clause jurisprudence as one might expect .

justice breyer , who provided the deciding vote in both cases , explained his understanding that the establishment clause requires the government to "avoid excessive interference with , or promotion of , religion," but "does not compel the government to purge from the public sphere all that in any way partakes of the religious. .

this rationale echoed the court's previous holdings in challenges to public displays of religious symbols .

generally , the court has upheld public displays of religious symbols where the display is set in diversified context .

mccreary and van orden appear to fit this analysis , as the display upheld in van orden was set in a historical secular context , while the display struck down in mccreary indicated a predominantly religious message .

displays of the ten commandments have been the most frequent type of display to be challenged .

however , public displays of other religious symbols have also been challenged under the establishment clause .

in the 1980s , the court decided two cases involving religious symbols on public property that were included in christmas holiday displays .

like the mccreary and van orden decisions , the court decided the constitutionality of the inclusion of a creche in two separate holiday displays with varying results .

the court's decisions relied on the setting of each display , particularly whether the display emphasized the religious nature of the symbol or the secular purpose of its inclusion .

in lynch v. donnelly , the court held that the inclusion of a creche in a city's christmas display did not violate the establishment clause .

applying the lemon test , the court reasoned that the creche had a legitimate secular purpose in recognizing "the historical origins of this traditional event long recognized as a national holiday. .

the display did not advance religion , according to the court , because the benefit to religion was "indirect , remote , and incidental. .

the court also found that there was no entanglement , and therefore , the creche was a constitutional display under the establishment clause .

in allegheny county v. greater pittsburgh aclu , the court held that the display of a creche at a county courthouse violated the establishment clause .

unlike lynch , the creche was the sole element of the display inside the courthouse and included a sign that indicated that it was donated by a religious group and displayed a related religious message .

because the display did not include anything to "detract from the creche's religious message" and the overall effect of the display was the endorsement of the religious message , the court held that the display was unconstitutional .

the case also addressed the inclusion of a menorah in a separate display outside a government building .

the menorah was not held to be a violation of the establishment clause because it was placed with a christmas tree and a sign saluting liberty .

the inclusion of the religious symbol with other symbols , according to several justices , indicated the celebration of a holiday season that had "attained a secular status" and illustrated a "message of pluralism. .

in february 2009 , the court issued a decision in pleasant grove city , utah v. summum , which addressed first amendment issues regarding monuments displayed in a public park .

summum , a religious group , challenged the city's refusal to include a monument of the seven aphorisms for display in a public park that currently includes various monuments , including the ten commandments .

the case was brought before the court on free speech grounds , rather than under the religion clauses of the first amendment .

summum claimed that the city violated the free speech clause because it had accepted a ten commandments display , but refused to display summum's seven aphorisms display .

the case did not challenge the constitutional validity of the ten commandments display under the establishment clause .

the court held that privately donated monuments displayed in the city's public park were a form of government speech , not the speech of the respective private donors .

as government speech , the monuments are not subject to limitations imposed by the free speech clause , but are subject to other restraints imposed by law , such as the establishment clause .

because the court has held the park's monuments to be government speech , rather than the private speech of the individuals or entities that donated them , the constitutionality of the display of the ten commandments may be challenged under the establishment clause .

thus , a future case may challenge pleasant grove's ten commandments display as an improper government action establishing religion .

in recent years , the public debate over the display of religious symbols on public grounds has involved latin crosses that have been designated as war memorials .

one of the prominent controversies has involved a cross placed in the mojave national preserve that became the subject of lengthy litigation , ultimately decided by the u.s. supreme court .

in salazar v. buono , the court considered a case involving the display of a cross that stands less than eight feet tall on the mojave national preserve in california , which is managed by the national park service ( nps ) .

the cross display had been erected by the veterans of foreign wars ( vfw ) as a memorial to fallen service members in 1934 .

nps denied a request to erect a buddhist shrine near the cross in 1999 , leading to controversial debate over whether the cross is constitutional under the establishment clause .

after nps indicated that the cross would be removed to avoid constitutional problems , congress passed legislation that prohibited the use of federal funds to remove the cross and passed additional legislation that designated the cross and adjoining land as a national memorial to world war i veterans .

in 2001 , a former employee of the preserve filed a lawsuit alleging that the cross display violated the establishment clause , particularly because the cross was displayed on public property on which displays of other religious symbols were not also permitted .

the district court held the display on public land to be a violation of the establishment clause and issued an injunction that prohibited the government from permitting the display .

congress subsequently enacted legislation directing the conveyance of approximately one acre of land on which the cross was displayed to the vfw .

in a second lawsuit challenging that land transfer , the u.s. court of appeals for the 9 th circuit held that the transfer of land did not cure the establishment clause violation and that the transfer could not "be validly executed without running afoul of the injunction. .

the court reasoned that "carving out a tiny parcel of property in the midst of this vast preserve ... will do nothing to minimize the impermissible governmental endorsement. .

the supreme court did not resolve the case on constitutional grounds , but instead remanded the case for reconsideration by the district court .

the court's decision was fractured , with no majority of justices agreeing on a rationale for the decision .

in the plurality opinion announcing the court's decision , justice kennedy explained that the case was "ill - suited for announcing categorical rules [and due to] the highly fact - specific nature of the inquiry , it is best left to the district court to undertake the analysis in the first instance. .

however , the plurality indicated that a proper analysis of the case should consider the purpose of the injunction and show deferential respect to congress as a coordinate branch of government if there is no "clear showing of unconstitutionality. .

thus , although the decision provides some guidance to how the court would analyze such a case , it provides little precedent for projecting future effects of challenges to religious symbols on public property .

a similar case , currently being litigated in the lower courts , involves a challenge to a 43-foot cross atop mt .

soledad in california .

the current cross was placed on then - city owned property in 1954 , although other versions of the cross have been located in the same place since 1913 .

the federal government seized the land upon which the cross stands by eminent domain in 2006 "in order to preserve a historically significant war memorial. .

in january 2011 , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit held that the federal government's actions with regard to the mt .

soledad cross may have had a secular purpose ( that is , preserving a memorial for veterans of the nation's armed forces ) , but the effect of displaying the large latin cross on public land indicated a religious message of endorsement of one religion and the exclusion of others .

the court evaluated the case under both the lemon test ( used in mccreary ) and the principles provided by van orden , finding the cross unconstitutional in each examination .

specifically , the court explained that the cross symbolized christianity exclusively , was rarely originally designated as a war memorial generally , and had a long religious history but scarce secular history .

the court repeatedly emphasized the significance of the setting of the cross within the memorial , noting that the cross was the central and dominant feature of the mt .

soledad memorial and was the only element visible from many perspectives .

the court noted the guidance of the supreme court's buono decision — that the context of the memorial was a critical element of analysis — and used the relative size and dominance of the cross as it currently stands as justification for finding a violation of the establishment clause .

