a ccording to article 1 , section 7 , of the constitution , when the president chooses not to sign a bill and instead returns it to the chamber that originated it , the chamber shall enter the message of the president detailing the reasons for the veto in its journal and then "proceed to reconsider" the bill .

a vetoed bill can become law if two - thirds of the members voting in each chamber agree , by recorded vote , a quorum being present , to repass the bill and thereby override the veto of the president .

the chamber that originated the bill sent to the president acts first on the question of its reconsideration .

in other words , the house acts first on vetoed bills that carry an "h.r. .

or "h.j .

res. .

designation , and the senate acts first on vetoed bills that carry an "s." or "s.j .

res. .

designation .

if the chamber of origin votes to repass the bill , then the bill with the veto message is transmitted to the second chamber , which then also reconsiders it .

nothing in the constitution requires that either chamber vote directly on the question of repassing a vetoed bill .

the chambers have , for example , referred a vetoed bill to committee instead .

if either chamber fails to vote on the question of repassing the bill , then the measure dies at the end of the congress .

both chambers will not necessarily even have a chance to take up the question .

if two - thirds of the members of the chamber of origin do not agree to override a veto , then the measure dies , and the other chamber does not have an opportunity to vote on the question of repassing the bill .

the constitution does not otherwise address how congress should consider a vetoed bill , and it is therefore house and senate rules and practices that additionally govern the treatment of bills vetoed and returned by the president .

if the senate wishes to reconsider a vetoed bill , senators generally enter into a unanimous consent agreement that the message be considered as read , printed in the congressional record , and , as required by the constitution , entered in the senate journal .

senators often also agree , by unanimous consent , to limit time for debate on the question of overriding the veto .

when the senate receives a vetoed measure from the president or the house , it is quite common for it to be "held at the desk" for several days and considered only after unanimous consent has been reached on the terms of its consideration .

when the vote on the question occurs , it must be taken by roll - call vote and receive support from two - thirds of the senators voting , a quorum being present .

although generally the senate reconsiders a vetoed bill under the terms of a unanimous consent agreement , it is not necessary to secure the support of all 100 senators to consider a vetoed bill in the senate .

absent an arrangement to hold the veto message at the desk , it would be read and then entered into the journal after its receipt from the president or the house .

the presiding officer would then state: shall the bill pass , the objections of the president of the united states to the contrary notwithstanding ? .

several debatable motions are in order , however , that could displace consideration of the veto message .

the message could be referred to committee , for example , or postponed to a specific time .

alternatively , the majority leader might make a motion to proceed to another matter .

the question of overriding the veto could be brought back before the senate with the consent of all senators or by a numerical majority through a nondebatable motion to proceed .

finally , once the veto message has been laid before the senate , it could also be tabled or indefinitely postponed , which would normally preclude any further action on the matter .

the question of overriding a veto is debatable under the regular rules of the senate .

the question could be debated as long as any senator sought recognition to discuss it .

debate on the question of overriding a veto can be limited by unanimous consent or by invoking cloture .

ending debate through a cloture motion requires the support of three - fifths of senators duly chosen and sworn , or 60 senators if there is no more than one vacancy .

cloture is rarely used to end debate on overriding a presidential veto .

the number of senators required to end debate is less than the number required to override a veto ( assuming that there are no vacancies and more than 90 senators vote on the override question ) .

two - thirds of the senators voting , a quorum being present , must agree to override the veto and repass the bill .

the vote must be a roll - call vote and not a voice vote , due to the constitutional requirement that the vote be by the "yeas and nays. .

a motion to reconsider the vote on the question of overriding a veto is in order only if the senate fails to override the veto .

in other words , if two - thirds of the senators agree to override the veto , a motion to reconsider that vote is not in order .

if the senate fails to override a veto of a senate - originated bill ( s. or s.j .

res .

 ) , then the question of override never reaches the house .

the senate simply informs the house that the override vote on a house or senate bill was unsuccessful .

if the override vote on a senate - originated measure ( s. or s.j .

res. ) .

is successful in the senate , the bill and veto message are sent to the house for action .

if the override vote on a house - originated measure ( h.r .

or h.j .

res. ) .

is successful , then the bill becomes law , because two - thirds of both chambers have agreed to override the veto .

