u.s. copyright law does not protect useful articles , and copyright protection has been denied to fashion designs because clothing garments have traditionally been viewed as useful articles — basic items of necessity having utilitarian value — rather than as artistic creations .

however , chapter 13 of the u.s .

copyright act does specify protection for the designs of one category of useful articles , the designs of boat hulls .

the 111 th congress did not pass legislation that would have amended chapter 13 of the copyright act to extend design protection to fashion design , the design piracy prohibition act ( h.r .

2196 ) and the innovative design protection and piracy prevention act ( s. 3728 ) .

although the two bills shared similar provisions , they also differed significantly .

legislation concerning fashion design copyright protection was also introduced but not passed by the 110 th congress ( h.r .

2033 , s. 1957 ) and the 109 th congress ( h.r .

5055 ) .

the 112 th congress may consider similar legislation .

the copyright act ( the act ) defines a "useful article" as "an article having an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not merely to portray the appearance of the article or to convey information. .

if the function of an article is found to be inherently utilitarian , rather than exclusively aesthetic or informational , then the article cannot be protected under u.s. copyright law .

although useful articles cannot be protected in and of themselves , certain aesthetic or creative aspects of such articles can receive protection .

designs of useful articles can be protected under copyright law "only if , and only to the extent that , such design incorporates pictorial , graphic , or sculptural features that can be identified separately from , and are capable of existing independently of , the utilitarian aspects of the article. .

because "pictorial , graphic , and sculptural" works are eligible for copyright protection under § 102 of the act , protection is permitted for aspects of a utilitarian article that fall into this category and can be physically or conceptually separable from the utilitarian aspects of the article .

the u.s .

copyright office describes this "separability test" as an "extremely limited" means of protecting the designs of useful articles , as courts have excluded most industrial designs from copyright protection .

both the patent and trademark law regimes provide limited means for protecting fashion design .

under the concept of trade dress ( part of trademark law ) , a fashion design can be protected in cases where the product has gained a reputation among consumers as being identifiable with a particular market source .

under patent law , design patents could also be a potential means for protection .

however , commentators have noted the potential shortcomings of each of these approaches .

the design piracy prohibition act ( h.r .

2196 ) and the innovative design protection and piracy prevention act ( s. 3728 ) would have amended the copyright act to provide a three - year term of copyright protection for fashion designs .

h.r .

2196 was referred to the house committee on the judiciary but received no further legislative action .

s. 3728 was approved by unanimous vote by the senate judiciary committee and reported to the senate on december 6 , 2010 ; however , the senate did not vote on the bill before the end of the 111 th congress .

the specific provisions of these bills are discussed and analyzed below .

law professors , government officials , and design industry professionals have expressed diverse viewpoints on the need for and desirability of legislation granting copyright protection to fashion design .

those in favor of protection assert that the copyright law mistakenly views clothing as purely utilitarian in nature , and ignores the possibility that fashion design may be a form of creative expression deserving of protection .

proponents also highlight the effects of modern technology on the ease and speed of copying fashion designs , pointing to the ability for copiers to easily access images of runway photos posted on the internet .

additionally , emphasis is placed on the particular vulnerability of young designers whose names and logos are not yet recognizable in the marketplace , and have difficulty promoting their work when it is quickly copied by established competitors .

supporters of the legislation also point to the protection granted to fashion design in other areas of the world .

those against offering copyright protection for fashion design generally point to the success of the marketplace as it is and note that copying is an integral and accepted part of the fashion industry .

they claim that such interference into the fashion market would be harmful because of increased litigation over the standard for infringement .

as a result , creative production of fashion designs would be stifled , ultimately resulting in less choice for consumers .

finally , these critics assert that foreign experience with fashion design protection has not had material effect because copying still occurs in nations that have design protection laws — to the same degree it occurs in the u.s. where there is currently no such protection .

