the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) was established by the trade act of 1974 ( 19 u.s.c .

2461 , et seq. ) .

and now provides preferential duty - free entry of up to 5,000 agricultural and non - agricultural products for 120 designated beneficiary countries and territories .

agricultural products under the program totaled $2.6 billion in 2015 , accounting for 15% of the total value of annual gsp imports .

some in congress have called for changes to the program that could limit or curtail benefits to certain countries .

the program was most recently extended until december 31 , 2017 ( title ii of p.l .

114-27 ) .

expiration of the program in 2017 means that gsp renewal could be a legislative issue in the 115 th congress .

in recent years , gsp has been reauthorized through a series of short - term extensions .

in 2015 , u.s. imports under gsp totaled $17.7 billion , accounting for roughly 1% of all commodity imports .

leading u.s. imports under the program are manufactured products and parts , chemicals , plastics , minerals , and forestry products .

agricultural products accounted for 15% of all imports under gsp , totaling $2.6 billion in 2015 .

compared to 2010 , the value of agricultural imports under the program has nearly doubled .

imports under the program account for about 2% of total u.s. agricultural imports .

table 1 shows the leading agricultural products ( ranked by value ) imported into the united states under the program .

leading agricultural imports ( based on value ) include processed foods and food processing inputs ; beverages and drinking waters ; processed and fresh fruits and vegetables ; sugar and sugar confectionery ; olive oil ; and miscellaneous food preparations and inputs for further processing .

more than one - third of agricultural imports under gsp ( based on value ) include food processing inputs , such as miscellaneous processed foods , processed oils and fats , fruit and vegetable preparations , and ag - based chemicals and byproducts ( table 1 ) .

about 15% of gsp agricultural imports consist of sugar and sugar - based products , and cocoa and cocoa - containing products .

mineral waters and other types of beverages account for about 12% , while olive oil accounts for about 8% of the value of gsp agricultural imports .

fresh fruits and vegetables account for another 11% , with roughly half of that consisting of bananas and other tropical produce imports .

most gsp agricultural imports are supplied by beneficiary countries that have been identified for possible graduation from the program .

in 2015 , five beneficiary countries ranked by import value — thailand , brazil , india , indonesia , and turkey — accounted for roughly two - thirds of the value of agricultural imports under the gsp program ( see table 2 ) .

thailand and brazil alone accounted for 40% of agricultural imports under the program .

gsp was most recently extended until december 31 , 2017 ( title ii of p.l .

114-27 ) .

over the past decade , gsp renewal has been somewhat controversial .

some in congress have continued to call for changes to the program , including tightening the program's requirements on products that can be imported under the program and limiting gsp benefits for certain eligible countries .

leaders of the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee have continued to express an interest in evaluating the effectiveness of u.s. trade preference programs , including gsp , and broader reform of these programs might be possible .

both committees have conducted a series of oversight hearings in recent years , focused on determining the effectiveness of u.s. trade preference programs and discussing ways to reform them .

others have continued to call for meaningful reforms to gsp .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has published a series of reports highlighting the perceived benefits and shortcomings of u.s. preference programs , including gsp .

amendments to gsp followed extensive debate about the program during the 109 th congress .

specifically , some in congress questioned the inclusion of certain more advanced "beneficiary developing countries" ( bdcs ) under gsp and also commented that certain countries had contributed to the ongoing impasse in multilateral trade talks in the wto doha development agenda .

in response to these concerns , both congress and the previous administrations have made changes to the program regarding product coverage ( eg , the type of products that can be imported under the program ) and country eligibility ( eg , limiting gsp benefits to certain countries ) .

changes made to gsp in the past decade have affected the overall distribution and volume of both agricultural and non - agricultural product imports under the program .

the suspension from gsp of some countries , such as argentina , likely has had an impact on agricultural trade under the program .

argentina had been among the main beneficiary countries under gsp and in earlier years accounted for more than one - tenth of all agricultural imports under gsp ( ranked by import value ) .

in 2012 , argentina had exported $116 million of agricultural products under the program , accounting for nearly 5% of the total value of gsp agricultural imports .

products imported from argentina under gsp included casein , olive oil , prepared meats , gelatin derivatives , cheese and curd , sugar confectionery , wine , and other food products .

other countries whose gsp beneficiary status has been suspended or who have graduated out of the program had not been major suppliers of u.s. agricultural imports under the program .

aside from changes made to the list of eligible gsp countries , other statutory changes to gsp tightening rules for cnl waivers may not have greatly affected u.s. agricultural imports under the program .

historically , there have been few cnl waivers for agricultural products imported duty - free under gsp .

other types of program changes , however , could affect u.s. agricultural imports under the program , including additional limits on cnl waivers from certain countries or graduation of some beneficiary countries .

some african cotton - producing nations are now eligible to supply certain cotton products to the united states , but data are not yet available to determine whether imports will consequently increase under these new categories .

although ustr has continued to conduct annual reviews of the program , it has not conducted a broad review that has solicited extensive stakeholder comment .

however , previous comments submitted to ustr as part of its 2006 review from u.s. agricultural industry groups indicate that opinions vary among u.s. agricultural groups regarding the program .

for example , the american farm bureau federation ( afbf ) expressed its general opposition to the gsp program , stating that products imported duty - free under the program compete with u.s. - produced goods without granting a commensurate level of opportunity for u.s. producers in foreign markets .

afbf further supported withdrawal of cnl waivers for the philippines , argentina , and colombia .

the grocery manufacturers association ( gma ) expressed support for the current gsp program and identified certain agricultural products of importance to gma under the program , including sugar confections , spices , and certain processed foods and inputs from brazil , india , and argentina .

gma's position was generally supported by comments from the american spice trade association , the national confectioners association , and the chocolate manufacturers association .

gma has previously supported congressional efforts to extend gsp .

what remains unclear is whether duty - free access for most agricultural imports under the gsp greatly influences a country's willingness to export these products to the united states .

in most cases , costs associated with import tariffs are borne by the importer .

these costs may be passed on to the bdcs in terms of lower import prices .

however , import tariffs to the united states for most of these products tend to be low .

as calculated by crs , ad valorem equivalent tariffs range from 3% to 4% for sugar , 2% to 10% for cocoa - containing products , 5% to 12% for confectionery , 1% to 2% for most processed meats , about 2% for olive oil , less than 1% for mineral water , and about 5% for agriculture - based organic chemicals .

in general , any additional costs that might be incurred by the bdcs as a result of the proposed changes could be more than offset by the generally higher u.s. prices for most products compared to prices in other world markets .

nevertheless , the imposition of even relatively low import tariffs could represent an increase in input costs to some u.s. food processors and industrial users .

these costs could be passed on to consumers through higher prices for these and other finished agricultural or manufactured products .

as shown in table 1 , most gsp agricultural imports are intermediate goods and inputs , such as raw sugar , miscellaneous processed foods , preparations , and byproducts , and agriculture - based organic chemicals .

