on july 16 , 1787 , the 55 founding fathers at the constitutional convention in philadelphia reached what is commonly called the "great compromise. .

the compromise emerged after a struggle between the large and small states over the system of representation for the house and senate .

the framers readily accepted the principle of bicameralism — a two - house national legislature .

after all , the british parliament was bicameral as were most state legislatures .

however , the framers encountered sharp divisions in grappling with these two questions: should representation ( the number of members ) in both chambers be apportioned according to each state's population , or , instead , should representation in the house be determined by population and in the senate on state equality ? .

under the first approach , the large states would dominate both chambers ; under the second plan , the large states would be advantaged in the house while all states , regardless of their population , would be represented equally in the senate .

this clash between proportional versus equal representation provoked the most contentious debate at the constitutional convention and nearly led to its end .

delegate luther martin of maryland wrote that differences over the issue "nearly terminated in a dissolution of the convention. .

george washington wrote to alexander hamilton that he "almost despaired" that the small and large states would ever resolve their differences .

in the end , the great compromise granted each side in the dispute a chamber where their interests could be protected and guaranteed .

house seats would be apportioned among the states based on population , with each state guaranteed at least one member ; representatives would be directly elected by the people .

by contrast , the senate would be composed of two senators per state — regardless of population — indirectly elected by the state legislatures .

as james madison wrote in federalist no .

39 , "the house of representatives will derive its powers from the people of america ... .

the senate , on the other hand , will derive its powers from the states , as political and co - equal societies ; and these will be represented on the principle of equality in the senate. .

the principle of two senators from each state was further guaranteed by article v of the constitution: "no state , without its consent , shall be deprived of equal suffrage in the senate. .

decisions made at the constitutional convention about the senate still shape its organization and operation today , and make it one of the most distinctive legislative institutions in the world .

as william e. gladstone , four - time british prime minister during the 19 th century , said about the american senate , it is a "remarkable body , the most remarkable of all the inventions of modern politics. .

plainly , the framers did not want the senate to be another house of representatives .

the institutional uniqueness of the senate flows directly from many of the decisions made at the constitutional convention .

several of these features merit discussion , because they highlight important and enduring features of the senate .

these features include constituency , size , term of office , and special prerogatives .

the one modification to the plan not foreseen by the framers was the direct election of senators .

the "one state - two senator" formula means that most senators represent constituencies that are more heterogeneous than the districts represented by most house members .

one result is that senators must accommodate a larger diversity of interests and voices in their representational roles .

for example , a house member might represent a district that is overwhelmingly agriculture in character .

the senators from that state focus on agriculture , too , but they must also be responsive to a wider array and diversity of interests .

the bottom line is that senators represent an entire state , not a part of it .

because the votes of senators are equal , balloting power in the senate is not apportioned by population .

as various scholars have pointed out: "the nine largest states are home to 51 percent of the population but elect only 18 percent of the senate ; the twenty - six smallest states control 52 percent of the senate but hold only 18 percent of the population. .

the disparity in the voting strength of senators from lightly versus heavily populated states prompted the late senator daniel moynihan , d - n.y. , to predict that sometime "in the twenty - first century the united states is going to have to address the question of apportionment in the senate. .

from the outset the senate's membership was relatively small compared to the house .

when the senate first convened in 1789 , there were twenty - two senators .

north carolina and rhode island soon entered the union to increase the number to twenty - six .

as new states entered the union , the senate's size expanded to the 100 that it is today .

the senate's size significantly shapes how it works .

for example , it operates in a generally informal manner , often relying on the unanimous consent of all 100 senators to function .

there is large deference to minority views — either those of the minority party , a small group of lawmakers , or a single senator .

the senate's formal rules and precedents are less comprehensive than the many detailed rules and voluminous precedents of the larger house of representatives .

viewed as "ambassadors" from the several states , the seed was planted early that senators should have few restraints placed on their parliamentary rights .

for example , in 1789 , the senate informally "adopted a policy of keeping formal rules to a minimum," agreeing to twenty short rules .

further , in framing its rules , the senate "quite naturally put a great premium on ease and dignity of speech. .

the senate grants every member two parliamentary freedoms that , so far as is known , no other lawmaker worldwide possesses .

these two freedoms are unlimited debate and an unlimited opportunity to offer amendments , including non - relevant amendments .

both prerogatives are , of course , subject to certain constraints .

as two senate parliamentarians wrote , "whereas senate rules permit virtually unlimited debate , and very few restrictions on the right to offer amendments , these [unanimous consent] agreements usually limit debate and the right of senators to offer amendments. .

unanimous consent agreements establish a tailor - made procedure for considering virtually any kind of business that the senate takes up .

they are commonly drafted by the parties' floor leaders and managers and , to be implemented , must be agreed to by the entire senate membership ( that is , not objected to by any senator. ) .

two fundamental objectives of these accords are to limit debate and to structure the amendment process .

it was the smaller size of the senate that no doubt encouraged these parliamentary traditions to emerge and flourish .

not until 1917 did the senate even adopt a method for ending extended debate ( called a "filibuster" if employed for dilatory purposes. ) .

it was called cloture ( closure of debate ) and its procedural requirements are spelled out in senate rule xxii .

so from 1789 to 1917 there was no way for the senate to terminate extended debates except by unanimous consent , compromise , or exhaustion .

a key goal of the framers , as noted earlier , was to create a senate differently constituted from the other chamber so that it could check the popular passions that might overly influence legislation emanating from the directly elected house .

to foster values such as deliberation , reflection , and continuity , the framers made three important decisions .

first , they set the senatorial term of office at six years even though the duration of a congress is two years .

the senate is a "continuing body" with only one - third of its membership up for election at any one time .

as article i , section 3 , states: "immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election , they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. .

consequently , the electorate that chooses the one - third up in november 2008 is different in various ways — in regard to the array of salient issues that may influence peoples' choices , for example — from the voters who selected the other two - thirds of the senate .

these lawmakers were influenced , respectively , by the public mood of the voters in november 2004 and 2006 ; thus , some of them might act collectively as a "brake" and block or slow down floor consideration of issues debated during the 2008 campaigns .

second , to be a senator , individuals must meet certain constitutional qualifications .

for example , to hold office , senators must be 30 years of age and nine years a citizen ; house members are to be 25 years of age and seven years a citizen .

the framers expected senators to be more seasoned and experienced than house members .

whether this expectation has been met is problematic , even in congress's earliest years when the likes of james madison and albert gallatin served in the house .

unlike house members , the selection of senators was done by the state legislatures , which bolstered the states' role as a counterweight to the national government and insulated the senate from popular pressures .

the house and senate share lawmaking authority , but the framers assigned special "advice and consent" prerogatives exclusively to the senate .

under article ii , section 2 , the senate functions as a unicameral body when it considers ( 1 ) the ratification of treaties , which require approval by a two - thirds vote , or ( 2 ) presidential nominations for high governmental positions such as federal judges , ambassadors , or cabinet officers ( all of whom require senate consent by a majority vote ) .

the framers assigned the advice and consent responsibilities to the senate ( but not the house ) because of certain characteristics embedded in that institution , such as stability , a longer time perspective , and its smaller size .

as one of the framers ( pierce butler of south carolina ) noted , treaty negotiations "always required the greatest secrecy , which could not be expected in a large body" like the house .

the senate's role in the appointments process , wrote hamilton in federalist no .

65 , would serve as "an excellent check upon the spirit of favoritism in the president , and would tend greatly to preventing the appointment of unfit characters from state prejudice. .

the constitution ( article i , section 3 ) also grants the senate the "sole power to try all impeachments. .

the house possesses the constitutional authority to decide by majority vote whether to impeach ( or indict ) executive or judicial officials while the senate , by a two - thirds vote , determines whether to convict the indicted public officials , which could even include the president .

"where else," wrote hamilton in federalist no .

65 , "than in the senate could have been found a tribunal sufficiently dignified , or sufficiently independent ? .

what other body would be likely to feel confidence enough in its own situation , to preserve unawed and uninfluenced the necessary impartiality between an individual accused , and the representatives of the people , his accusers ? .

 ( italics in the original. ) .

the senate , like any legislative institution , constantly changes in big and little ways .

if the framers returned today to visit the senate , they would surely recognize that it remains the preeminent legislative forum for protecting minority rights and for debating and refining the great issues of the day .

they would continue to find that many of their fundamental principles — two senators from each state , the advice and consent role , or the impeachment prerogative — continue to govern the senate's composition and activity .

to be sure , they would likely be awe - struck by the country's many changes: the demographic diversity among the 50 states ; the size and reach of the federal establishment ; the rise of presidential power ; the cost of campaigns ; the role of political parties ; the extent of the nation's international obligations ; and numerous other societal , technological , or medical developments .

they would soon discover a significant change to their handiwork , however: today's senators no longer are elected by state legislatures .

in 1913 the seventeenth amendment to the constitution was ratified providing for the direct election of senators .

the framers would probably view this as the most significant constitutional change affecting the senate .

the election of senators by state legislatures lasted for more than 125 years until the two institutions that were vested politically in the procedure — the u.s. senate and the state legislatures — opted for the popular election of senators .

why ? .

two words epitomize the fundamental drivers of the change: democracy and deadlock .

the direct election of senators was triggered by the progressive movement of the 1890s and early 1900s which advocated an agenda of democratic reform , such as women's suffrage , the direct primary , and the direct election of senators .

progressive leaders wanted to end the influence of powerful special interests , especially corporations , over state legislatures ; block the purchase of senate seats ; blunt the influence of party bosses in determining who state lawmakers should select ; and make senators directly answerable to the people for their actions or inactions .

for example , the spread of direct primaries in many states "led to voters expressing their choice for senator on the primary ballot .

although not legally binding on the legislatures , the popular choice was likely to be accepted. .

the second major stimulus for the seventeenth amendment involved the often contentious state legislative deadlocks in electing senators .

various factors provoked the deadlocks , such as different party control of the two chambers , and lengthy contests among as many as 80 or more senatorial candidates , with balloting extending over several weeks .

as a scholar of the senate reported , the "record of senatorial elections for the fifteen years , 1891 to 1905 , shows forty - five such deadlocks — from one to seven in each of twenty states. .

the combination of these two forces — the democratic impulse and disgruntlement with deadlocks — led to congressional passage of a direct election constitutional amendment in may 1912 .

ratification by three - fourths of the state legislatures occurred a year later .

to close , as british prime minister gladstone said , the senate is a "remarkable body. .

many senators throughout history have shared his view .

as senator claude pepper , d - fl , said in 1939 , on the occasion of the senate's 150 th anniversary: the varied and extraordinary functions and powers of the senate make it , according to one's view , a hydra - headed monster , or the citadel of constitutional and democratic liberties .

like democracy itself , the senate is inefficient , unwieldy , inconsistent ; it has its foibles , its vanities , its members who are great , the near great , and those who think they are great .

but , like democracy also , it is strong , it is sound at the core , it has survived many changes , it has saved the country from many catastrophes , it is a safeguard against any form of tyranny which ... might tend to remove the course of government from persistent public scrutiny .

in the last analysis it is probably the price we in america have to pay for liberty .

