feed is the single largest input cost for cattle feeders , dairy , hog , and poultry producers , who are wary of government policies that can raise feed prices .

these include commodity support or conservation programs that take cropland out of production , or ethanol incentives that bid up the price of corn , a key feed ingredient .

such incentives have already helped to boost significantly the portion of the total u.s. corn crop going to ethanol ; a possible energy title in the next ( 2007 ) farm bill could further bolster feed grain demand and prices , animal producers worry .

unlike major crops such as grains , cotton , and oilseeds , animal products are not recipients of commodity price and income support program benefits .

an exception is milk , where producers benefit from a combination of administered pricing under federal milk marketing orders , surplus dairy product purchases , and milk income loss payments .

also , some cattle and hog producers in a limited number of states are participating in livestock revenue insurance programs being administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) risk management agency ( rma ) .

a new farm bill likely will continue some form of milk price and / or income support and possibly could continue or even expand revenue insurance for livestock producers .

also see: crs report rl32712 , agriculture - based renewable energy production crs report rl34594 , farm commodity programs in the 2008 farm bill crs report rl34036 , dairy policy and the 2008 farm bill crs report rl33037 , previewing a 2007 farm bil .

animal producers who do not raise crops commercially lack access to federally subsidized crop insurance .

congress or the administration has periodically made animal producers in declared disaster areas eligible for ad hoc federal payments , mainly to help defray the cost of purchasing off - farm feed following a disaster affecting on - farm feed production , or permitted producers to use conservation lands for haying and grazing .

issues include whether the government should assume more of livestock and poultry producers' disaster risks as they have for crop farmers , and whether congress should establish a "permanent" aid program automatically triggered in times of disasters , in lieu of ad hoc legislation in virtually every recent year .

also see: crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance crs report rl31095 , emergency funding for agriculture: a brief history of supplemental appropriations , fy1989-fy200 .

changes in the structure and business methods of the livestock and meat sectors appear to be rapidly transforming u.s. animal agriculture .

animal farms continue to diminish in number and expand in average size .

a relative handful of large firms process animal products , and these firms increasingly seek to control or at least better coordinate all phases of production and marketing , often to meet the specific requirements of large retail chains that want to satisfy consumer demand for a range of lower - cost products .

critics assert that these trends have undermined the traditional u.s. system of smaller - scale , independent , family - based farms and ranches , by eroding farmers' negotiating power , lowering farm prices , and forcing all but the largest operators out of business .

others counter that the sector's structural changes are a desirable outgrowth of factors such as technological and managerial improvements , changing consumer demand , and more international competition .

in 2007 , various bills have been proposed to address perceived "competition" problems .

among them are proposals to regulate meat packer ownership or acquisitions of cattle ( s. 305 ; s. 786 ) ; to give farmers more options to dispute provisions in contracts with processors ( in 2007 , s. 221 ) ; and to broaden protections under , and strengthen administration , of the packers and stockyards act and other antitrust laws ( s. 622 ) .

these or other so - called competition options could become the basis for a proposed competition title in a new 2007 farm bill .

see also: crs report rl33325 , livestock marketing and competition issue .

outbreaks of animal diseases like avian influenza ( ai ) , foot and mouth disease ( fmd ) , bse , brucellosis , and tuberculosis are seen as perhaps the greatest potential threats to animal production .

even where u.s. cases have been few ( as with bse ) or quickly contained ( as with various strains of ai ) , the impacts can be economically devastating , causing production losses , closed export markets , and a decline in consumer confidence .

some animal diseases , like ai and bse , have the potential to harm humans .

cattle producers , meat processors , and the feed industry are anticipating an upcoming decision by the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) on whether to finalize or amend a proposed rule that would prohibit the use of higher - risk cattle parts ( i.e. , those more likely to harbor the bse agent ) in all animal feeds .

the proposal would be more restrictive than the fda's rule that now bans most mammalian parts from cattle feed only , as a way to prevent bse's spread through animal feeding .

however , the industry believes the economic costs of the proposed rule could be extremely high .

many producers appear to agree that a nationwide animal identification ( id ) system that can trace animals from birth to slaughter is a critical tool for quickly finding and controlling future animal diseases .

more foreign markets are demanding animal traceability , and other meat - exporting countries are adopting id programs , it is noted .

despite several years of usda effort and public funding totaling an anticipated $118 million through fy2007 , a universal u.s. system is not expected to be in place for some time , as policy makers debate numerous questions about its design and purpose .

should animal id be mandated ? .

what data should be collected and who should hold it , government or private entities ? .

to what extent should producer records be shielded from the public and government agencies ? .

should traceability be expanded to follow meat and poultry products from farm to consumer , and / or used for other purposes such as food safety or certification of labeling claims ? .

how much will it cost , and who should pay ? .

in the 110 th congress , h.r .

1018 would prohibit mandatory id and address privacy concerns .

other bills intended to address many of these questions could emerge , possibly as farm bill items .

also see: crs report rl32199 , bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad cow disease" ) : current and proposed safeguards crs report rl32012 , animal identification and meat traceabilit .

another possible , and somewhat related , item is country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) , which the 2002 farm bill required of many retailers of fresh produce , red meats , seafood , and peanuts .

although the seafood labeling rules are in place , congress has delayed implementation for red meats , produce , and peanuts until september 30 , 2008 , while lawmakers continue to debate the need for , and anticipated costs and benefits of , cool .

in the 110 th congress , bills ( h.r .

357 ; s. 404 ) have been introduced that would require implementation by september 30 , 2007 .

see also: crs report rs22955 , country - of - origin labeling for food .

the united states is one of the leading exporters of livestock and poultry products , which have been among its fastest - growing categories of agricultural exports .

however , u.s. market share is being challenged , and for some products surpassed , by highly competitive foreign exporters such as brazil , australia , india , argentina , and new zealand in beef / veal , canada and brazil in pork , and brazil in poultry .

u.s. exporters also face foreign trade barriers such as high import tariffs and divergent foreign food safety and animal health measures ( sometimes regarded as baseless by the exporters ) .

examples of recent problems include russia's restrictions on u.s. beef and pork exports , purportedly over animal disease concerns , japan's and korea's slowness in ramping up u.s. beef imports due to a limited number of cases here of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or mad cow disease ) , and a longstanding european union ban on importation of meat from animals treated with growth hormones approved for use here .

trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which permits the president to negotiate trade deals and present them to congress for an up or down vote without amendment , expires on june 30 , 2007 , making renewal a topic in the 110 th congress .

the administration has used tpa to pursue an ambitious series of bilateral and regional free trade agreements ( ftas ) as well as to participate in negotiations for new multilateral trade rules under the world trade organization ( wto ) .

u.s. interests seek assurances that any new agreements will not favor foreign over u.s. animal products .

many farmers and ranchers also are wary of signing new agreements when , in their view , some countries have not fulfilled obligations under existing agreements to lower tariffs and / or non - tariff barriers that have blocked meat and poultry exports .

also see: crs report rl33144 , wto doha round: the agricultural negotiations crs report rl33463 , trade negotiations during the 110th congress crs report rl33472 , sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) concerns in agricultural trad .

questions about the applicability of federal environmental laws to livestock and poultry operations have been controversial and have drawn congressional attention .

as animal agriculture increasingly concentrates into larger , more intensive production units , concerns arise about impacts on the environment , including surface water , groundwater , soil , and air .

some environmental laws specifically exempt agriculture from regulatory provisions , and some are designed so that farms escape most , if not all , of the regulatory impact .

the primary regulatory focus for large feedlots is the clean water act , since contaminants from manure , if not properly managed , also affect both water quality and human health .

operations that emit large quantities of air pollutants may be subject to clean air act regulation .

in addition , concerns about applicability of superfund to livestock and poultry operations are of growing interest .

bills to exempt animal manure from federal superfund requirements have been introduced in the past and could re - emerge in the 110 th congress .

the house and senate agriculture committees do not have direct jurisdiction over federal environmental law , but they do have a role in the issue .

for example , under the conservation title of recent farm bills , the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) has provided financial and technical assistance to farmers to protect surrounding resources ; livestock receives 60% of the funds .

also see the following reports: crs report rl31851 , animal waste and water quality: epa regulation of concentrated animal feeding operations ( cafos ) crs report rl32948 , air quality issues and animal agriculture: a primer crs report rl33691 , animal waste and hazardous substances: current laws and legislative issues crs report r40197 , environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) : status and issue .

usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) is responsible for inspecting most meat , poultry , and processed egg products for safety and proper labeling .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) is responsible for ensuring the safety of all other foods , including seafood , and also regulates animal feed ingredients .

for years congress has monitored the efforts of fsis and industry to address the problem of microbial contamination , which has caused outbreaks of severe and sometimes fatal foodborne illness .

a long - standing issue is the effectiveness of these efforts and the need , if any , for policy changes ( such as increased fsis resources or more efficient ways of assigning existing resources to the highest risk plants or products ) .

another concern is the use of antibiotics to control disease , promote growth , and address well - being in food - producing animals .

some argue that antibiotic overuse in animal production can lead to resistance to related drugs used in humans , and that fda should discontinue unnecessary animal uses .

others counter that such assertions have not been scientifically proven and that restrictions would raise production costs by millions of dollars and harm the quality of animal products .

various proposals related to meat safety have been offered in recent years , including proposals to clarify usda's use of microbial performance standards ; to allow state - inspected meat and poultry products to be sold outside the state ( to which they are currently restricted ) ; to give usda more authority to recall suspect meat and poultry products ; to tighten controls on imports ; and to restrict nontherapeutic use of medically important antibiotics in livestock ( eg , h.r .

962 and s. 549 in the 110 th congress ) .

some would reorganize federal food safety responsibilities , possibly within a single new agency ( eg , h.r .

1148 , s. 654 ) .

see also: crs report rl32922 , meat and poultry inspection: background and selected issue .

biotechnology — a term often used as a synonym for such technologies as genetic engineering , genetic modification , transgenics , recombinant dna techniques , and cloning — has been promoted as a way to improve animal productivity and quality ; to introduce new food , fiber , and medical products ; and to protect the environment .

criticisms range from food safety and social resistance to potential negative impacts on animal welfare and on ecosystems .

in the 110 th congress , early interest focuses on fda's publication in the january 3 , 2007 federal register of a long - awaited draft risk assessment which finds that meat and milk from cloned cattle , pigs , and goats and their offspring are as safe to eat as those of conventionally bred animals , although animal health problems may be more frequent than in other assisted reproductive technologies .

members may be asked to review the benefits and costs of cloning and other biotechnologies , and to refine existing laws to ensure adequate oversight .

s. 414 and h.r .

992 , for example , would require the labeling of foods from cloned animals or their offspring ; h.r .

1396 and s. 536 would not permit organically labeled foods to be derived from such animals .

also see: crs report rl33334 , biotechnology in animal agriculture: status and current issue .

farm animals are not covered by the animal welfare act , which requires minimum care standards for many other types of warm - blooded animals .

farm animals are covered by federal laws addressing humane transport and slaughter , however .

animal activists periodically seek new legislation that would further regulate on - farm or other animal activities , such as bills to prohibit the slaughter of horses for human food ( one passed the house but not the senate in september 2006 ; another has been introduced in the 110 th congress as h.r .

503 / s. 311 ) , to require the federal government to purchase products derived from animals only if they were raised according to specified care standards , and to prohibit the slaughter for food of disabled livestock ( introduced in 2007 as h.r .

661 and s. 394 ) , among others .

members of the house and senate agriculture committees generally express a preference for voluntary approaches to humane methods of care .

for example , smithfield farms , the largest u.s. pork producer , recently announced that it would require its producers to phase out the use of gestation crates , which many animal welfare advocates believe provide far too little room for hogs to move around .

see: crs report rs21978 , humane treatment of farm animals: overview and issues crs report rs21842 , horse slaughter prevention bills and issues crs report rs22493 , the animal welfare act: background and selected legislation , by [author name scrubbed .

