the forcible seizure of japanese citizens by north korean agents in the 1970s and 1980s continues to be a pivotal issue in the ongoing six - party talks on north korea's nuclear weapons program .

tokyo's participation in the international forum is dominated by its efforts to achieve progress on the abduction issue .

while the united states is now aggressively pursuing a deal that provides energy and economic assistance to north korea in exchange for the dismantlement of its nuclear weapons program , japan has refused to contribute aid without satisfactory progress on the kidnappings .

this had led to japan's relative isolation in the multilateral talks , although better relations between new leaders in japan and south korea may provide some flexibility to end the impasse .

u.s. interest in the abductions issue is driven by its needs for japan's diplomatic and economic assistance in the negotiations , as well as concerns that friction in the u.s. - japan relationship will damage one of the united states' most important alliances in the world .

u.s. negotiators maintain that they strongly support japan's position on the abductees , but also indicate that the issue will not block a nuclear deal .

this stance contrasts with the pre - 2007 approach of the bush administration , in which the abductions issue provided a platform for tokyo and washington's strategic priorities to converge .

in the earlier six - party talks , the united states and japan joined to pressure north korea on not only nuclear weapons , but also on human rights , refugees , and the abductions .

the next several months are likely to be decisive for how the abductions issue will affect the u.s. - japan relationship .

foremost is how progress in the six - party talks proceeds: if time pressure and proliferation concerns lead the bush administration to accept a nuclear deal with north korea that does not appear to enhance japanese security , leaders in tokyo may find it difficult to convince their citizens to steadfastly support u.s. strategic interests , including military basing .

however , amid some indications that tokyo may be reconsidering its priorities in the negotiations , a deal that extracts significant concessions from pyongyang could reinforce the fundamentally strong u.s. - japan alliance .

in the 1980s and 1990s , circumstantial evidence began to surface that north korean agents were responsible for the disappearance of several japanese citizens .

isolated press reports addressed the suspicion , but the japanese government initially dismissed the accounts and reacted slowly to the allegations .

as tokyo moved to re - establish diplomatic relations with pyongyang in the early 1990s , some japanese politicians saw the issue as a possible obstacle to normalization , and may have suppressed information that suggested north korea's responsibility .

unconfirmed reports from north korean defectors emerged that japanese nationals were held by north korea , but the mainstream media largely ignored them .

then , in 1996 , an article appeared in which a north korean defector spoke about his experience at a "spy school" where native japanese trained agents in japanese language and culture .

support groups for the victims' families formed in japan , and politicians — particularly those opposed to negotiating with pyongyang — mobilized support in the diet ( parliament ) .

in 1998 , pyongyang's test of an intermediate - range ballistic missile over japan raised security fears about the threat from north korea and made the general japanese public more suspicious of its behavior .

eventually , the kidnappings became part of the diplomatic agenda with north korea and , in september 2002 , prime minister junichiro koizumi traveled to pyongyang to "resolve" the abductions issue and move toward normalizing relations .

at the 2002 summit , north korean leader kim jong - il admitted to and apologized for north korean agents' abduction of 13 japanese citizens .

the kidnappings took place in japan and europe between 1977 and 1983 .

he claimed that only five remained alive .

the japanese public , shocked at the revelations , became fixated on the drama , with attention reaching its height a month later when the five abductees were returned to japan .

in may 2004 , koizumi returned to pyongyang to secure the release of five of the abductees' children .

coverage of the abductees saturated the press , and the issue quickly became the top priority in japan's north korea policy .

given north korea's record of truculence and denial , many analysts expressed surprise that kim jong - il admitted the kidnappings and allowed the abductees and their families to return to japan .

however , when tokyo pressed for proof of the remaining abductees' deaths , pyongyang produced apparently forged death certificates and traffic accident reports .

when asked for physical evidence , north korean officials provided cremated human remains that most japanese felt to be of dubious origin ( see below ) and also claimed that some remains were washed away in floods .

the inconsistency and apparent deception compounded the japanese public's anger at north korea and reinforced the views of many conservative politicians that pyongyang should not be trusted .

because of the shaky evidence , tokyo determined that its policy would be based on the premise that all the remaining abductees are alive .

as the abductee drama has played out , three japanese prime ministers have navigated the issue in subtly different ways , though always mindful of the emotional reaction of the public .

koizumi's bold initiative to visit pyongyang in 2002 brought the issue to the surface , although he may not have anticipated the strong response from the public .

koizumi's position toward north korea gradually hardened as the public's criticism of north korea swelled and the bush administration indicated a reluctance to aggressively pursue a negotiated settlement with pyongyang .

his successor , shinzo abe , rose to prominence based on his hardline position toward north korea , specifically on the kidnappings .

upon taking office , abe established a headquarters in the cabinet secretariat to coordinate abductee affairs ; led efforts to impose international and unilateral sanctions and restrictions when north korea tested missiles and a nuclear device in 2006 ; and called for the immediate return and safety of all the abductees , on the assumption that all were still alive .

since assuming the premiership in 2007 , yasuo fukuda has stated his interest in re - engaging more actively in the six - party talks , but has not indicated that he will adjust japan's policy on the abductees .

advocacy groups for the abductees note that he has retained the office that abe created , but voice some doubt that his stance will mirror abe's approach .

due to the overwhelming public reaction , there has been little open opposition to the official policy on the abductions .

opposition political parties have not challenged the ruling party's orthodoxy on the issue , and politicians from all parties have formed special diet committees to indicate their support for the victims .

advocacy groups have gained particular clout as the controversy grew: the association of the families of victims kidnapped by north korea , made up exclusively of relatives of the abducted , have become major media figures .

other groups of conservative activists , some explicitly committed to regime change in pyongyang , have elevated their political influence and public profile .

among the most active of these are the national association for the rescue of japanese kidnapped by north korea ( narkn ) .

as with many popular movements , the outrage over the abductees' fates has a powerful poster child .

megumi yokota was only 13 years old when she was reportedly snatched by north korean agents on her way home from school .

north korean officials claimed that she committed suicide in 1993 .

her case had drawn widespread media attention , both domestically and internationally , as the subject of documentaries and even an american folk song .

as leaders of the association of the families of victims kidnapped by north korea and in frequent media appearances , yokota's parents have become the face of the abductee cause .

in 2006 , president bush invited the yokotas to the white house , later calling the encounter "one of the most moving meetings since i've been the president. .

earlier that day , yokota's mother testified in front of a house subcommittee on asia and the pacific and subcommittee on africa , global human rights and international operations joint hearing .

because of yokota's high profile , any progress or setbacks to resolve her case is of particular symbolic importance .

the public reacted with outrage when north korea provided what they claimed were her cremated human remains to japan , only to have japanese officials later announce that they were not yokota's .

at the 2002 summit , north korea relayed that yokota had a fifteen - year - old daughter .

a reunion of yokota's parents with their granddaughter has been floated as a possible path to reconciliation , and observers maintain that any settlement of the yokota case would make a significant impact on the public perception of the issue .

since the six - party talks began , tokyo's focus on the abductions issue has isolated it from the other parties , particularly china and south korea .

some critics say that the abductions issue allows japan to play the victim while refusing to take responsibility for its own historical offenses , particularly in the world war ii era .

thorny historical controversies between japan and its neighbors , however , have showed significant signs of easing in the past few years .

after a period of rocky relations under koizumi , abe and fukuda made strides in warming ties with seoul and beijing .

amid an overall detente in sino - japanese relations , fukuda visited china in january 2008 .

when asked about the abductions issue during the visit , chinese premier wen jiabao reportedly stated that "we understand japan's position , and we are confident that a resolution can be reached through dialogue. .

new south korean president lee myung - bak has stated explicitly that he does not intend to press japan to apologize for historical grievances as his predecessor did .

in his capacity of a special envoy , lee's brother , who is also the vice speaker of south korea's national assembly , reportedly told japanese officials that the new leader "understands and supports" japan's position on the abductee issue .

lee has also indicated that he is more willing to raise human rights issues with the north than his predecessor .

most observers think it is unlikely that chinese or south korean negotiators will actively champion the abductees' cause , but both capitals appear to recognize the need for japanese involvement ( and funding ) in any diplomatic arrangement with north korea .

optimistic observers say that new leadership in tokyo and seoul , combined with beijing's interest in maintaining smooth relations before the 2008 summer olympics and the bush administration's determination to reach a negotiated agreement this year , provide an environment ripe for a breakthrough .

