this report provides an overview of the family educational rights and privacy act ( ferpa ) , as well as a discussion of several court cases that have clarified the statute's requirements .

under ferpa , educational agencies and institutions that receive federal funds must provide parents with access to the educational records of their children .

access must be provided within a reasonable time , but no later than forty - five days after a request to access education records has been made .

in addition , the statute provides parents with an opportunity to challenge the content of their children's education records in order to ensure that the records are not inaccurate , misleading , or otherwise in violation of a student's privacy rights .

under the statute , education records are defined to include those records , files , documents , and other materials that contain information directly related to a student and that are maintained by an educational agency or institution or by a person acting for such agency or institution .

education records may also include videotape and products of other media .

however , education records do not include any of the following: ( 1 ) records of educational personnel that are in the sole possession of the maker and not accessible to anyone other than a substitute ; ( 2 ) records maintained by a law enforcement unit of an educational agency or institution for purposes of law enforcement ; ( 3 ) employment records ; or ( 4 ) medical records for students who are age eighteen or older .

the parents of a student may exercise rights granted by ferpa until the student reaches the age of eighteen or attends an institution of postsecondary education .

at that point , the rights defined by ferpa are transferred from the parents to the student .

however , ferpa provides that certain types of information shall not be available to students in institutions of postsecondary education .

such students shall not have access to their parents' financial records .

letters and statements of recommendation submitted prior to the enactment of ferpa must also remain confidential if the letters are not used for other purposes .

finally , recommendations regarding admission to any educational agency or institution , employment application , and the receipt of an honor must remain confidential if the student has signed a waiver of his right of access .

in addition to requirements regarding access to educational records , ferpa prohibits educational agencies or institutions that receive federal funds from having a policy or practice of releasing the education records of a student without the written consent of his parents .

in addition , each educational agency or institution must maintain a record that identifies those individuals , agencies , or organizations that have requested or obtained access to a student's education records .

it is important to note that consent is not required for the release of education records to certain individuals and organizations .

these exceptions to ferpa's general prohibition against nonconsensual disclosure of educational records are described in detail below , as are controversial 2011 regulations that , among other things , permit educational agencies and institutions to disclose personally identifiable information to third parties under limited circumstances .

under ferpa , educational agencies and institutions found to have a policy of denying parental access to a student's education records or releasing a student's education records without written consent may be denied federal funds .

the secretary of education is authorized to deal with violations of the act and to establish or designate a review board for investigating and adjudicating ferpa violations .

the family policy compliance office ( fpco ) , which acts as a review board , permits students and parents who suspect a violation to file individual written complaints .

if a violation is found after investigation , the fpco will notify the complainant and the educational agency or institution of its findings and identify the specific steps that the agency or institution must take to comply with ferpa .

if the agency or institution fails to comply within a reasonable period of time , the secretary may either withhold further payments under any applicable program , issue a complaint to compel compliance through a cease - and - desist order , or terminate eligibility to receive funding .

in gonzaga university v. doe , the court considered whether a student could enforce the provisions of ferpa by suing an institution for damages under 42 u.s.c .

section 1983 , which provides a remedy for violations of federally conferred rights .

the respondent , a former student at gonzaga , planned to teach in the washington state public school system after graduation .

washington required new teachers to obtain an affidavit of good moral character from a dean of their graduating college or university , but the respondent was denied such an affidavit after gonzaga's teacher certification specialist informed the state agency responsible for teacher certification of allegations involving sexual misconduct by the respondent .

the respondent sued gonzaga , alleging a violation of section 1983 for the impermissible release of personal information to an unauthorized person under ferpa .

the court found that ferpa creates no personal rights that may be enforced under section 1983 .

the court noted that unless congress expresses an unambiguous intent to confer individual rights , federal funding provisions , like those included in ferpa , provide no basis for private enforcement under section 1983 .

the respondent had argued that as long as congress intended for a statute to "benefit" putative plaintiffs , the statute could be found to confer rights enforceable under section 1983 .

the court disagreed: "it is the rights , not the broader or vaguer 'benefits' or 'interests,' that may be enforced under the authority of that section. .

the court also observed that ferpa's nondisclosure provisions had an aggregate focus and were not concerned with the needs of any particular person .

by having such a focus , the provisions could not be understood to give rise to individual rights .

