the first amendment of the u.s. constitution prohibits the government from establishing a religion and guarantees citizens the right to freely exercise their religion .

the u.s. supreme court has clarified the scope of these broad guarantees .

this report provides an overview of the governing principles of the law of church and state .

it explains the legal requirements for challenges under the establishment clause and free exercise clause and the standards used to evaluate such challenges .

the report includes current interpretations of these clauses and summarizes related statutes ( p.l .

103-141 , the religious freedom restoration act , or rfra , and p.l .

106-274 , the religious land use and institutionalized persons act , or rluipa ) .

alleged violations under the religion clauses must meet two threshold requirements: government action and standing .

in order to bring a claim to enforce rights provided by the religion clauses , an individual must show that government action has interfered with those rights .

in other words , actions by private actors cannot violate the religion clauses .

the individual must also have standing .

cases brought under the religion clauses are governed by general standing rules .

standing is the legal term used to indicate that the person has an individualized interest that has actually been harmed under the law or by its application .

for instance , a person who has been barred by the government from attending religious services or required by law to attend religious services would have standing because the individual has been individually affected by the government's action .

for some establishment clause cases , the court has recognized special exceptions to the general rules for standing .

generally , taxpayers do not have standing to sue the government on the grounds that their tax money has been spent in a manner that they consider improper .

the court has recognized an exception to this rule , known as the flast exception .

under the flast exception , taxpayers may raise establishment clause challenges of actions taken by congress under article i's taxing and spending clause .

the court has maintained its narrow interpretation of this exception , refusing to extend it to permit taxpayer lawsuits challenging executive actions or taxpayer lawsuits challenging actions taken under powers other than taxing and spending .

the establishment clause provides for separation of church and state , but advocates differ as to the extent to which it requires such separation .

some argue that government and religion operate best if each conducts its business independently of the other .

others argue that the drafters of the constitution did not intend strict separation , and strict separation has not been practiced throughout american history .

for much of the second half of the 20 th century , the court had held that religious interests were to be considered of paramount importance in the constitutional scheme .

under this interpretation , any government act that infringed on religious practices of citizens had to serve a compelling state interest .

in 1990 , the supreme court significantly altered its interpretation of the free exercise clause .

it abandoned the compelling state interest test ( a strict scrutiny standard ) with respect to neutral statutes .

the court held that the free exercise clause never "relieve[s] an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability. .

the constitutional strict scrutiny standard was not abandoned entirely , though .

it still applies to cases that involve religious claims for exemption in programs allowing for individualized assessments and cases that involve deliberate governmental targeting of religion .

a standard required by the constitution is a baseline , which congress may raise but can never lower .

in response to the court's reinterpretation of the standard necessary under the free exercise clause , congress brought back the compelling interest test by statute .

congress sought to broaden the legal protection afforded religious exercise with the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) of 1993 , which prohibited government action that has the effect of substantially burdening religious practice .

rfra provided that a statute or regulation of general applicability could lawfully burden a person's exercise of religion only if it were shown to further a compelling governmental interest and to be the least restrictive means of furthering that interest .

this statutory requirement for any law , including those of general applicability not aimed at religious practice , would supplement the constitutional protection , which prohibits only government action that intentionally burdens the exercise of religion .

rfra , when originally passed , applied to federal , state , and local government actions .

in 1997 , the court held that , because of federalism , congress lacked the constitutional power to impose such a sweeping requirement on states and localities .

therefore , the strict scrutiny standard imposed by rfra applies only to actions of the federal government .

congress responded to the inapplicability of rfra to state and local government by enacting the religious land use and institutionalized persons act of 2000 ( rluipa ) .

to avoid the federalism problems presented by rfra , congress limited the scope of rluipa's application .

rluipa applies only where the burden could be linked to situations involving congress's spending power or commerce power , or to situations involving land use in which individualized assessments are involved .

thus , rluipa provides a statutory strict scrutiny test for state and local zoning and landmarking laws that impose a substantial burden on an individual's or institution's exercise of religion and on state and local actions that impair the religious practices of individuals in public institutions such as prisons , mental hospitals , and nursing homes .

