while private equity firms and hedge funds may differ in their investment strategies , their structures are similar .

nearly all are organized as partnerships , which means that their earnings are not taxed at the firm level .

most partnerships are simply straightforward conduits of taxable income or loss and tax attributes to the individual partners .

they can , however , also be used to manipulate the allocation of tax attributes and to shelter income and assets from taxation as a result of the allocation of tax attributes .

there are two kinds of partners .

the fund managers , who guide the investment strategy , are general partners .

their background typically includes experience at a wall street investment bank , although two former secretaries of the treasury and a former securities and exchange commission ( sec ) chairman now run hedge funds .

the general partners often invest their own capital in the funds , but this is usually a small share of the total managed by the fund .

outside investors , who contribute capital but have no say in investment or management decisions , are the limited partners .

they are generally institutional investors — public and corporate pension funds , insurance companies , foundations , and endowments — or individual investors with significant amounts of resources .

in contrast to the general partners , the contributions of limited partners is usually a large share of the total managed by the fund .

hedge funds typically establish multiple funds to accommodate the tax planning preferences of different investors .

while they generally share a common pool of underlying assets , they are chartered in different jurisdictions to cater to different clientele .

by one estimate , nearly 11,000 hedge funds , or about 80% of the total , are registered in the cayman islands as well as their home country .

foreign investors and u.s. tax - exempt institutions may prefer to invest in foreign - chartered funds , while other types of u.s. investors find it disadvantageous to invest in foreign funds .

small public investors are generally not able to invest in hedge funds , because they lack either the assets or income .

under u.s. law , the sale of shares , or interests , in an investment partnership constitutes an offering of securities , and must be registered with the sec if the offering is public .

in order to avoid registration , and the associated disclosure requirements , most funds rely on exemptions in the securities laws that allow them to make unregulated "private" offerings .

in order to qualify for these exemptions , prospective limited partners must meet various income and asset thresholds .

 ( the most basic is the "accredited investor" standard — income of $200,000 or more in the past two years and at least $1 million in assets. ) .

recently , a number of hedge funds and private equity partnerships have gone public , by selling shares ( or units ) in an ipo .

their securities are now traded on the new york stock exchange and other major markets , and may be purchased by anyone .

these firms , which include the fortress investment group and blackstone , will operate much as before , but will be required to file quarterly and annual financial statements and make the full range of disclosures required by the sec .

congressional proposals have evolved since the 110 th congress from the full taxation of carried interest as ordinary income to more nuanced approaches that account for "enterprise value" and tax carried interest at some blend of the capital gains and ordinary income tax rates .

similarly , the president's fy2014 budget proposal calls for the taxation of carried interest as ordinary income less compensation from "enterprise value. .

as noted above , carried interest is the portion of fund managers' compensation that represents a percentage of the funds' total investment gains .

under current tax rules , it is generally taxed at the capital gains rate ( generally 20% ) when realized .

the current law treatment follows from the long - standing principle that the distributions of a partnership should be taxed the same as underlying income — or that the income should retain its character .

however , the current law treatment , according to a particular point of view , violates the economic principle of horizontal equity .

according to this point of view , fund managers provide labor to the fund the same as other workers provide to their employers .

as such , the principle of horizontal equity says the fund manager and worker should be taxed similarly .

one option to correct this potential issue would be to tax carried interest as ordinary income .

in the 113 th congress , s. 268 and the president's fy2014 budget proposal take a nuanced approach that treats carried interest as a mix of capital gains and ordinary income .

the tax reform act of 2014 would exempt carried interests derived from real estate but tax a portion of the remainder as ordinary income .

as a result , each proposal would treat a portion of carried interest as ordinary income and the remainder as capital gains income .

according to the joint committee on taxation , the provision in the tax reform act of 2014 would raise $3.1 billion in revenue in the fy2014-fy2023 budget window , while the provision in the president's fy2014 budget proposal would raise $17.4 billion in revenue in the fy2014-fy2023 budget window .

supporters of these proposals have argued that carried interest is essentially a fee for investment advisory services , and that the appropriate treatment is to tax it like other ordinary income .

opponents maintained that since the source of carried interest is earnings on the fund's investments , it should be treated like any other investment income: capital gains if held for more than a year , ordinary income if the holding period is less .

along with its reduced tax rates , capital gains income receives another benefit — termed a tax deferral — because it is not taxed until realized .

carried interest shares this benefit .

the concept of tax deferral relates to the timing of tax payments — with the idea that a taxpayer prefers to pay taxes in the future , rather than today because he or she can control the funds longer , use them in some other way , and benefit from the time value of money .

deferral increases in value with both the length of the deferral period and the taxpayer's marginal tax rate .

carried interest , discussed above , benefits from deferral since it is only taxed when realized — as is the case with capital gains .

in addition , hedge fund managers can amplify the benefits of deferral by electing to receive their compensation in shares of foreign - chartered funds .

as mentioned earlier , these foreign - chartered funds may appeal to different types of investors than their u.s. - chartered counterparts .

in addition to deferring u.s. tax as long as the money is held offshore , and not related to the conduct of a trade or business , the returns on the investment can compound tax - free — resulting in a substantial tax advantage .

the advantage is such that the new york times reported that a single hedge fund , citadel , has deferred at least $1.7 billion since it was founded in 1990 .

in the 110 th congress , h.r .

3996 , h.r .

4351 , and h.r .

6049 , all introduced by then committee on ways and means chairman rangel , would have included compensation deferred through foreign - chartered funds in the gross income of the hedge fund manager in the year the income is earned .

as mentioned above , h.r .

3996 was passed by both the house of representatives and the senate , though the senate amended the bill to remove this provision .

h.r .

4351 was passed by the house of representatives and referred to the senate committee on finance on january 22 , 2008 .

h.r .

6049 was passed by the house of representatives on may 21 , 2008 .

the value of investment services management partnerships is generally viewed as the present value of the future returns from fees and carried interest plus the value of traditional capital assets like stockholdings in companies , real estate , and goodwill ( often referred to as enterprise value ) .

how to tax this enterprise value has been central to the more recent debates concerning carried interest .

while there is a general common ground in the definition of enterprise value , there is not a consensus on its proper tax treatment .

from one perspective , the current law treatment of enterprise value ( as a capital gain ) is entirely unjustified and violates economic equity principles and long - standing tax policy principles on the treatment of business income .

the alternative view is that the current tax law treatment is justified on the grounds of long - standing tax policy principles on the treatment of pass - through income and is consistent with the treatment of other businesses .

the unsettled nature of how to tax enterprise value is , perhaps , reflected in s. 268 and the president's fy2014 budget proposal .

these proposals both reflect the position that enterprise value contains characteristics of both capital and ordinary income .

as a result , each proposal would allow enterprise value that is separable from other partnership value and unrelated to the provision of investment services to be taxed as capital gains .

instead of changing the tax treatment of fund managers' income , another approach would change the tax treatment of some hedge funds that are organized as publicly traded partnerships .

publicly traded partnerships are partnerships whose interests are traded on an established exchange or in a secondary market .

they are generally treated as corporations for tax purposes and subject to the corporation income tax with its 35% general rate , with two exceptions .

one exception consists of partnerships with at least 90% of their gross income from passive investments , such as dividends , interest , rents , capital gains , and mining and natural resources income .

a second exception consists of those partnerships that were publicly traded on december 17 , 1987 ; these partnerships , originally grandfathered in for 10 years , may now elect to retain partnership treatment by paying a tax of 3.5% of gross income from the active conduct of business .

these partnerships are not taxed at the corporate level .

in the 110 th congress , s. 1624 , introduced on june 14 , 2007 , by senator max baucus , and others , with senator chuck grassley as an original co - sponsor , would have changed the tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships that provide investment advisory and related asset management services: they would have been taxed as though they were corporations .

that is , they would have had to pay the corporate income tax on their earnings , rather than pass those earnings through to be taxed only as the partners' individual income .

in a news release , senator baucus stated that the bill was needed to ensure that some corporations are not disadvantaged because they conduct business in the corporate form and pay taxes as a corporation .

asset management service and investment advisory partnerships provide the same types of active business services as their corporate competitors .

our tax system functions best when it is fair .

the tax law ought to treat similarly situated taxpayers the same .

thus , these publicly traded partnerships should be taxed as corporations .

the bill was criticized by henry paulson , then secretary of the treasury , on the grounds that tax policy ought not to single out one industry sector .

chairman baucus held a hearing on the bill in the finance committee in august 2007 .

the bill was referred to the senate finance committee but did not advance .

