following the collapse of the former soviet union , congress authorized the closure of certain military installations under four brac rounds in 1988 , 1991 , 1993 , and 1995 .

these installations have been closed for many years , and the majority of the properties have been made available for civilian purposes .

however , cleanup efforts continue at some of the most contaminated properties , delaying their reuse .

public desire for their redevelopment has motivated ongoing concern about the pace and costs of cleaning up these remaining properties .

the completion of cleanup is often a key factor in economic redevelopment , because a property cannot be used for its intended purpose until it is cleaned up to a degree that would be suitable for that use .

in 2005 , the 109 th congress approved a new brac round .

although the department of defense ( dod ) is required to close and realign selected installations by 2011 , there is no statutory deadline for the cleanup of contaminated property .

the timing of cleanup will depend on response actions negotiated with federal and state regulators , capabilities of cleanup technologies , and the amount of funding appropriated by congress to support cleanup efforts .

this report explains the federal statutory requirements that govern the transfer and reuse of contaminated properties on closed military installations , discusses the status of cleanup to prepare these properties for reuse , examines estimates of costs to address remaining cleanup challenges , and identifies issues for congress .

as amended in 1986 , the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla , commonly referred to as superfund ) generally requires the united states to clean up contaminated federal property prior to transfer out of federal ownership .

this requirement applies to all contaminated property declared surplus to the needs of the federal government , including property on closed military installations .

the agency with administrative jurisdiction over a property usually administers and pays for the cleanup to satisfy the responsibility of the united states .

dod typically assumes this responsibility for closed military installations .

after a property is transferred out of federal ownership , the united states remains liable for any original contamination found not to have been sufficiently remediated .

however , the document transferring ownership typically guarantees cleanup only to a level suitable for a specific use , and in some cases may include a deed restriction prohibiting certain uses that would be considered unsafe relative to the level of cleanup performed .

considering this condition , the united states is usually held responsible for further cleanup to the extent that more work is found to be needed to make the originally agreed - upon use safe .

if a new owner later decides to use the property for another purpose that would require further cleanup , the new owner ordinarily is held responsible for additional cleanup costs to make the property suitable for that purpose .

property declared surplus to the needs of the federal government is typically transferred to a local redevelopment authority ( lra ) responsible for implementing a plan for civilian reuse .

while the administering agency generally must complete the cleanup prior to transfer out of federal ownership , cercla authorizes early transfer under certain conditions , including assurances that the cleanup will be carried out .

early transfer can speed the redevelopment process , if it may be feasible for cleanup to occur in conjunction with redevelopment planning and construction , or if a short - term use would be suitable for the existing level of contamination while cleanup proceeds to prepare the property for its eventual use .

early transfer also may offer the potential to speed the redevelopment process in situations in which the recipient voluntarily agrees to administer and pay for the cleanup .

in such cases , the property is usually sold at a discounted price to offset the cleanup costs borne by the purchaser .

a discounted price may lower a purchaser's initial costs to buy the property , but the purchaser does assume some financial risk if the cleanup costs are greater than expected .

the cost of environmental insurance to limit this financial risk may offset some of the initial savings gained from a discounted price .

if a property on a closed installation still could be of use to the federal government , dod may transfer it to another federal agency rather than make it available to non - federal entities .

if a contaminated property remains in federal ownership , cercla does not specify which agency has responsibility for the cleanup .

the determination of which agency performs the cleanup is subject to negotiation among the agencies involved , and as such is an executive branch decision .

although the agency that caused the contamination most often administers and pays for the cleanup , disagreements over this responsibility sometimes arise in negotiating the transfer of jurisdiction .

congress has sometimes addressed such disagreements in legislation , specifying agency responsibilities .

regardless of who administers the cleanup of a closed military installation , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and state regulatory agencies oversee cleanup decisions to ensure that applicable requirements are met .

cercla specifically requires epa to take the lead in overseeing cleanup of federal facilities on the national priorities list ( npl ) .

states usually oversee cleanup of federal facilities not on the npl .

cercla generally requires cleanup actions to achieve levels of exposure to contamination that would be protective of human health and the environment .

land use is critical in determining the potential exposure risks and the cleanup actions needed to address those risks .

cleanup generally is more extensive and more costly for land uses that would result in greater exposure risks .

cleanup typically is the most stringent and the most costly for residential use because of the greater likelihood of exposure among sensitive populations , including children and the elderly .

cleanup is usually the least costly and the least stringent for industrial use , as the exposure risks are not as great .

as amended , the defense base closure and realignment act requires dod to give "substantial deference" to an lra's redevelopment plan in determining the use of surplus property on closed military installations .

still , the locally preferred use can be constrained , if costs or technical challenges would make it infeasible to clean up a property to a certain degree .

epa guidance acknowledges that some uses may not be practical because of such challenges , and indicates that cleanup goals may need to be revised , which could result in "different , more reasonable land use ( s ) . .

dod administers a defense environmental restoration program to carry out cleanup actions under cercla on military installations in the united states .

multiple defense appropriations accounts fund this program .

two defense base closure accounts fund the cleanup of installations closed under the brac rounds .

the "1990" account consolidates funding for the cleanup of installations closed prior to the 2005 round .

this account is now entirely devoted to cleanup , as these installations were closed many years ago .

the "2005" account funds the cleanup of installations being closed under the 2005 round .

most of this account currently funds the actions necessary to close and realign the missions of the installations .

as these actions are completed , a greater portion of the 2005 account will be devoted to cleanup to prepare surplus properties for reuse .

the cleanup of realigned installations that remain in active use will be funded out of the defense environmental restoration accounts that support cleanup of active installations .

see the " estimated costs " section of this report for the amount of funding spent on the cleanup of closed installations over time out of the base closure accounts .

to manage cleanup efforts , dod divides each installation into discrete sites ( i.e. , parcels of land ) , based on the nature and boundary of contamination .

one installation may contain numerous sites with differing types of contamination .

as of the end of fy2007 , dod had identified a total of 5,356 sites on hundreds of installations closed under all five brac rounds where contamination was known or suspected to be present .

these sites include those on installations that are in the process of closing under the 2005 round .

the vast majority of sites on brac installations were contaminated with hazardous substances ( i.e. , chemical contaminants ) , but some sites contained abandoned or discarded munitions on former training ranges and munitions disposal facilities .

congress enacted specific authorities for the cleanup of munitions sites in the national defense authorization act for fy2002 ( p.l .

107-107 ) .

see crs report rs22862 , cleanup of u.s. military munitions: authorities , status , and costs , by [author name scrubbed] .

dod reported that planned response actions were complete at 70% of the 5,356 sites it had identified through fy2007 .

no response was required or expected at 14% of the sites because investigations revealed that the potential for exposure to contamination was within an acceptable range , based on applicable standards .

response actions were pending at 10% of the site inventory , with varying stages of progress among individual sites ranging from the assessment phase to the construction of cleanup remedies .

evaluations were pending at 6% of the sites , leaving much uncertainty as to the extent of contamination at those locations and the cleanup actions that will be required .

sites requiring no further response actions generally have been made available for their intended use .

some sites where response actions were not complete also have been made available using early transfer authority , or by leasing the property with ownership retained by the federal government .

however , remaining contamination and ongoing cleanup could limit the use of these properties .

table 1 presents the status of cleanup through fy2007 at sites on closed military installations by individual brac round .

considering that the cleanup of 2005 round installations began many years ago when these installations were still operational , cleanup generally should be at a more advanced stage upon closure than experienced under earlier rounds when cleanup efforts were less mature .

as of the end of fy2007 , planned response actions were complete , or not required , at half of the sites on 2005 round installations , leaving much of the property inventory suitable for reuse .

however , sites where response actions were complete would have been cleaned up to a level compatible with military use at that time .

if other uses are desired after closure , additional cleanup may be needed .

through fy2007 , dod had spent nearly $7.3 billion out of the base closure accounts over time to clean up contaminated sites on installations closed under all five brac rounds to prepare these properties for reuse .

in march 2007 , dod estimated that another $3.9 billion would be needed to complete all planned cleanup actions .

dod estimated the future cleanup costs based on its most recent knowledge of conditions at the sites presented in table 1 .

dod periodically revises its estimates as more is learned about the type and level of contamination at each site , and the actions that federal and state regulators will seek to address potential risks .

in effect , these estimates are "moving targets" that change as more information becomes available to project the costs of future actions .

uncertainties about the degree of cleanup that ultimately will be required at some sites make it challenging to accurately estimate the total costs to complete cleanup .

table 2 presents the past and estimated future costs to clean up contaminated sites at closed military installations by individual brac round .

some attention has been drawn to the impact that potentially higher cleanup costs could have on the savings expected from a brac round .

the closure of a military installation results in annual "savings" in operational expenses , but cleanup costs to prepare decommissioned properties for reuse can reduce these savings .

however , some of the cleanup costs would have been incurred regardless , as dod still is required to clean up its active installations to a degree that would be suitable for military purposes .

the amount of time and resources needed to complete the cleanup of closed military installations generally depends on the level of contamination on those properties , and the actions selected to make them suitable for civilian reuse .

cleanup can take many years in some instances , as the continuing cleanup of certain installations closed between 1988 and 1995 demonstrates .

however , the generally more advanced stage of cleanup at 2005 round installations anticipated upon closure may allow contaminated properties to become available for reuse more quickly .

still , the availability of funding and capabilities of cleanup technologies could limit the feasibility of cleanup at some installations , making certain land uses impractical and posing challenges to economic redevelopment .

it is difficult to ascertain whether dod's cleanup cost estimates are a reasonable approximation of the funding that will be needed to prepare closed installations for reuse .

because the civilian uses of installations to be closed in the 2005 round have yet to be decided , dod's cost estimates are based on a degree of cleanup that would be compatible with recent military use .

if a property were to be used for other purposes that would result in a higher risk of exposure to contamination , more stringent cleanup likely would be required to make the property suitable for that use .

in these circumstances , more time and resources could be needed to complete cleanup than dod has estimated .

