today's european union had its beginnings in 1957 with the creation of the european economic community ( eec ) .

the economic core of the eec called for the free movement of goods , capital , services , and people among its original members—france , germany , italy , belgium , the netherlands , and luxembourg .

during its first two decades , considerable progress was made in eliminating tariffs and quotas on trade in goods among its members .

much less progress was made in freeing up the movement of services , capital , and people .

for example , service sectors such as telecommunications , rail transport , banking , and medicine remained largely divided along national lines .

trips from one country to another required frequent passport checks , changes of money , and customs inspections , slowing commerce and travel considerably .

member states also maintained controls on capital flows as tools of national economic policy .

in support of the creation of a single european market where goods , services , capital and people could cross borders freely , member states enacted in 1987 the single european act ( sea ) , which made completion by 1992 of an open and free european market a top priority .

to facilitate achieving this objective , the member states agreed to pass single market legislation by a qualified majority rather than by a unanimous vote .

while substantial progress was achieved by 1992 , the process is still on - going .

for the eu to overcome remaining barriers , it is necessary for the european commission in brussels to propose eu - level directives ( or laws ) .

these directives , in turn , have to be adopted by the council of ministers and implemented in a non - discriminatory fashion by each member state .

through this cumbersome and complicated legislative process , directives governing the free movement of capital , labor , and services have taken more than a decade to be crafted and implemented .

in terms of capital market liberalization , the directives affecting mergers and takeovers were substantially watered down , resulting in limited market liberalization .

since the summer of 2005 , a number of eu member states have erected barriers to prevent cross - border mergers and acquisitions that undermine the effort to deepen the single market .

these include new anti - takeover laws , politically engineered corporate mergers of domestic firms , and populist appeals to national security or economic patriotism .

some in the media and representatives of the european commission in brussels have claimed that these actions are evidence of resurgent economic nationalism in europe .

the most prominent and recent of these actions occurred in: france: the government orchestrated a quick merger of two utilities , publicly traded suez sa , a french utility , and state - controlled gaz de france ( gdf ) , to fend off a potential takeover by enel of italy ; passed a new decree giving the government the right to veto or impose conditions on foreign takeovers in 11 "sensitive" sectors ; and expressed concerns about the prospect that pepsico was interested in buying the french yogurt giant , groupe danone .

in june 2006 french president jacques chirac stated that as a "matter of principle" he was against the proposed merger of the new york and euronext stock exchanges .

italy: italian politicians from both major political coalitions advocated blocking french bids for italian companies in retaliation for france's treatment of enel ; and italy's central bank blocked the acquisition of various italian banks by european rivals ; spain: the spanish government is attempting to prevent a hostile takeover of its gas utility endesa sa by the german electricity and gas utility e. on a , and has stated that madrid will do everything in its power to ensure that spain's energy companies remain spanish ; poland: in order to protect the dominant position of a state - owned bank , poland attempted to block the merger of two polish subsidiaries of the italian bank unicredit and the german bank hvb ; luxembourg: together with france , luxembourg endeavored to block mittal , an indian steel maker , from a takeover of the european conglomerate arcelor—a company formed in 2002 from three european firms based in luxembourg , spain , and france ; and germany: the government has clashed with the european commission over 'volkswagen law,' which protects volkswagen from hostile bids .

actions that discourage foreign companies from bidding for firms which are regarded as strategic or national champions present the eu with a significant challenge in its efforts to enforce the principle of the free movement of capital .

several eu officials have weighed into the public debate to warn about the dangers of resurgent economic nationalism in certain member states .

eu competition commissioner neelie kroes threatened to break up the eu energy giants in order to open the market for greater competition , while internal market commissioner charlie mccreevy said he refused to turn a blind eye to recent moves to defend national champions from foreign takeovers .

while neither questioned the principle of the mergers , both warned that protectionism in principle and in practice was contrary to community law .

commission president jose manuel barroso has gone further by arguing that "no member state , even the biggest member state , can go it alone .

economic nationalism was never the solution and is even less so today. .

in the spring of 2006 , the commission initiated a number of actions to counter the rise of economic nationalism .

these included a request to the european court of justice to rule on poland's attempt to block an italian lender from acquiring a stake in a polish bank ; a request to the italian government to comply with a june 2005 ruling by the european court on investment in italian energy companies ; a similar request to the spanish government to comply with the court's ruling over similar restrictions on foreign investment in spanish energy companies , and a request to france to justify its 2005 foreign investment decree affecting foreign investment in strategic sectors .

in reality , eu regulators lack sufficient powers to force countries to abide by various treaties intended to encourage competition and a single european market .

under competition policy rules , the commission can examine whether state - sponsored mergers unduly impede competition , and , if necessary , impose conditions on such mergers that might limit the range of business activities of the merged company .

the european competition rules , however , provide for such an investigation only if one of the merged companies accounts for less than two - thirds of its sales in the domestic market .

and under the current eu takeover directive , the eu commission intervenes only if protective measures imposed by the government against foreign investors violate eu rules such as the principle of the free movement of capital .

the takeover directive also contains exemptions and leeway for member states to adopt various kinds of anti - takeover defenses .

filing lawsuits against rule - breaking member states in the european court of justice in luxembourg can take years to resolve and may not guarantee results that are consistent with a single market .

in addition , when the european commission files lawsuits against member states in the european court , it risks igniting nationalistic or anti - brussels sympathies .

there are at least two perspectives on the significance of the resurgence of economic nationalism .

one view , which is more optimistic , interprets the resurgence as a reflection of how far the single market today has advanced , particularly as the blocking of mergers remains one of the few areas left for national authorities to play an interventionist role in a world where markets are increasingly global .

a second view , which is more pessimistic , interprets the resurgence as part of larger pressures and developments that have put support for trade liberalization , as well as support for a strong europe , on the defensive .

the united states and the eu share a huge and mutually beneficial economic partnership .

as the largest bilateral trade and investment relationship in the world , actions by either economic superpower can have important economic and political repercussions not only for each other , but also the rest of the world .

if anti - foreign merger actions escalate in europe , the united states could have a number of concerns .

perhaps most importantly , resurgent protectionism could aggravate europe's economic problems and lead to lower economic growth rates .

in the process , u.s. exports to and investments in europe could be curtailed .

resurgent economic nationalism that discriminates against u.s. companies could also provoke the united states , as well as other countries , to retaliate in response .

such a reaction could undermine the mutual economic benefits , including millions of jobs , that are derived from the robust two - way flow of foreign trade and investment .

it could also hurt eu efforts to play a constructive foreign policy role , particularly in calling on other countries to open their markets and in bringing the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations to a successful conclusion .

while these are all legitimate concerns , the eu's market opening activities still appear more powerful than the limited anti - merger actions of some governments .

on balance , these anti - merger actions have had limited economic and political effects to date .

