the benefits of greater educational attainment that accrue to individuals are both monetary ( eg , higher earnings ) and nonmonetary ( eg , better health ) .

the benefits of additional years of schooling extend beyond individuals and their families .

these societal benefits also are of a pecuniary ( eg , greater economic growth ) and nonpecuniary ( eg , increased civic involvement ) nature .

partly because of the spillover of benefits from individuals to society , congress has enacted measures to encourage more of the nation's population to enroll in postsecondary educational institutions ( eg , pell grants , education tax provisions ) .

this report focuses specifically on differences over time in selected labor market outcomes of individuals associated with their educational attainment .

workers with more education historically have had higher annual earnings on average than workers with less education .

in 2007 , the latest year for which data are available , a worker with a bachelor's degree earned 2.66 times the amount earned by a worker who had not graduated from high school ( $57,181 and $21,484 , respectively ) .

as also can be seen from the columns labeled "current dollars" in table 1 , the importance of educational attainment to earnings has increased over the years .

the wage premium of workers with a bachelor's degree compared to workers with some college courses or an associate degree grew by 13 percentage points from 51% on average in the first eight years of the 1980s to 64% on average in the first eight years of the 2000s .

the payoff to graduating as opposed to not graduating from high school similarly increased by 14 percentage points from an average of 33% in the earlier period to 47% thus far in the current decade .

the wage gap between workers with postsecondary education short of a four - year college degree and high school graduates also widened , but by 3 percentage points , from 10% on average in 1980-1987 to 13% in 2000-2007 .

all workers generally have seen their standard of living increase over the years , but their wages have been more insulated from rising prices the greater their educational attainment .

the growth in earnings of individuals who did not graduate from high school just slightly outpaced the rise in the consumer price index between 1987 and 2007 , which would have increased their purchasing power by $839 .

the real ( inflation - adjusted ) value of wages paid to workers with a high school diploma or some college or associate degree held up much better against price increases over the 20-year period .

they could have bought an additional $4,224 and $4,486 , respectively , in goods and services .

bachelor's degree holders fared the best: the purchasing power of their 2007 paychecks was $11,477 greater than their 1987 paychecks .

 ( see columns labeled "2007 dollars" in table 1 . ) .

the real average annual earnings of four - year college graduates have grown fairly steadily and very substantially over the years , while those of workers with a high school degree or less have fluctuated and not risen to as great a degree .

this disparate pattern has sparked still ongoing concern about the extent of wage inequality in u.s. society .

the annual earnings differences by level of education presented in table 1 can be expected to produce even larger disparities after years spent in the labor force .

according to a 2002 census bureau study , high school dropouts employed full - time year - round ( i.e. , at least 35 hours a week at least 50 weeks a year ) over a 40-year working life might earn a total of $1.0 million in 1999 dollars .

similarly employed high school graduates might earn $1.2 million , and those with some college courses or an associate degree might earn $1.5-$1.6 million .

college graduates employed full - time year - round throughout their working lives were estimated to earn considerably more , $2.1 million on average .

as educational attainment increases , the likelihood of unemployment decreases .

in 2008 , for example , the unemployment rate of workers age 25 and older was 9.0% if they lacked a high school diploma , 5.7% if they were high school graduates , 4.6% if they took some postsecondary courses or obtained an associate degree , and 2.6% if they had at least a bachelor's degree .

unlike the previously examined increase over time in the educational wage premium , relative unemployment rates by educational attainment generally have been stable since 1978 .

the risk of displacement is lower and the likelihood of reemployment is higher for long - tenured workers with at least a bachelor's degree compared to other workers .

workers with a four - year college degree or more were laid off from long - held jobs at a below - average rate from the late 1990s to the mid - 2000s , while the displacement rate of workers with a high school diploma or less usually equaled the average rate .

workers with more years of schooling who were displaced from full - time jobs had a higher rate of reemployment in full - time jobs than displaced workers with fewer years of education .

for example , 72% of workers with an advanced degree and 63% of workers with a bachelor's degree displaced from full - time jobs in the january 2003 to december 2005 period were reemployed in full - time jobs in january 2006 ; comparable reemployment rates were 57% among displaced high school graduates and 39% among displaced workers who did not enter or complete high school .

the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) projects that employment in occupations typically requiring at least a bachelor's degree will increase by 15.3% between 2006 and 2016 , well above the all - occupations average of 10.5% .

the nearly five million new jobs estimated to be available to persons with at least a four - year college degree could account for almost one - third of all jobs projected to be added to the economy in the ten - year period .

many of the estimated five million new jobs are in professional occupations .

some professional specialties — computer software engineers ( applications ) , computer systems analysts , and network systems and data communications analysts ; elementary and postsecondary school teachers ; and accountants and auditors — not only are projected to be among the fastest growing fields but also among those adding the largest number of positions through 2016 .

occupations that usually require little or no postsecondary education are projected to grow at a comparatively slow rate , but these less skilled comparatively low - paying jobs ( eg , retail salespersons , food preparation and serving workers , general office clerks , home health aides ) nonetheless rank among those estimated to experience the largest numerical increases in employment between 2006 and 2016 .

