cluster munitions are weapons that open in mid - air and disperse smaller submunitions — anywhere from a few dozen to hundreds — into an area .

they can be delivered by aircraft or from ground systems such as artillery , rockets , and missiles .

cluster munitions are valued militarily because one munition can kill or destroy many targets within its impact area , and fewer weapons systems are needed to deliver fewer munitions to attack multiple targets .

cluster munitions also permit a smaller force to engage a larger adversary and are considered by some an "economy of force" weapon .

many cluster munitions rely on simple mechanical fuzes that arm the submunition based on its rate of spin and explode on impact or after a time delay .

a newer generation of sensor - fuzed submunitions is being introduced by a number of nations to improve the munitions' and submunitions' accuracy and to reduce the large number of residual unexploded submunitions .

these sensor - fuzed submunitions are designed to sense and destroy vehicles without creating an extensive hazard area of unexploded submunitions .

cluster bombs were first used in world war ii , and inclusive of their debut , cluster munitions have been used in at least 21 states by at least 13 different countries .

cluster munitions were used extensively in southeast asia by the united states in the 1960s and 1970s , and the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) estimates that in laos alone , 9 million to 27 million unexploded submunitions remained after the conflict , resulting in over 10,000 civilian casualties to date .

cluster munitions were used by the soviets in afghanistan , by the british in the falklands , by the coalition in the gulf war , and by the warring factions in yugoslavia .

in kosovo and yugoslavia in 1999 , nato forces dropped 1,765 cluster bombs containing approximately 295,000 submunitions .

from 2001 through 2002 , the united states dropped 1,228 cluster bombs containing 248,056 submunitions in afghanistan , and u.s. and british forces used almost 13,000 cluster munitions containing an estimated 1.8 million to 2 million submunitions during the first three weeks of combat in iraq in 2003 .

senior u.s. government officials have stated that the united states has not used cluster munitions since 2003 , during the intervention in iraq .

it is widely believed that confusion over u.s. cluster submunitions ( blu - 97 / b ) that were the same color and size as air - dropped humanitarian food packets played a major role in the u.s. decision to suspend cluster munitions use in afghanistan but not before using them in iraq .

in 2006 , israeli use of cluster munitions against hezbollah forces in lebanon resulted in widespread international criticism .

israel was said to have fired significant quantities of cluster munitions — primarily during the last 3 days of the 34-day war after a u.n. cease - fire deal had been agreed to — resulting in almost 1 million unexploded cluster bomblets to which the u.n. attributed 14 deaths during the conflict .

reports maintain that hezbollah fired about 113 "cluster rockets" at northern israel and , in turn , israel's use of cluster munitions supposedly affected 26% of southern lebanon's arable land and contaminated about 13 square miles with unexploded submunitions .

one report states that there was a failure rate of upward of 70% of israel's cluster weapons .

the fundamental criticisms of cluster munitions are that they disperse large numbers of submunitions imprecisely over an extended area , that they frequently fail to detonate and are difficult to detect , and that submunitions can remain explosive hazards for decades .

civilian casualties are primarily caused by munitions being fired into areas where soldiers and civilians are intermixed , inaccurate cluster munitions landing in populated areas , or civilians traversing areas where cluster munitions have been employed but failed to explode .

two technical characteristics of submunitions — failure rate and lack of a self - destruct capability — have received a great deal of attention .

then - acting assistant secretary for political - military affairs stephen mull stated in may 2008 that the united states relies on cluster munitions "as an important part of our own defense strategy," and that washington's preferred alternative to a ban is "to pursue technological fixes that will make sure that these weapons are no longer viable once the conflict is over. .

u.s. officials note that cluster munitions are available for use by every combat aircraft in the u.s. inventory , they are integral to every army or marine maneuver element and in some cases constitute up to 50 percent of tactical indirect fire support .

u.s. forces simply can not fight by design or by doctrine without holding out at least the possibility of using cluster munitions .

the united states also maintains that using cluster munitions reduces the number of aircraft and artillery systems needed to support military operations , and that if cluster munitions were eliminated , significantly more money would need to be spent on new weapons systems , ammunition , and logistical resources .

officials further suggest that if cluster munitions were eliminated , most militaries would increase their use of massed artillery and rocket barrages , which would likely increase destruction of key infrastructure .

then - department of state legal adviser harold koh stated november 9 , 2009 , that the united states has determined that its "national security interests cannot be fully ensured consistent with the terms" of the ccm .

dod and the services have been and are currently involved in efforts to reduce cluster munitions failure rates .

the army's alternative warhead program ( awp ) is intended to assess and recommend new technologies to reduce or eliminate cluster munitions failure rates .

the awp program is viewed as particularly relevant , as the pentagon estimates that "upward of 80 percent of u.s. cluster munitions reside in the army artillery stockpile. .

in december 2008 , the army decided to cease procurement of a guided multiple launch rocket system ( gmlrs ) warhead — the dual - purpose improved conventional munition ( dpicm ) warhead — because its submunitions had a dud rate up to 5% .

the air force has also acquired cluster munitions that comply with the less than 1% failure rate — the cbu - 97 sensor fuzed weapon ( sfw ) and the cbu - 105 wcmd / sfw .

while dod's new 2017 cluster munitions policy calls for dod to continue its efforts to meet the 1% or less unexploded submunitions standard "as rapidly as industry can support," it is not yet known how this policy will affect the aforementioned programs or how it could result in the establishment of new programs .

consolidated appropriations acts the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) , which the president signed into law december 16 , 2009 , prohibits the provision of military assistance for cluster munitions , the issuing of defense export licenses for cluster munitions , or the sale or transfer of cluster munitions or cluster munitions technology unless "the submunitions of the cluster munitions , after arming , do not result in more than 1 percent unexploded ordnance across the range of intended operational environments. .

moreover , any agreement "applicable to the assistance , transfer , or sale of such cluster munitions or cluster munitions technology" must specify that the munitions "will only be used against clearly defined military targets and will not be used where civilians are known to be present or in areas normally inhabited by civilians. .

subsequent appropriations laws have included similar provisions ; the most recent is the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) , which the president signed into law on february 15 , 2019 .

