unemployment compensation for ex - servicemembers ( ucx ) provides income support to former active duty military personnel or reservists , who were recently released from active duty , while they search for work .

the emergency unemployment compensation act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-164 ) provides that former servicemembers be treated the same as other unemployed workers with respect to benefit levels , the waiting period for benefits , and benefit duration .

once entitlement to regular unemployment benefits is exhausted , former servicemembers may qualify the extended benefit ( eb ) payments if the program is active and available in their states .

from july 2008 through december 2013 , the temporary emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) benefit might have been available for additional weeks of unemployment benefits .

the euc08 program's authorization terminated on december 28 , 2013 , for all unemployed persons .

treatment of civilian spouses who quit their employment because their military spouse was transferred varies greatly among the states .

in the majority of states , a quit to follow a transferred spouse may be deemed a "good personal" cause and the newly unemployed worker may receive uc benefits .

however , some state uc programs do not award uc benefits to workers who quit their jobs because a spouse was transferred , deeming this as a "voluntary quit. .

the laws of the state may go further and include a specific disqualification for claimants who quit work to relocate with a spouse until certain additional income is generated .

the disqualification following a "voluntary quit" continues until the claimant returns to work , completes a specified duration of work , and earns wages of a specified amount .

in other states , the disqualification is time - limited .

these states penalize the worker for quitting , but recognize that economic conditions may be such that even a person who diligently seeks work may find none .

the reasoning is that beyond a certain point , if a diligent job seeker is still unemployed , such continuing unemployment is attributable to labor market conditions rather than their decision to quit .

thus , spouses relocating to areas of high unemployment or limited opportunities may become eligible for benefits even if initially disqualified .

twenty - seven states and the district of columbia allow uc benefits if a worker quits to accompany a spouse who has been transferred regardless of military status ( labeled "y" in table 2 ) .

in addition , another 20 states have special exceptions for workers who quit to follow their transferred military spouse ( labeled as "military only" ) .

only idaho , louisiana , and north dakota do not consider quitting to follow a military spouse a voluntary quit "good cause. .

state unemployment taxes are levied on employers based on a combination of established rates and the employer's past history of its workers using the uc system .

generally , employers with a greater history of unemployed workers would have a worse experience rating and would pay higher state unemployment taxes .

military service of business owners or employees may impact the tax rate that certain employers face .

furthermore , if workers who quit to join a transferred military spouse receive uc benefits , this may impact the overall state unemployment tax burden of most , if not all , of the state's employers .

below are some examples of these situations: a business owner , if called up for active military service , may need to lay off some or all of the business's workers .

once the business owner returns from military service , the revival of the business may mean that the small business may face a new , higher state unemployment tax rate .

if the servicemember serves for less than two years , some of the worker's ucx benefit may be based on nonmilitary work .

 ( these workers receive a hybrid uc / ucx benefit. ) .

in some states , their former ( civilian ) employers may face a state unemployment tax increase as a result .

workers who quit their jobs and move to accompany their military spouse may receive uc benefits in many states as listed in table 2 .

these states do not charge uc benefits to employer accounts when workers voluntarily quit their jobs to accompany a transferred military spouse .

the benefits paid to a worker accompanying a military spouse generally would not increase the state unemployment taxes of the worker's former employer .

however , these benefits are still charged to the state's account within the utf .

as a result , the cost of benefits is passed on to the state's employers as a socialized cost and may increase the overall state unemployment tax rate .

states may choose to create provisions that remove or limit these tax increases in certain situations .

for example: in illinois , business owners who are called to active duty from the reserves and had to close their firms are not charged for the increases attributable to uc benefits for the workers who lose their jobs on account of the closure .

when the business owner returns and reopens his or her business , the business's state unemployment tax rate is not increased .

some states provide for the non - charging of benefits for unemployment directly resulting from reinstatement of another employee upon his or her completion of uniformed service duty .

senator ron johnson sponsored s. 1356 , which was enacted as the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , p.l .

114-92 .

in addition to many other actions , the law altered certain conditions for individuals to receive ucx .

the law generally prohibits the concurrent receipt of ucx and post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance but did provide exceptions .

in addition , the law doubled the number of days ( from 90 to 180 continuous days ) a reserve member of the armed forces would have to be on active duty to qualify for ucx .

two earlier proposals had similar provisions , but did not include exceptions to the prohibition of concurrent receipt .

representative mac thornberry sponsored h.r .

1735 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( vetoed by president obama on october 22 , 2015 ) .

the bill contained two provisions regarding unemployment compensation for former servicemembers .

section 535 of s. 1376 includes a provision that would prohibit the concurrent receipt of unemployment benefits for former military servicemembers ( ucx ) and post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance .

section 592 of the bill would double the number of days a reserve member of the armed forces would have to be on active duty to qualify for ucx ( from 90 to 180 ) .

senator john mccain sponsored an identically named bill ( s. 1376 ) that contained similar provisions .

