in the first few months of 2005 , two leading data brokers , lexisnexis and choicepoint , announced that unauthorized individuals had breached their security measures and obtained personal information ( eg , social security numbers , addresses ) about hundreds of thousands of individuals .

these companies and others like them — so - called "data brokers" — operate largely free from federal and state regulation .

the recent scandals have led to calls for tighter regulation of the data brokerage industry , creating the need for more complete information on the types of businesses that make up this industry , and the types of services they provide .

this report provides an overview of the industry and specific case studies of choicepoint and lexisnexis .

personal information for background checks is of course essential for employers and criminal investigators .

businesses that have been able to use the internet to quickly provide such information have grown tremendously over the past several years , as the events of september 11 , 2001 , and the subsequent war on terror have put a premium on accurate identification of individuals in both the public and private sectors .

"data brokers" — companies like choicepoint , lexisnexis , axciom , experian , us search , and information search — have prospered by fulfilling this need .

law enforcement , in particular , has found data brokers useful , as these private companies maintain and organize personal information on individuals in a manner that may not be legally available to government actors .

the privacy act , for example , requires federal agencies to limit the amount of information on american citizens that these agencies maintain and disseminate .

the act establishes the principle that the government should "collect information to the greatest extent practicable directly from the subject individual when the information may result in adverse determinations about an individual's rights , benefits , and privileges under federal programs. .

most data brokers sell data that they collect from public records ( eg , driver's license records , vehicle registration records , criminal records , voter registration records , property records , occupational licensing records ) or from warranty cards , credit applications , etc .

in addition , data brokers purchase so - called "credit headers" from credit reporting agencies .

information on a credit header generally includes a person's name , social security number , address , phone numbers , and birth date .

while the release of certain information , such as data associated with a credit report , is subject to federal law , data brokers are largely free from state and federal regulation .

generally , companies or government agencies purchase from data brokers information about an individual — including his or her social security number .

the vast majority of these transactions are conducted via the internet , rather than person - to - person .

of course , the anonymity of most data brokerage transactions has opened the door for criminals to pose as legitimate businesses and obtain vital information about an individual — usually a social security number — and steal his or her identity .

it has been reported in the past , for example , that identity thieves — using stolen credit card numbers — have obtained information about victims and transferred funds from the victims' accounts , written phony checks against those accounts , etc .

as the following case studies show , the danger of identity theft remains , despite the implementation of tighter safeguards by data brokers .

while the growth of companies that gather and sell information has tracked the rise of personal computers since the early 1980's , two events led to the exponential growth of data brokerage firms since 2000: ( 1 ) the explosion of the internet throughout the 1990's ; and ( 2 ) the development by florida - based programmer john asher of parallel programming software allowing a researcher to use bits of information about an individual ( eg , name , social security number ) to search several databases simultaneously and find more information about that person within seconds .

asher built two companies on this technology , and later sold the companies to choicepoint and lexisnexis , who have used the technology to become two of the most successful data brokers in the world .

as the market for personal information has grown — particularly in light of the war on terror — so too has grown the data brokerage industry .

the choicepoint and lexisnexis scandals , however , have spurred debate over the security of personal information collected and sold by data brokers .

