section 1811 of the social security act provides that social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) beneficiaries are eligible for medicare hospital insurance ( part a ) .

individuals are also eligible to purchase medicare supplementary medical insurance ( part b ) or enroll in a medicare advantage plan ( formerly known as a medicare+choice plan ) .

ssdi beneficiaries are also eligible for voluntary prescription drug benefits ( part d ) .

generally , ssdi beneficiaries under age 65 are eligible for medicare coverage in the month after they have received 24 months of ssdi benefits .

because of the five - month waiting period from onset of the disabling condition for disabled individuals to be qualified to receive ssdi benefits , this results in a total of 29 months after the onset of the disability before an individual is eligible for medicare benefits .

thus , at the beginning of the 30 th month since the onset of the qualifying disability , ssdi beneficiaries become eligible for medicare coverage .

for ssdi beneficiaries under 65 years of age , there are exceptions to the required 24-month waiting period for certain diseases .

specifically , ssdi beneficiaries qualify for medicare after 24 months of receiving ssdi benefits ( the general rule described previously ) ; or at the first month of receiving ssdi benefits if the beneficiary has amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als , or lou gehrig's disease ) ; or after the third month when a beneficiary has end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) or kidney failure ; or in the month in which a beneficiary receives a kidney transplant .

the als exception went into effect july 1 , 2001 as a result of the consolidated appropriations act of 2001 , p.l .

106-554 .

the esrd provision was part of social security amendments of 1972 , p.l .

92-603 .

in addition to ssdi beneficiaries , other individuals who are under age 65 may be eligible for medicare on account of a disabling condition as described below .

certain disabled local , state , and federal employees who do not receive ssdi benefits may be eligible after the waiting period .

disabled widows and widowers ages 50 to 65 ( and disabled divorced widows and widowers ages 50 to 65 ) are eligible for medicare after a 24-month qualifying period if they are receiving social security benefits based on disability .

for disabled widows / widowers , previous months of eligibility for supplemental security income ( ssi ) based on disability may count toward the qualifying period .

certain dependent adult children of medicare beneficiaries are eligible for medicare if they developed a permanent and severe disability before age 22 and thus qualify for ssdi benefits based on a parent's work history .

the two - year waiting period applies and starts when an individual turns 18 or when he or she is determined to be disabled if it is after age 18 .

a spouse or child may be eligible for medicare , based on a worker's record , if the spouse or child is on continuing dialysis for esrd or has a kidney transplant , even if no other family member participates in the medicare program .

table 1 shows the number and percentage of persons under 65 years old who received medicare in july 2005 due to disabling conditions .

in 2006 , just over 7 million beneficiaries under the age of 65 received medicare on account of disability status .

more than 43% of disabled beneficiaries were between the ages 55 and 64 .

more men ( 53.3% ) than women ( 46.7% ) received this benefit and the vast majority ( 73.5% ) were white .

the social security amendments of 1972 , p.l .

92-603 , extended medicare to persons with disabilities who had been entitled to social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) benefits for at least 24 consecutive months .

the provision required the waiting period to begin with the first month of ssdi entitlement , which is five months after the onset of the disability .

according to research based on new ssdi beneficiaries in 1995 who qualified upon their own work record , 11.8% died within the waiting period , 2.1% recovered , and 86.1% became entitled to medicare .

the study estimated hypothetical medicare costs for the first 24 months of ssdi entitlement to be $10,055 in 2000 dollars per person .

costs varied substantially by diagnostic group and by whether the person died or recovered during the waiting period .

on average , beneficiaries who died during the waiting period were estimated to cost $25,864 , whereas those who recovered were estimated to cost $1,506 .

one research study suggested that eliminating the 24-month medicare waiting period would cost $5.3 billion while another study estimated the cost at $8.7 billion .

the differences in the estimates are because: ( 1 ) the $5.3 billion used 2000 dollars while the $8.7 billion is in 2002 dollars: ( 2 ) the $5.3 billion estimate is for only ssdi beneficiaries that qualified under their own work record while the $8.7 billion estimate includes disabled adult children and disabled widow ( er ) s ; and ( 3 ) each used substantially different estimation methodologies .

neither of these estimates include the cost of the prescription drug benefit that started in january 2006 .

in 2002 , approximately 40% of ssdi beneficiaries in the medicare waiting period were enrolled in medicaid .

one study estimated that the federal government would save $2.5 billion in medicaid if the 24-month waiting period was eliminated ; however , these federal medicaid savings would more than be offset by the aforementioned cost increases to the medicare program .

additionally , the states would realize $1.8 billion in medicaid savings if the waiting period was eliminated .

