the growth of china and india as large consumers of energy , coupled with an inability to develop reliable and affordable alternatives to oil and natural gas , has led to the belief that the power to ensure access to international energy resources has shifted from energy consumers to energy producers .

since 2005 russia has several times drastically raised the price of its natural gas supplies to european countries as a means to squeeze them economically and politically .

these actions also underscored the shift towards the ability of energy producers to exert pressure on countries dependent upon them for supplies .

the united states and its european allies are discussing the appropriate institutions and policies for ensuring energy security .

the bush administration introduced a discussion of energy security at nato in february 2006 , with the support of key allies .

at the same time , eu governments view energy security in a broad manner , and most believe that political and economic measures are the first steps to ensure access to energy resources .

most eu members are also members of nato , and the two organizations may handle energy security in a complementary manner .

most european countries are heavily reliant upon imported energy .

today , eu countries as a whole import 50% of their energy needs , a figure expected to rise to 70% by 2030 .

russia is a key supplier of oil and natural gas .

germany imports 32% of its energy from russia .

poland imports two - thirds of its natural gas needs from russia , and 97% of its oil .

as a whole , eu countries import 25% of their energy needs from russia .

in one estimate , by 2030 eu countries will import 40% of their gas needs from russia , and 45% of their oil from the middle east .

in addition , oil in particular is found largely in unstable areas of the world such as the middle east , a factor in u.s. and european concerns over energy security .

european governments view energy security primarily in an economic and political context .

the eu floated a proposal meant to build interdependence between eu members and russia to secure reliable energy supplies from russia .

the eu has discussed with russia a structured arrangement in which russia would sell energy not only to its principal customers in central and eastern europe , but to more distant customers in western europe .

in return , the eu is asking moscow to allow european companies to develop russian energy reserves .

but russia has rejected key elements of this proposal .

moscow for the most part has not allowed foreign ownership of its pipelines , and has squeezed out some foreign companies that were developing its energy reserves .

at the same time , it has secured access to some european markets , for example , through agreements to sell gas to hungary and france .

russia has taken steps to build its leverage in european energy markets .

in december 2007 , russia , turkmenistan , and kazakhstan signed an agreement to build a new gas pipeline around the caspian sea .

the new pipeline would send central asian natural gas to the russian energy grid ; russia has repriced such gas , from another pipeline , twofold before selling it to european customers .

the united states and some eu governments have sought instead a trans - caspian sea pipeline that would bypass the russian grid , and provide natural gas more cheaply to europe , thereby diminishing as well greater potential russian leverage tied to the supply of energy .

russia has also discussed linking its natural gas supply grid to that of algeria , which also supplies gas to europe .

eu energy commissioner andris piebalgs has charged that the two governments may be planning to develop an energy cartel that would further weaken competitive pricing .

to prevent impediments to competition and to improve energy security , the eu commission is urging new infrastructure , including terminals to receive liquified natural gas ; construction of new pipelines from the caspian region and north africa ; and single european energy grids for continental electricity and natural gas markets to challenge the grip of national energy firms on their national markets .

the commission has also recommended that companies producing raw energy not be allowed to own distribution networks , a step intended to encourage competition .

some eu governments , such as france , have large public entities that own both the sources of energy and the distribution network , and oppose this proposal .

should the eu eventually adopt the commission's proposal , russian efforts to buy parts of the european energy grid might be set back .

few observers believe that moscow's pricing agreements for its gas exports to its neighbors indicate that the market process is working successfully .

some eu officials contend that russia needs european ( and other ) firms' good will and continued investment in its decaying energy infrastructure to maintain existing production and develop its oil and gas reserves to sell energy products abroad .

some european and u.s. officials believe that germany may become too reliant on russian energy supplies and move away from its eu partners and the united states .

east european states in particular , once in moscow's sphere , believe that they could find themselves unable to ensure reliable and affordable energy supplies from gazprom , the powerful state - controlled russian energy company .

they point to the former schroeder government's deal with gazprom to involve german companies in the development of a russian - german gas pipeline under the baltic sea as a special arrangement that appears to promise a supply to germany that other states might not enjoy .

some governments believe that russia has little interest in market forces in the energy sector .

in this view , russia seeks high energy prices to maximize profits .

these governments note that the russian government has a prevailing control over gazprom , hardly a model of capitalist entrepreneurship , and that gazprom was behaving like a monopoly in ratcheting up the price of natural gas to its neighbors .

knowing that ukraine , for example , had no reliable alternatives for gas supply , gazprom raised prices threefold and threatened a sixfold rise .

gazprom also controls the transit of non - russian energy supplies to ukraine , and threatened rapid rises in transit fees as well .

russia has temporarily followed similar policies towards georgia , lithuania , and belarus .

political motives seem apparent in such policies .

in 2003 , putin himself said that gazprom is a "powerful political and economic lever of influence over the rest of the world. .

in december 2007 , putin designated dimitri medvedev , the president of gazprom , as his successor as russian president , a move that could signal continuation of russia's aggressive energy policy .

some u.s. officials believe that nato could play a role in building international political solidarity in the event of a deliberate disruption of energy flows .

nato's military capability could be severely limited should russia or other suppliers cut european energy supplies in a crisis .

to counter such a move , nato might coordinate policies among member states and with non - member partner governments to share resources and to bring an end to an energy disruption .

nato might also provide security for infrastructure in energy - producing states facing unrest .

iran has threatened to use its energy reserves to attain political objectives .

in response to possible sanctions due to its refusal to comply with requirements by the international atomic energy agency on its nuclear program , iran has threatened to cut off or limit its energy supplies to buyers .

beyond deliberate policies affecting energy security , there are many countries in central asia and the middle east that are unstable , have a need for new energy infrastructure investment , and have insecure transportation systems due to political unrest .

some of these countries are in nato's partnership for peace program , or desire a closer association with nato .

nato member states increasingly believe that the alliance must be a global player with global partners .

this trend is evident in afghanistan , for example , where australia and new zealand are expending resources to bring stability through nato's international security assistance force , even though the two countries are not nato members .

nato's role in energy security could be complementary to the eu's effort to strengthen market forces and interdependence in the international energy sector .

u.s. officials agree with their eu counterparts that market forces can lead to greater energy security .

diversification of supply , for example , through building more pipelines that are secure , is one course of action .

turkey could play a major role , as key pipelines under discussion originating in the caspian region may cross its territory , thereby avoiding the russian energy grid .

joint investment efforts to build such pipelines in and with energy producers such as kazakhstan and azerbaijan could be an important step in this direction .

both countries are members of nato's partnership for peace program , and are seeking closer relations with the united states and its allies .

development of more liquified natural gas ( lng ) transport and reception facilities from distant suppliers , such as nigeria , into europe could be another course of action .

coupled with the development of new oil and gas pipelines could be an offer from nato ( and / or eu ) members to provide security for energy infrastructure in periods of unrest or conflict in supplier and transit countries .

the 110 th congress has shown strong interest in energy security .

congress passed the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) , which will raise vehicle fuel efficiency standards and require increased use of alternative fuels , both means to ensure greater energy security .

in november 2006 senator lugar gave a speech in which he urged that energy security be raised to an article v , or mutual security , issue .

house and senate committees are expected to hold hearings on energy security , with attention to nato's possible role , in the second session of the 110 th congress .

nato is attempting to become a global security organization , concentrating on protection of the interests of the united states and its canadian and european partners , but also engaging non - member states as global partners .

nato's role in energy security remains uncertain , however , as some individual members may prefer a greater role for the eu .

a political role in energy security for nato seems most likely in the near future .

under nato's istanbul cooperation initiative of 2004 , the allies have begun discussions with bahrain , qatar , kuwait , and the united arab emirates to build practical cooperation in the security field , including the fight against terrorism .

some middle eastern governments are concerned about terrorist attacks on their oil facilities , but it is not publicly known whether nato has discussed this issue with the four governments .

partnership for peace countries , such as kazakhstan and azerbaijan , that are important energy producers often seek ways to associate themselves more closely with nato , in part to diminish russian influence on their soil , in part to develop reliable partners in an unstable region .

it is possible that nato will seek ways to provide security for the energy infrastructure of such countries .

at the same time , the eu may encourage its member states to invest more heavily in that infrastructure .

there is division in the eu over management of the union's growing dependence on russian oil and gas .

several states , led by poland , wish to engage nato more fully in ensuring energy security in this relationship .

while in the early stages of discussion , poland is exploring a role for nato and the united states , perhaps only diplomatically , in which u.s. leverage on moscow could be an element for encouraging responsible russian behavior and deflecting any russian attempt to divide the europeans .

most eu governments clearly prefer that market forces secure access to energy .

a well - structured commercial partnership with russia might be one mark of such a policy .

another would be the effort of the eu3 ( germany , france , and britain ) and the united states to curtail iran's nuclear program .

the eu3 desire completion of that effort in the un before there is any discussion of a military organization like nato assuming responsibility for a broader policy of energy security .

in addition , some nato partner governments in central asia and the middle east might be reluctant to accept allied assistance in securing the resource that is central to their survival .

the belief is widespread in the middle east that the united states invaded iraq in part to secure access to its oil .

there might be popular opposition to any nato effort to secure energy infrastructure in some of these countries .

moreover , the united states has been unable to provide full security to pipelines in iraq , and nato might have similar difficulties in partnership countries .

russia is also a factor .

turkmenistan and kazakhstan depend upon russia as a transit country for their pipeline shipments to the west , and could be subject to moscow's pressure to spurn nato proposals of assistance .

