cuba's peaceful political succession from one communist leader to another raises questions about the future direction of u.s. policy .

current u.s. policy can be described as a dual - track policy of isolating cuba through comprehensive economic sanctions , including restrictions on trade and financial transactions , while providing support to the cuban people through such measures as funding for democracy and human rights projects and u.s. - government sponsored broadcasting to cuba .

the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-114 ) sets forth a number of conditions for the suspension of the embargo , including that a transition cuban government: does not include fidel or raúl castro ; has legalized all political activity ; has released all political prisoners ; and is making progress in establishing an independent judiciary and in respecting internationally recognized human rights .

the actual termination of the embargo would require additional conditions , including that an elected civilian government is in power .

the dilemma for u.s. policy is that the legislative conditions could keep the united states from having any leverage or influence as events unfold in a post - fidel cuba and as cuba moves toward a post - raúl cuba .

the bush administration has made substantial efforts to prepare for a political transition in cuba .

in 2004 and 2006 , the administration's commission for assistance to a free cuba prepared two reports detailing how the united states could provide support to a cuban transition government to help it respond to humanitarian needs , conduct free and fair elections , and move toward a market - based economy .

a criticism of the reports , however , has been that they presuppose that cuba will undergo a rapid democratic transition , and do not entertain the possibility of reform or economic change under a communist government .

on the basis of these reports , critics maintain that the united states may be unprepared to deal with alternative scenarios of cuba's political transition .

over the past several years congress has often debated policy toward cuba , with one or both houses at times approving legislative provisions that would ease u.s. sanctions on cuba .

president bush has regularly threatened to veto various appropriations bills if they contained provisions weakening the embargo , and ultimately these provisions have been stripped out of final enacted measures .

in 2007 , the lack of any significant policy changes in cuba under raúl appeared to diminish the impetus in congress for any major change in policy toward cuba , although raúl's official installation as president could alter that .

since assuming power , raúl castro has made several public offers to engage in dialogue with the united states that have been rebuffed by u.s. officials who maintain that change in cuba must precede a change in u.s. policy .

in an august 2006 interview , raúl asserted that cuba has "always been disposed to normalize relations on an equal plane," but at the same time he expressed strong opposition to current u.s. policy toward cuba , which he described as "arrogant and interventionist. .

in response , assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs thomas shannon reiterated a u.s. offer to cuba , first articulated by president bush in may 2002 , that the administration was willing to work with congress to lift u.s. economic sanctions if cuba were to begin a political opening and a transition to democracy .

according to shannon , the bush administration remains prepared to work with congress for ways to lift the embargo if cuba is prepared to free political prisoners , respect human rights , permit the creation of independent organizations , and create a mechanism and pathway toward free and fair elections .

raúl castro reiterated an offer to negotiate with the united states in a december 2006 speech .

he said that "we are willing to resolve at the negotiating table the longstanding dispute between the united states and cuba , of course , provided they accept , as we have previously said , our condition as a country that will not tolerate any blemishes on its independence , and as long as said resolution is based on the principles of equality , reciprocity , non - interference , and mutual respect. .

more recently , in his july 26 , 2007 speech , raúl reiterated for the third time an offer to engage in dialogue with the united states , and strongly criticized u.s. economic sanctions on cuba .

this time , raúl pointed to the future of relations with the next u.s. administration , and stated that "the new administration will have to decide whether it will keep the absurd , illegal , and failed policies against cuba , or accept the olive branch that we extended. .

he asserted that "if the new u.s. authorities put aside arrogance and decide to talk in a civilized manner , they will be welcome .

if not , we are willing to deal with their hostile policies , even for another 50 years if necessary. .

a u.s. state department spokesman responded that "the only real dialogue that's needed is with the cuban people. .

in the aftermath of fidel's announcement that he would step down as head of government , u.s. officials maintained there would be no change in u.s. policy .

in the context of raúl castro's succession , there are two broad policy approaches to contend with political change in cuba: a stay the course or status - quo approach that would maintain the policy of isolating the cuban government with economic sanctions ; and an approach aimed at influencing cuban government and society through an easing of sanctions and increased contact and engagement .

advocates of continued sanctions argue that the cuban government under raúl castro has not demonstrated any willingness to ease repression or initiate any political or economic openings .

secretary of commerce carlos gutierrez asserts that "the succession from fidel to raúl is a preservation of dictatorship" and that "the regime needs to have a dialogue with the cuban people before it has one with the united states. .

other supporters of current policy maintain that easing economic sanctions would prolong the communist regime by increasing money flowing into its state - controlled enterprises , while continued sanctions would keep up the pressure to enact deeper economic reforms .

those advocating an easing of sanctions argue that the united states needs to take advantage of cuba's political succession to abandon its long - standing sanctions - based policy that they maintain has had no practical effect in changing the policies of the cuban government .

they argue that continuing the status quo would only serve to guarantee many more years of hostility between cuba and the united states , and reduce the chances for positive change in cuba by slowing the pace of liberalization and reform .

others argue that the united states should work toward engaging and negotiating with cuba in order to bring incremental change because even the smallest reforms can help spur popular expectations for additional change .

