most civilian federal employees participate in one of two federal retirement systems .

in general , employees hired before 1984 are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and those who were hired in 1984 or later are covered by the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) .

employees enrolled in csrs do not pay social security taxes and do not earn social security benefits based on their employment in the federal government .

employees enrolled in fers pay social security taxes and earn social security benefits .

employees in either system can contribute to the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) , but only employees enrolled in fers receive employer matching contributions .

as governmental plans , csrs and fers are not subject to the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ; p.l .

93-406 ) , which governs many aspects of employer - sponsored retirement plans in the private sector .

erisa establishes certain rights for the spouses and former spouses of participants in private - sector plans .

to protect spouses and former spouses , erisa requires that the default form of benefit in a defined benefit pension plan must be a joint and survivor annuity with at least a 50% survivor benefit ; a retirement plan must comply with the terms of a qualified domestic relations order ( qdro ) issued by a state court that divides retirement benefits between the parties to a divorce ; the written consent of both spouses must be secured in order for a married participant in a defined contribution plan to name anyone other than his or her spouse as the beneficiary if the participant were to die ; and the default form of annuity in a defined contribution plan that offers this form of benefit must be a joint and survivor annuity .

retirement benefits for federal employees are governed by chapters 83 ( csrs ) and 84 ( fers ) of title 5 of the united states code .

these chapters establish rights of the spouse or former spouse of a current or former federal employee that are similar in many respects to those established by erisa for private - sector plans ; however , there are a few important differences .

for example , like erisa , title 5 requires the default form of benefit under csrs and fers to be a joint and survivor annuity , and both erisa and title 5 require the written consent of the participant and spouse in order to waive the survivor annuity .

on the other hand , while both erisa and title 5 allow a pension to be divided between the parties to a divorce , the laws differ with respect to when pension payments to the former spouse can begin .

under erisa , a court can require a plan to begin paying benefits to the former spouse when the plan participant has reached the earliest retirement age under the plan , regardless of whether the participant has yet retired .

in contrast , even if a state court decree of divorce or annulment has awarded a share of a federal employee's retirement annuity to a former spouse , title 5 prohibits payment of any part of a csrs or fers annuity to a former spouse until the employee has separated from federal service , is eligible to receive a csrs or fers annuity , and has applied for an annuity .

another difference between erisa and title 5 is in the designation of beneficiaries in defined contribution plans .

erisa requires a married participant in a defined contribution plan to secure the written consent of his or her spouse in order to name anyone other than the spouse as the plan beneficiary in the event of the participant's death .

in contrast , federal regulations allow a participant in the thrift savings plan for federal employees to name anyone as the plan beneficiary in the event of the participant's death "without the knowledge or consent of any person , including his or her spouse. .

a state court decree of divorce , annulment , or legal separation can award a former spouse of a federal employee either a share of the employee's retirement annuity , a survivor annuity , or both types of annuity .

to award a former spouse both a share of the employee's retirement annuity and a survivor annuity , the court order must specify both benefits .

the office of personnel management ( opm ) will pay only the benefits that are specified in the court order .

federal employees enrolled in fers participate in social security .

the former spouse of a worker is eligible for a social security spouse's benefit at the age of 62 if the couple were married for at least 10 years , and if the worker is receiving , or is entitled to , social security benefits .

if the former spouse of the worker remarries , he or she generally cannot collect benefits on the worker's record unless the marriage ends by death , divorce , or annulment .

the divorced spouse of a worker insured by social security can receive widow or widower benefits if the couple were married at least 10 years .

survivor benefits terminate if the divorced spouse remarries before the age of 60 unless the later marriage ends , by death , divorce , or annulment .

remarriage does not affect social security survivor benefits being paid to the children of a deceased worker .

