dod's leases of foreign - built ships raise several potential questions for congress , including the following: how many additional foreign - built ships might dod in the future decide to lease , with renewals , for total periods of more than five years ? .

if dod leases of foreign - built ships were limited to no more than two years , including all options to renew or extend the contract , in how many cases would dod purchase a ship and have it built in a u.s. yard rather than lease a foreign - built ship ? .

what would be the resulting impact on workloads , revenues , and employment levels at various u.s. shipyards , and on u.s. merchant marine employment ? .

would this impact be in the national security interest ? .

what is the comparative cost effectiveness of meeting dod sealift requirements under current ship leasing authorities , under a two - year limit for leases of foreign - built ships , and through purchase of u.s. - built ships ? .

how much risk would there be of a mismatch between dod's sealift requirements and dod sealift capacity if a two - year limit on dod leases of foreign - built ships resulted in a decision by dod to purchase u.s. - built ships rather than lease foreign - built ships ? .

what are the potential implications , if any , of dod's leases of foreign - built ships for acquisition of other dod capabilities , such as capabilities provided by aircraft ? .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-230 of july 24 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 , states: leasing of foreign built ships the committee remains very concerned with the navy's practice of entering into extended leases for foreign built ships .

historically , these leases have met the intent of long term capital lease restrictions on an individual basis , but the recurring nature of several of the leases violates the spirit and intent of the 1990 budget enforcement act .

the committee recognizes that the ships leased by the navy fill an important role that must be continued through the near term and well into the future , but believes that ships that fill these roles can provide an economic opportunity for the domestic shipbuilding industry .

two years ago , the committee received a report from the navy on their practice of leasing foreign built ships and a plan for ending the practice of leasing foreign built ships by 2012 .

the basic conclusion of the report was that the dependence on foreign built ships would be significantly reduced by the year 2012 , principally as a result of shifting requirements and modifications to existing department of defense assets .

since the administration is currently undertaking a review of future requirements , the committee is extremely interested in how that review will affect the navy's practice of leasing foreign built ships .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the navy to update the report submitted in march 2008 regarding the practice of leasing foreign built ships .

the report should include the navy's updated plan for terminating the practice of leasing foreign built ships to supplement the fleet and using only domestic built ships by 2012 .

additionally , the report should include the necessary budget and funding plans that may be required to accomplish this .

this report should be submitted no later than march 31 , 2010 .

 ( page 166 ) in lieu of a conference report , the house appropriations committee on december 15 , 2009 , released an explanatory statement on a final version of h.r .

3326 .

this version was passed by the house on december 16 , 2009 , and by the senate on december 19 , 2009 , and signed into law on december 19 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-118 .

the explanatory statement states on page one that it "is an explanation of the effects of division a [of h.r .

3326 ] , which makes appropriations for the department of defense for fiscal year 2010 .

as provided in section 8124 of the consolidated bill , this explanatory statement shall have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and the implementation of this as if it were a joint explanatory statement of a committee of the conference. .

the explanatory statement states: leasing of foreign built ships there exists strong interest in the impact that the review of future requirements in the quadrennial defense review will have on the navy's practice of leasing foreign built ships .

therefore , the secretary of the navy is directed to update its march 2008 report on the use of such leases and address impacts on american seafarers , sealift capabilities , and naval shipbuilding .

 ( page 169 ) .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-288 of october 7 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 of october 28 , 2009 , does not contain any provisions relating directly to dod leases of foreign - built ships .

the conference report states: conversion of certain vessels ; leasing rates the house bill contained a provision ( sec .

126 ) that would permit the secretary of the navy to use up to $35.0 million from the weapons procurement , navy , account to lease and convert vessels that have defaulted on construction loan guarantees: ( 1 ) that have become the property of the united states ; and ( 2 ) for which , the maritime administrator has a right of disposal .

the senate amendment contained no similar provision .

the house recedes .

the conferees agree that the navy should , in trying to make near - term additions to the high speed vessel fleet , consider fully the possibility of using vessels within the control of the maritime administration .

 ( page 687 ) .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

110-279 of july 30 , 2007 ) on h.r .

3222 / p.l .

110-116 of november 13 , 2007 , stated that it was concerned with the navy practice of bypassing the intent of the long term capital lease restrictions in the way several foreign built military sealift mission ships are leased... .

the committee believes this leasing practice is harming the nation's shipyards and major ship component industrial base by indirectly denying our shipbuilders the opportunity for additional ship construction .

the committee recognizes that the ships leased by the navy fill an important role that must be continued through the near term and into the future... .

however , the committee strongly believes that the american shipbuilders must take advantage of this opportunity .

therefore , the committee directs the navy to submit a report that outlines a plan to wean itself off the practice of leasing foreign built ships to supplement the fleet and institute the practice of utilizing only american built ships within four years.... ( pages 230-231 ) .

the text of section 1011 of the fy2008 defense authorization act ( h.r .

4986 / p.l .

110-181 of january 28 , 2008 ) is as follows: sec .

1011 .

limitation on leasing of vessels .

section 2401 of title 10 , united states code , is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ` ( h ) the secretary of a military department may make a contract for the lease of a vessel or for the provision of a service through use by a contractor of a vessel , the term of which is for a period of greater than two years , but less than five years , only if — ` ( 1 ) the secretary has notified the committee on armed services and the committee on appropriations of the senate and the committee on armed services and the committee on appropriations of the house of representatives of the proposed contract and included in such notification — ` ( a ) a detailed description of the terms of the proposed contract and a justification for entering into the proposed contract rather than obtaining the capability provided for by the lease , charter , or services involved through purchase of the vessel ; ` ( b ) a determination that entering into the proposed contract as a means of obtaining the vessel is the most cost - effective means of obtaining such vessel ; and ` ( c ) a plan for meeting the requirement provided by the proposed contract upon completion of the term of the lease contract ; and ` ( 2 ) a period of 30 days of continuous session of congress has expired following the date on which notice was received by such committees. .

