on april 12 , 2006 , u.s. trade representative rob portman and peruvian minister of foreign trade and tourism alfredo ferrero diez canseco signed the proposed u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement ( ptpa ) .

the labor chapter of the ptpa includes enforceable international labor organization ( ilo ) core labor standards in addition to specific obligations on domestic labor law enforcement and a labor cooperation and capacity building mechanism .

despite the june 30 , 2007 expiration of presidential "fast track" or "trade promotion authority" ( provided by the trade act of 2002 , p.l .

107 - 210 ) to negotiate agreements that congress then considers on an expedited basis — without amendment and under limited debate — congress passed ptpa implementing legislation , the president signed it , and it became law as p.l .

110 - 138 on december 14 , 2007 .

it went into effect february 1 , 2009 .

on may 10 , 2007 , after much negotiation , congress and the administration announced a "new trade policy for america. .

pending u.s. trade agreements would be amended to incorporate "key democratic priorities" relating to such issues as labor , the environment , access to medicine , port security , and government procurement that would "spread the benefits of globalization here and abroad by raising standards. .

the release also announced that "this policy clears the way for broad , bipartisan congressional support" for pending ftas .

key concepts in the new trade - labor policy include , for ftas , fully enforceable provisions: ( 1 ) incorporating ilo core labor standards as stated in the 1998 ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work ( henceforth referred to as the ilo declaration ) ; and ( 2 ) prohibiting fta countries from weakening laws relating to ilo core labor standards in order to attract trade or investment .

they also include ( 3 ) new limitations on "prosecutorial" and "enforcement" discretion , so that fta countries cannot defend failure to enforce laws related to the ilo core labor standards on the basis of resource limitations or decisions to prioritize other enforcement issues ; and ( 4 ) the same mechanisms / penalties for settling labor , environment , and all other fta obligations .

the administration released the "final text" of the peru fta incorporating these concepts on june 25 , 2007 .

on june 27 , 2007 , peru's congress approved the fta - related amendments .

other fta language previously agreed to by both countries also includes procedural guarantees to help ensure that workers and employers would have fair , equitable , and transparent access to labor tribunals .

both parties would ensure that ( 1 ) workers have appropriate access to tribunals for the enforcement of each party's labor laws ; ( 2 ) the proceedings before such tribunals are fair , equitable , and transparent ; ( 3 ) the tribunals' final decisions are in writing and made publicly available ; ( 4 ) parties to the proceedings have the right to seek review and possible correction of final decisions ; ( 5 ) tribunals conducting or reviewing the proceedings are impartial and independent ; ( 6 ) parties to the proceedings could seek remedies such as penalties or temporary workplace closures to ensure the enforcement of their rights under labor laws ; and ( 7 ) public awareness of domestic labor laws is promoted through public availability of information and encouraging public education regarding labor laws .

in addition , the agreement would require that the united states and peru establish a labor affairs council ( labor council ) comprised of cabinet - level or equivalent representatives to oversee implementation of the labor obligations , including the activities of the labor cooperation and capacity building mechanism .

the labor council would meet within the first year after the date of entry into force of the agreement and as often as necessary thereafter .

government representatives of the two countries would work together to establish priorities in specific cooperative and capacity - building activities .

the labor council would establish guidelines , prepare reports , provide public communication , and be responsible for cooperating with the parties' points of contact .

finally , the two parties agreed that cooperation on labor issues plays an important role in advancing labor commitments , including those embodied in the 1998 ilo declaration and a 1999 ilo convention on the worst forms of child labor ( including child trafficking , or the use of children in armed conflict , drug trafficking , or pornography ) .

they would establish a labor cooperation and capacity building mechanism to develop and pursue bilateral or regional cooperation activities on labor - related issues .

such initiatives would be aimed at establishing and strengthening alternative dispute resolution mechanisms for labor disputes .

peruvian president alan garcia took office for a five - year term at the end of july 2006 , replacing outgoing president , alejandro toledo .

president toledo presided over a period in which peru was one of the fastest growing economies in latin america , largely due to growth in the mining and export sectors .

in spite of the recent economic growth , over half of peruvians live in poverty and a large portion of the population is underemployed .

unemployment and underemployment levels total 64.5% nationwide .

peru's labor market is relatively small compared with that of the united states .

in 2005 , the labor force of peru comprised nine million workers , compared to 151 million workers in the united states .

recorded unemployment in peru was 7.2% and labor cost per hour was $1.48 in 2005 .

in comparison , the united states had a recorded unemployment rate of 4.7% and an hourly labor cost of $24.42 .

the economic sector in peru with the highest employment is wholesale / retail trade and repair services , followed by manufacturing .

during the regime of former president alberto fujimori ( 1990 to 2000 ) , the government implemented a radical economic reform program to control hyperinflation and bring economic stability to the country .

part of the program included a wide - ranging privatization plan and a relaxation of foreign investment restrictions to help increase foreign investment .

existing labor laws were relaxed significantly during this time .

in recent years , however , peru has made much progress in strengthening labor protections by implementing labor law reform and protecting workers' rights .

in 2002 , peru ratified the two ilo conventions on the abolition of child labor .

in 2003 , the government reduced the number of workers needed to establish a union , eliminated prohibitions on workers that kept them from joining unions during their probationary period , and limited the power of the labor authority to cancel a union's registration .

in july 2004 , the government published regulations to strengthen labor inspections and broaden labor inspectors' powers to allow easier access to firms , improved inspectors' ability to impose sanctions , and increase the levels of fines .

peru has ratified 71 ilo conventions , including all eight core conventions on workers' rights .

the ilo has stated that peru has satisfactorily amended its laws to improve labor standards in certain areas related to freedom of association and protection of the right to organize .

however , some critics argue that peru has had some problems in the observance of the ilo core labor standards and that improvements must be made in peru's legislation on collective bargaining .

the proposed ptpa was negotiated under the trade promotion authority in the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 210 ) as were seven other trade agreements approved by congress: the u.s. - dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , plus agreements with chile , singapore , australia , morocco , bahrain , and oman ; and several agreements that are still pending ( colombia , panama , and south korea. ) .

while many provisions of the free trade agreements ( ftas ) are similar , the peru tpa was the first to incorporate provisions reflecting the new congressional - administration trade policy .

in addition , each of the eight agreements has some unique provisions .

for the ptpa , unique labor provisions include some new reporting requirements and cooperative and trade - capacity building activities .

proponents and opponents typically cite the following strengths and weaknesses of the labor provisions of the ptpa .

before the new ptpa language was released , some observers noted that the united states has ratified only two ilo conventions , while peru has ratified all eight .

in addition , the united states has some laws that may not totally conform with language of ilo conventions .

a possible example is some state laws that permit employment - without - pay for prisoners .

consequently , they express concern that including enforceable ilo core labor standards into trade agreements could subject the entire u.s. labor code to challenges by trading partners .

this issue is addressed by language in the ptpa that ( a ) restricts the application of the ptpa provisions to trade - related matters and ( b ) incorporates only the principles of the four basic ilo rights listed in the ilo declaration and quoted on p. 4 , footnote 2 , rather than the detailed language of the specific eight conventions .

the proposed ptpa is unlikely to impact the aggregate employment level in the united states: u.s. - peru trade accounts for only 0.3% of total u.s. merchandise trade ( 2005 ) .

however , it could impact jobs in specific industries .

according to a report by the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) , the largest u.s. employment gain ( 1% ) is projected in wheat production .

declines are projected in metals ( gold , copper , and aluminum ) , rice production , and miscellaneous crops ( cut flowers , live plants , and seeds ) which could "lose" up to 0.2% of their employment , displaced by imports .

for peru , various estimates of job "gains" range from less than 20,000 to 700,000 .

on the other hand , some labor groups argue that u.s. exports of basic grains could adversely affect the livelihoods of subsistence farmers in peru , where agriculture is the main source of jobs .

the peruvian congress voted 79-14 to approve the ptpa in june 2006 and it approved a set of amendments tied to the fta on june 27 , 2007 .

gaining passage of a ptpa was a high priority for the government of peru .

peruvian president alan garcía perez met with president bush on october 10 , 2006 , and again on april 23 , 2007 , to discuss the free trade agreement .

after the april 2007 meeting , president garcía said about the agreement , "it is vital for our country .

it is fundamental to continue this path of growth and social redistribution that we have started in my country. .

house democratic leaders had indicated they would not take up implementing legislation until after peru changed its laws to comply with new labor ( and other ) provisions added to the ptpa .

peru is implementing its new labor obligations under the agreement through a series of "supreme decrees" issued by president garcia .

peru had agreed to issue supreme decrees covering five areas: time - limited contracts , subcontracting , the right to strike , anti - union discrimination , and safeguarding the right to strike .

the house passed the peru tpa implementing legislation , h.r .

3688 , on november 8 , 2007 , by a vote of 285 to 132 ; the senate passed it on december 4 by a vote of 77 to 18 ; and president bush signed it into law as p.l .

110 - 138 on december 14 , 2007 .

issues included how a ptpa might affect workers in both countries , and peru's commitments to reforms , alleviating poverty , and enforcement .

some peruvian policymakers believe that maintaining confidence in the bilateral trade environment with the united states is the key to the long - term stability of the region .

while the chamber of commerce and the business roundtable strongly supported the peru tpa , the afl - cio neither supported nor opposed it because the afl - cio has labor unions on both sides of the issue .

change to win labor coalition , comprised of labor unions that formerly belonged to the afl , urged congress to oppose the ptpa .

