"price gouging" is a term commonly used to refer to sellers inflating prices to "unfair" levels in order to take advantage of certain circumstances causing a decrease in supply , including emergencies .

currently , no federal law specifically addresses price gouging .

however , bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that would prohibit price gouging of gasoline and other fuels .

in addition , price - gouging laws already exist in many states and are generally applicable in situations arising from a declared emergency .

an increase in prices alone does not constitute price gouging under most of these state statutes .

generally , protections and prohibitions in these statutes are triggered only when prices increase following a statutorily designated event .

federal antitrust and consumer protection laws also afford consumers some protection from unfair pricing schemes .

this report begins with a discussion of state price - gouging laws , including their triggers and applications , and then moves to a discussion of proposed federal legislation aimed at prohibiting price gouging .

finally , the report analyzes existing federal law regarding anticompetitive behavior and how it might apply to the market for gasoline or other petroleum products .

many states have enacted some type of prohibition or limitation on price increases during declared emergencies .

generally , these state laws take one of two basic forms .

some states prohibit the sale of goods and services in the designated emergency area at what are deemed to be "unconscionable" or "excessive" prices during a designated emergency period .

other states have enacted legislation that caps the amount by which the prices for retail goods can be increased during a designated emergency period .

many statutes of both kinds include an exemption if price increases are the result of increased costs incurred for procuring the goods or services in question .

as mentioned above , currently there is no federal law that deals specifically with price gouging .

however , federal antitrust laws may apply to behavior generally regarded as price gouging .

the federal trade commission ( ftc ) monitors gas prices and investigates possible antitrust violations in the petroleum industry .

in addition , the energy policy act of 2005 required the ftc to investigate whether the price of gasoline is being "artificially manipulated by reducing refinery capacity or by any other form of market manipulation or price gouging practices. .

in may 2006 , the ftc released its report , finding generally that sellers behaved competitively following hurricane katrina and that the price increases were the result of increased costs , although there were limited instances of price gouging .

at least three bills introduced in the 112 th congress would create a federal law that specifically addresses price gouging in response to emergencies .

h.r .

964 , introduced on march 9 , 2011 , addresses the sale of wholesale or retail gasoline ( or any other petroleum distillate ) at a price that is "unconscionably excessive" and that "indicates that the seller is taking unfair advantage of the circumstances related to an international crisis to increase prices unreasonably. .

the bill would make it unlawful to engage in this behavior during an "international crisis affecting the oil markets" as declared by the president , within the affected area as designated by the president .

the bill creates both civil and criminal penalties for violations .

the federal trade commission would be tasked with enforcement , although the bill would also authorize state attorneys general to bring civil actions on behalf of the state residents to enforce the provisions of the bill and to recover civil penalties .

title iii of h.r .

1899 , introduced on may 13 , 2011 , contains language identical to the language in h.r .

964 discussed above .

the bill's two other titles also attempt to address gasoline prices .

title i would amend the sherman act ( discussed below ) to make it illegal for foreign states to act collectively to limit the production or distribution of petroleum products , to set or maintain the price of such products , or to take any other action that would restrain trade for petroleum products .

title ii would expand the clayton act to create a new prohibition on refusal to sell , export or divert supplies of petroleum products for purposes of increasing prices or creating a shortage in a particular market .

title ii also sets forth the factors to be considered in determining whether a party has engaged in this sort of activity .

like h.r .

1899 , h.r .

1748 is comprehensive legislation intended to address gasoline pricing through a few different avenues , one of which is a prohibition on price gouging .

title iii of h.r .

1748 is identical to both title iii of h.r .

1899 and h.r .

964 .

all three would create the same ban on "unconscionable pricing" during a time of crisis as declared by presidential proclamation .

in addition to this , h.r .

1748 also contains language focused on the tax treatment of "major integrated oil companies," as well as language that would bar certain lessees who hold leases that grant exemption from royalties from bidding on new offshore leases until those lessees renegotiate their royalty - exempt leases and language that would direct the sale of petroleum from the strategic petroleum reserve .

antitrust laws aim to foster free and unfettered competition on the assumption that such competition will produce the best result for consumers — the lowest and most reasonable prices .

in some ways , the antitrust laws could be looked upon as the opposite of price gouging laws , because the antitrust laws seek to remove unreasonable restraints upon trade , allowing market forces to govern , while price gouging laws operate by placing restrictions on prices in certain circumstances effectively placing legal limits or restraints upon trade .

however , "price gouging," as noted above , has no singular definition .

the term generally refers to the inflation of prices to "unfair" levels in certain circumstances , particularly following natural disasters .

it could be argued that activities such as "price gouging" in the oil industry might constitute a restraint on free and fair competition , because prices may be raised to "unreasonable" levels .

it is possible that in some circumstances the antitrust laws would prohibit such activity .

agreements among competitors to accomplish what is commonly referred to as "price gouging" would most likely violate section 1 of the sherman act ( 15 u.s.c .

§1 ) .

section 1 prohibits contracts or conspiracies in restraint of trade .

that is , section 1 forbids two or more persons or entities from , for example , agreeing to limit output or set prices .

while the literal phrasing of section 1 forbids all agreements in restraint of trade , the supreme court has long acknowledged that the statute forbids only unreasonable restraints of trade .

as a result , most antitrust cases are examined by courts in light of a variety of factors .

in the oil and gas price gouging context , this section might apply , for example , to a group of competitors who agreed to fix prices in the market for gasoline .

such a case may be difficult to prove , however .

recently , the first circuit court of appeals affirmed a grant of summary judgment for the defendants in a case in which a group of gasoline station owners on martha's vineyard were accused of violating section 1 of the sherman act in the aftermath of hurricane katrina .

it was alleged that the gas station owners conspired to raise prices to a level far above prices at the gas stations nearest to the island .

however , the appellate panel concluded , in that case , that the plaintiffs had failed to sufficiently prove the existence of an agreement to raise prices in such a fashion .

as a result , the antitrust claims failed .

if an agreement were proven , however , and a section 1 violation was found , a number of penalties might be imposed upon the convicted persons .

the most commonly cited penalty for violation of the antitrust laws is the civil penalty requiring treble damages .

in other words , if found to have violated section 1 of the sherman act , a person may be required to pay to the person injured or to the united states ( when injured in its business or property ) three times the damages caused by the violation of the antitrust laws , as well as court costs , and , for private plaintiffs , attorneys' fees .

the antitrust laws may also be enforced criminally by the department of justice .

every natural person found guilty of violating section 1 of the sherman act has committed a felony and may be fined up to $1 million or imprisoned for up to 10 years , or both .

every corporation that violates section 1 may be fined up to $1 million .

