in 2001 , lighting accounted for 8.8 % ( 101 billion kilowatt hours ) of u.s. household electricity use .

incandescent lamps , which are commonly found in households , are highly inefficient sources of light because about 90% of the energy they use is lost as heat .

for that reason , lighting has been one focus of efforts to increase the efficiency of household electricity consumption .

lighting manufacturers are now producing products that are significantly more energy - efficient than incandescent bulbs .

such lighting includes fluorescent bulbs .

long considered a more economical choice for commercial and industrial lighting , compact fluorescent light bulbs are becoming more attractive to household consumers .

the primary difference between a compact fluorescent light bulb ( cfl ) and a fluorescent tube is the size .

unlike tubes , cfls are made to fit into products that can be plugged into standard household light sockets like table lamps and ceiling fixtures .

compared to incandescent bulbs that use a heated filament to produce light , cfls contain a gas that produces invisible ultraviolet ( uv ) light when the gas is excited by electricity .

uv light hits a white coating inside the fluorescent bulb , which alters the light into light visible to a human eye .

because fluorescent bulbs do not use heat to create light , they are far more energy - efficient than regular incandescent bulbs .

in the past , complaints about the high cost , harsh light quality , and the inability to use with a dimmer made cfls less attractive to some consumers .

however , improvements in technology have resulted in less expensive cfls that illuminate more softly , emitting light similar to light from an incandescent bulb , that are capable of dimming .

cfl sales have increased significantly in the past two years .

according to the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , 290 million energy star - qualified cfls were sold in 2007 .

that is nearly double the number sold in 2006 ( the year that cfl market share increased from a steady 5% to 11% ) , and represents almost 20% of the u.s. light bulb market .

mercury is a highly volatile , naturally occurring element .

it conducts electricity , is liquid at room temperature , combines easily with other metals , and expands and contracts evenly with temperature change .

these properties make mercury useful in a variety of household , medical , and industrial products and processes .

mercury is also a potent neurotoxin that can , at certain exposure levels , cause brain , lung , and kidney damage .

mercury is an essential component of cfls that allows a bulb to be an efficient light source .

fluorescent bulbs , unlike many other mercury - containing consumer products , are among the few products for which non - mercury substitutes do not exist .

still , over the past 20 years , the mercury content in fluorescent tubes and bulbs has declined steadily .

a cfl generally contains 2 to 6 milligrams ( mg ) of mercury ( an amount that poses virtually no risk of harm ) .

by comparison , mercury has been present for decades in the following household products: watch batteries ( 25 mg ) , dental amalgams ( 500 mg ) , thermometers ( 500 mg to 2 grams ( g ) ) , thermostats ( 3 g ) , electrical switches and relays ( 3.5 g ) , and standard fluorescent tubes ( up to 40 mg ; lighting manufacturers now produce low - mercury fluorescent tubes that generally contain less than 9 mg of mercury ) .

increased use of cfls has generated concern among some over the potential danger the bulbs may pose if broken in the home during use or after disposal .

the amount of mercury that may be released by a cfl depends on a variety of factors , including a bulb's age at the time of disposal .

as the bulb ages , the mercury content becomes bound to the glass , where it is not readily available for release into the environment unless it is burned ( i.e. , disposed of in an incinerator ) .

therefore , it is possible to essentially eliminate potential mercury releases from cfls if they are not broken , particularly when new , or incinerated .

mercury is not released from cfls during normal use .

consumers would be exposed to mercury only if a bulb were to break .

at room temperature , some of a bulb's metallic mercury will evaporate and form mercury vapors ; however , the danger posed from exposure to the amount of mercury in an individual cfl is minimal .

although the potential risk of harm associated with cfl use is relatively low , certain precautions are recommended to avoid spreading of mercury vapor .

several federal and state agencies have published cleanup and disposal recommendations for cfls .

guidance from the different agencies varies slightly , but generally recommends the following steps: open a window and leave the room for 15 minutes , and keep pregnant women , children , and pets away from the area until it is cleaned up ; gather glass fragments and powder — on hard surfaces , use stiff paper or cardboard ( do not vacuum ) , and on carpet , pick up large pieces wearing disposable gloves ; use sticky tape , such as duct tape , to pick up any remaining small glass fragments and powder ; wipe the area clean with damp paper towels or disposable wet wipes ; and place all waste and cleaning materials in a glass jar with a metal lid or in a sealed plastic bag , and immediately place all materials outdoors and check with local or state government about disposal requirements .

in guidance provided by the energy star program , it has been noted that the use of cfls in place of incandescent bulbs could actually reduce the amount of mercury emissions to the environment .

coal - fired power plants currently account for 40% of mercury emissions in the united states .

during a five - year span , by some estimates , a coal - fired power plant emits 9.3 mg of mercury in the course of producing the same amount of electricity needed to power an incandescent bulb , compared to 2.3 mg of mercury emissions from a cfl over the same period .

the use of cfls in place of incandescent bulbs could also lead to comparable decreases in carbon dioxide , sulfur dioxide , and nitrogen oxide emissions — all pollutants emitted from coal - fired power plants .

any additional mercury emissions associated with cfls could be minimized if bulbs are kept out of the waste stream ( i.e. , recycled rather than discarded ) when spent .

products containing mercury may meet the federal regulatory definition of hazardous waste .

pursuant to the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) , epa has established regulations regarding the transport , treatment , storage , and disposal of hazardous wastes .

however , households are essentially exempt from rcra .

this means that household hazardous waste ( eg , paint , batteries , thermostats , certain cleaning fluids , and pesticides ) may be disposed of in municipal solid waste landfills or incinerators .

the mercury levels in cfls would potentially cause them to be deemed household hazardous waste .

as such , epa suggests that the bulbs not be discarded in household garbage "if better disposal options exist. .

epa recommends that household consumers contact their state or local environmental regulatory agency for information about proper disposal options .

if household garbage disposal is the only option , epa recommends that certain precautions be taken .

since cfls discarded in the trash will likely break and release mercury , epa recommends that bulbs be put in two plastic bags and sealed before placement in outdoor trash or a protected outdoor location .

since virtually all components of a fluorescent bulb can be recycled , epa recommends recycling as the preferred method to manage spent cfls .

the scope of programs to recycle cfls varies from state to state .

for example , a recycling program operating in minnesota allows residents to leave cfls at any of hundreds of retail stores across the state .

a program in indiana accepts cfls at certain sears stores .

also , regional groups have formed to develop recycling options .

for example , the northwest compact fluorescent lamp recycling project is in the process of designing a pilot project to recycle cfls in oregon and washington .

another possibility is that more retailers will begin to accept cfls for proper disposal — ikea currently accepts spent cfls , and home depot has begun to accept them at stores in canada ( but , not yet in the united states ) .

generally , recycling is not widely available for waste products that are not generated in sufficient amounts to make it economically feasible for recyclers .

it is anticipated that , as more spent cfls enter the waste stream , recycling opportunities will increase .

further , epa is currently working with cfl manufacturers and u.s. retailers to expand disposal options .

finally , under § 321 ( h ) of the energy act , epa is directed to submit to congress a report describing recommendations relating to the means by which the federal government may reduce or prevent the release of mercury during the manufacture , transport , storage , and disposal of light bulbs .

a perceived danger posed by the use of cfls has been fed , at least in part , by some media reports claiming hidden costs and dangers associated their use .

these reports escalated after an incident involving a broken cfl in a home in prospect , maine , on march 14 , 2007 .

after contacting various sources , the homeowner sought cleanup advice from the maine department of environmental protection ( dep ) .

a dep representative advised the homeowner to contact an environmental remediation company to remove any residual mercury from the home .

the homeowner was given a $2,000 cleanup estimate .

the maine dep later acknowledged that because cfls were relatively new to the market , department personnel had been unfamiliar with proper cleanup and disposal requirements for the bulbs .

the agency subsequently posted cleanup guidance on its website , along with an account titled the "history and facts on cfl breakage in prospect , maine. .

the initial incident was repeated by various media outlets , some of which exaggerated the potential danger and cost associated with cfl use and disposal .

for example , one journal stated , in part , [t]here is no problem disposing of incandescents when their life is over .

you can throw them in the trash can and they won't hurt the garbage collector .

they won't leech deadly compounds into the air or water .

they won't kill people working in the landfills .

the same cannot be said about the mercury - containing cfls .

as noted previously , significantly higher levels of mercury have been present for decades in several other consumer products .

there have been no reports of landfill worker fatalities related to mercury exposure .

additional elements of the incident in maine have been widely repeated , particularly the claim that it will cost a consumer $2,000 to clean up a broken cfl at home .

even though many of the original details and claims have been refuted , the maine incident is often cited in online news stories and web logs , particularly when the potential dangers associated with cfls are discussed .

