in the 109 th congress , two proposals have been introduced to regulate more strictly certain long - range .50 caliber rifles .

the fifty caliber sniper weapons regulation act of 2005 ( s. 935 ) , introduced by senator dianne feinstein , would amend the national firearms act ( nfa ) to regulate ".50 caliber sniper weapons" in the same fashion as short - barreled shotguns and silencers , by levying taxes on the manufacture and transfer of such firearms and by requiring owner and firearm registration .

the other proposal introduced by representative james moran , the 50 caliber sniper rifle reduction act ( h.r .

654 ) , would also amend the nfa to include these weapons , but would also amend the gun control act to effectively freeze the population of these weapons legally available to private persons , and to prohibit any further transfer of these firearms .

in other words , h.r .

654 would grandfather in existing rifles , but would ban their further transfer .

consequently , the proposal would eventually eliminate these rifles altogether from the civilian gun stock .

it is likely that covered .50 caliber rifles would have to be destroyed or handed over to the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) as contraband , when the legal firearm owner died or wanted to give up the firearm .

as currently constructed , h.r .

654 includes no compensation provision for rifles destroyed or handed over to the federal government under this proposal .

furthermore , both proposals ( s. 935 and h.r .

654 ) would define ".50 caliber sniper weapon" to mean "a rifle capable of firing center - fire cartridge in .50 caliber , .50 bmg caliber , any other variant of .50 caliber or any metric equivalent of such calibers. .

many rifles , and even some handguns , are chambered to fire .50 caliber ammunition , meaning the projectile is about one - half inch in diameter .

opponents of this legislation are likely to note that this definition is very broad and would likely cover .50 caliber rifles that would not be considered "long - range" or "sniper rifles. .

the .50 bmg caliber round , on the other hand , is an exceptionally large cartridge ( projectile and casing ) , which was once used almost exclusively as a heavy machine gun round .

certain specialized firearms manufacturers began producing long - range .50 caliber rifles in the early 1980s .

in recent years , these firearms have gained popularity among firearms enthusiasts ; and , in 1985 , they formed the fifty caliber shooters association , inc. ( fcsa ) to "advance the sporting uses of the .50 caliber bmg cartridge. .

the fcsa holds competitive marksmanship matches of 1,000 yards ( and longer ) .

the .50 caliber bmg cartridge was developed following the first world war as a "heavy machine gun" cartridge .

adopted by the u.s. army in 1923 , it has seen continuous service ever since .

according to one firearms expert , one common variety of the .50 caliber bmg cartridge ( 12.7x99mm ) includes a projectile that weighs 665 grains ; whereas , a comparable mid - size rifle cartridge like the .308 winchester ( 7.62x51mm ) includes a projectile that weighs about 147 grains .

hence the .50 caliber bmg projectile is 4.5 times greater in weight than the .308 winchester .

while a cartridge's ballistic performance depends on the type of projectile , grade of propellant ( gunpowder ) and other factors , the .50 caliber bmg cartridge casing holds about five times more propellent than the .308 winchester .

by further comparison , the same rounds have: ( 1 ) a maximum effective range of 2,000 and 1,500 yards ; ( 2 ) a muzzle velocity of 2,900 and 2,750 feet per second ; and ( 3 ) a muzzle energy of 12,000 and 2,400 foot - pounds , respectively .

the muzzle energy of the .50 caliber bmg round provides not only increased "knock down" power , but increased accuracy as well .

in modern rifles , the .50 caliber bmg round can routinely hit a 55-gallon drum at ranges of a mile ( 1,760 yards ) .

in skilled hands and known wind conditions , such a rifle can be used to place five shots within a 6-inch circle at a range of over one - half mile ( 1,000 yards ) .

the fcsa maintains that long - range .50 bmg caliber rifles were first developed for marksmanship competitions and , then adopted by the military as sniper rifles .

one of the rifles adopted by the u.s. army is the m - 107 long range sniper rifle .

outfitted with a 10-round magazine , the m - 107 is a semiautomatic rifle , meaning it is self - loading , but fires only one round per trigger pull .

it is also outfitted with an "attached optics / electro - optics [scope] that supports all weather , day / night tactical dominance.... " fifty caliber bmg ammunition comes in a wide variety , so the rifle is capable of delivering incendiary , armor piercing , tracer , and dual purpose ammunition .

according to one firearms expert: the primary mission of this rifle is to engage and defeat material targets at extended ranges to include parked aircraft ; command , control , communications , computers , and intelligence ( c4i ) sites ; radar sites ; ammunition ; petroleum , oil and lubricants ; and various other thin skinned ( lightly armored ) material targets out to 2000 meters .

loaded with nine rounds , the m - 107 weighs about 32 pounds .

for fy2005 , the unit price for a single rifle is $14,833 ( based on a modular cost of $8.9 million for 600 rifles ) .

the m - 107 government contractor — barrett firearms manufacturing company — produces long - range .50 caliber rifles , which are available to the general public .

equipped with conventional scopes , these rifles range in price from $2,800 for a single - shot bolt - action rifle to $6,750 for a semiautomatic rifle ( new in box ( nib ) ) .

regarding the availability of armor piercing / incendiary rifle ammunition in the civilian gun market , for the past six years ( fy2000-fy2005 ) , a provision has been included in the department of defense appropriations act that bans the resale of military surplus .50 caliber ammunition , unless it is "demilitarized," so that the refurbished ammunition does not include armor piercing , incendiary , and tracer projectiles .

this provision includes exceptions for ammunition that is refurbished for the national guard or for export to foreign governments for military purposes .

while such ammunition introduced into the civilian market prior to the ban is still available , it is a specialty item and not always easily located .

gun control advocates have reported that long - range .50 caliber rifles could be used by terrorists in several deadly scenarios .

according to the violence policy center , given the range and power of a .50 caliber bmg round , a rifle chambered to fire this round could be used to bring down a slow / low - flying aircraft .

it is also plausible , that a terrorist using such a rifle could punch holes in pressurized chemical tanks , igniting combustible materials or leaking hazardous gases .

in addition , such a rifle could be used to penetrate lightly armored vehicles — such as those used by law enforcement and protective limousine services .

while these potentialities exist , as pointed out by gun control opponents , long - range .50 caliber rifles have not been the weapons of choice of criminals as law enforcement encounters with these weapons have been few and sporadic .

given the potential destructiveness of these rifles , one option for congress to consider is more strictly regulating these firearms under the national firearms act .

two major statutes regulate the commerce in , and possession of , firearms: the national firearms act of 1934 and the gun control act of 1968 , as amended .

supplementing federal law , many state firearms laws are stricter than federal law .

for example , some states prohibit any possession of machine guns by private persons , require permits to obtain other firearms , and impose waiting periods for firearm transfers .

other states are less restrictive , but state law cannot preempt federal law .

in general , federal law serves as the minimum standard in the united states .

in 1934 , congress passed the nfa to limit the availability of machine guns , short - barreled rifles and shotguns , silencers , and a "catch - all" class of other "concealable" firearms identified as "any other weapon. .

many of these weapons were considered particularly lethal and often the weapons of choice of "gangsters" during the prohibition era ( 1919-1933 ) .

as part of the internal revenue code , the nfa levies taxes on all aspects of the manufacture / importation and distribution of such firearms , and requires that these firearms and their owners be registered at every point the firearms change ownership in the chain of commerce .

the nfa required the secretary of the treasury to establish a registry of all nfa firearms in the united states that were not under the control of the united states .

today , the registry is maintained by the attorney general .

title ii of the gun control act ( gca ) of 1968 revised and re - codified the nfa to ( 1 ) expand its scope of coverage to include destructive devices ( bombs , incendiary devices , and weapons with a bore of greater than one - half inch ) ; ( 2 ) include a definition for "any other weapon" to more precisely include certain smooth bore , short - barreled handguns ; and ( 3 ) redefine the term "firearm" to exclude antique firearms or any device ( except machine guns and destructive devices ) that were determined to be "collectors' items" by reason of their date of manufacture , value , design , and other characteristics and would not likely be used as a weapon .

under this provision , the attorney general is authorized to reclassify certain firearms as "collectors items," administratively removing them from the nfa .

the gca also increased penalties for violating the nfa .

in addition , the gca included an amnesty provision that addressed a supreme court ruling regarding the registration of nfa weapons and the likelihood that individuals holding unregistered nfa firearms would incriminate themselves by registering such weapons .

in 1986 , congress passed the firearms owners' protection act ( fopa ) and amended the gca to prohibit the possession of machine guns that were not legally possessed or available for transfer prior to enactment ( may 19 , 1986 ) .

while fopa included exceptions for any department or agency of the united states , a state , or political subdivision thereof , it effectively froze the number of machine guns that were legally available to the general public in the united states .

as stated above , the nfa requires the attorney general to maintain a central registry of all nfa firearms and owners in the united states , which are not in the possession or under the control of the united states .

the attorney general has delegated this duty to the atf director .

at atf , the nfa branch is charged with maintaining the registry — the national firearms registration and transfer record ( nfrtr ) database , which includes data on the make and model of registered firearms , registration dates , as well as biographic and address information about the persons to whom the firearms are registered .

it is a felony to receive , possess , or transfer an unregistered nfa firearm .

such offenses are punishable by a fine of up to $250,000 , imprisonment for up to 10 years , and forfeiture of the firearm and any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft used to conceal or convey the firearm .

to deal in nfa firearms , a person is required to be a federal firearms licensee ( ffl ) under the gca and also be a special occupational taxpayer ( sot ) under the nfa .

class one sots are importers of nfa firearms ; class two sots are manufacturers of nfa firearms ; and class three sots are dealers .

nfa firearms are often referred to as class three weapons , for class three dealers .

the nfa imposes a $200 manufacturing tax and a $200 transfer tax each time a firearm changes hands .

upon a transfer's approval , atf places a tax stamp on the tax paid transfer document .

the transferee may not take possession of the firearm until he holds the approved transfer document .

private persons , who are not otherwise prohibited by law , may acquire an nfa firearm in one of three ways: ( 1 ) a registered owner of an nfa firearm may apply for atf approval to transfer the firearm to another person residing in the same state or to a ffl in another state ; ( 2 ) an individual may apply to atf for approval to make and register an nfa firearm ( except machine - gun ) ; or ( 3 ) an individual may inherit a lawfully registered nfa firearm .

congress could consider several options for dealing with long - range .50 caliber rifles .

one , congress could take no action .

two , congress could require that such rifles be registered under the nfa , as would senator feinstein's proposal ( s. 935 ) .

three , congress could ban their further production for the civilian gun market , as would representative moran's proposal ( h.r .

654 ) .

four , congress could also ban any further transfer of these firearms — effectively eliminating these weapons from the civilian gun market in time , as would h.r .

654 .

five , these weapons could be banned outright , a scenario under which , congress could also consider compensating owners for turning such firearms over to the federal government .

six , congress could also consider recalling all existing armor piercing / incendiary .50 caliber bmg ammunition still available in the civilian gun market .

seven , congress could consider setting ballistic performance standards that would benchmark the outward limit for .50 caliber rifle ammunition considered acceptable for sporting , hunting , or recreational purposes .

