congressional and consumer interest in passenger natural gas vehicles ( ngvs ) has grown in recent years , especially in response to higher gasoline prices , concerns over the environmental impact of petroleum consumption for transportation , and policy proposals such as the "pickens plan. .

although natural gas passenger vehicles have been available for years , they have been used mostly in government and private fleets ; very few have been purchased and used by consumers .

larger ngvs — mainly transit buses and delivery trucks — also play a role in the transportation sector , especially due to various federal , state , and local incentives for their use .

however , high up - front costs for new ngvs , as well as concerns over vehicle performance and limited fuel infrastructure , have led to only marginal penetration of these vehicles into the personal transportation market .

the energy information administration ( eia ) estimated that there were roughly 114,000 compressed natural gas ( cng ) vehicles in the united states in 2009 , and roughly 3,000 liquefied natural gas ( lng ) vehicles .

roughly two - thirds of ngvs are light - duty ( i.e. , passenger ) vehicles .

this compares to roughly 235 million conventional ( mostly gasoline ) light - duty vehicles .

further , of the roughly 11.6 million new light - duty vehicles sold in 2009 , only about 400 ( 0.004% ) were ngvs .

for model year ( my ) 2012 , only two passenger ngvs are available from original equipment manufacturers ( oems ) for purchase by consumers — the cng - fueled honda civic gx and the vehicle production group mv - 1 — although some companies convert vehicles to cng before they are sold ( usually as fleet vehicles ) .

while the current purchase prices for ngvs exceed those of conventional vehicles , much of this difference can be made up over the life of the vehicle in fuel cost savings .

for example , the incremental price between a conventional honda civic ex and a natural gas - powered honda civic gx is over $5,000 .

through 2010 some of this difference was made up through a tax credit for the purchase of new alternative fuel vehicles , but that tax credit has since expired .

it should be noted that with higher production , this incremental cost should decrease , but the likely extent of that decrease is unclear .

since the number of natural gas refueling stations is limited — only about 400 publicly available nationwide , compared to roughly 120,000 retail gasoline stations — the purchaser of a new ngv might also choose to install a home refueling system .

according to consumer reports and natural gas vehicles for america ( ngvamerica ) , a fuelmaker phill system costs between $3,400 and $4,500 plus installation .

however , through the end of 2011 a taxpayer could offset $1,000 of this by claiming a tax credit for installing new alternative fuel refueling infrastructure .

offsetting the higher up - front costs are likely annual fuel savings in switching from gasoline to natural gas .

using average retail gasoline and residential natural gas prices from january 2011 , annual fuel cost savings could be roughly $600 .

assuming a 3% discount rate , the payback period for the cng vehicle and home refueling system is more than 17 years .

given that this is roughly the median survival age for new passenger vehicles , this payback period may or may not be acceptable to that consumer .

assuming a smaller differential between natural gas and gasoline prices , or other factors ( eg , the expiration of tax incentives ) , can significantly increase this payback period ; assuming a larger difference in fuel prices ( as was the case in spring 2011 ) , assuming a smaller discount rate , or assuming incremental natural gas vehicle prices decrease in the future , this payback period could be shorter .

in addition to the life - cycle cost difference between cng and conventional vehicles , there are other costs and benefits associated with ngvs that may not have a defined market price tag .

for example , any reduction in petroleum dependence ( beyond the per - gallon cost savings ) is not represented in the above payback period estimate .

some consumers may place a value on displacing petroleum consumption , and thus imports .

further , ngvs in general have lower pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions than comparable gasoline vehicles , although this may or may not be true for specific vehicles and pollutants .

a key potential benefit raised by proponents of ngvs is that while the united states imports the majority of the petroleum it uses , most natural gas is domestically produced .

further , domestic output is higher than once thought , mainly due to recent growth in unconventional natural gas sources ( eg , coal mine methane , shale gas ) .

but there are also several potential and measurable drawbacks to ngvs , many related to vehicle performance and acceptability .

for example , cng engines tend to generate less power for the same size engine than gasoline engines .

thus ngvs tend to have slower acceleration and less power climbing hills .

also , because cng has a lower energy density than gasoline , cng vehicles tend to have a shorter range than comparable gasoline vehicles .

in addition , for passenger vehicles , the larger natural gas storage tanks often occupy space that would otherwise be used for cargo — generally in the trunk of a sedan and in the bed of a pickup truck .

again , these considerations may or may not play into a individual purchaser's decision , but could affect the overall marketability of the vehicles .

a key question raised by those interested in the expansion of natural gas for automobiles is whether existing vehicles can be converted to operate on natural gas .

from a technical feasibility standpoint , there are few problems with converting a vehicle to operate on natural gas .

most existing engines can operate on the fuel , and most conversions involve changes to the fuel system , including a new fuel tank , new fuel lines , and modifications to the vehicle's electronic control unit .

until recently , when epa reduced restrictions , converting an existing vehicle was more problematic from a practical standpoint .

in the united states , ngv conversions — or any other fuel conversion — can potentially run afoul of the clean air act ( caa ) .

all new vehicles ( gasoline or otherwise ) must pass rigorous tests to prove they will meet emissions standards over the life of the vehicle .

these tests tend to be very expensive , although the marginal cost spread over a full product run — thousands to hundreds of thousands of vehicles — is minimal .

after a vehicle has been certified by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , any changes to the exhaust , engine , or fuel systems may be considered tampering under the caa .

section 203 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) states that it is prohibited for any person to remove or render inoperative any device or element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine in compliance with regulations under this title prior to its sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser , or for any person knowingly to remove or render inoperative any such device or element of design after such sale and delivery to the ultimate purchaser .

epa generally interprets this to mean that any change to a vehicle's engine or fuel systems that leads to higher pollutant emissions constitutes "tampering" under section 203 .

several bills have been introduced in recent years to promote ngvs and ngv infrastructure .

most notably in the 112 th congress , the new alternative transportation to give americans solutions act ( nat gas act ) of 2011 ( h.r .

1380 and s. 1863 ) would provide a wide range of incentives .

the nat gas act would reinstate the tax credit for the purchase of ngvs ( which expired at the end of 2010 ) , significantly expand the tax credit for the installation of natural gas refueling infrastructure , and extend both credits through 2016 .

the bill would also provide a tax credit to automakers who produce ngvs , and would authorize grants to those automakers to develop natural gas engines .

higher gasoline prices and concerns about u.s. oil dependence have raised interest in ngvs .

energy policy proposals such as the pickens plan have further raised interest in these vehicles .

however , currently the number of new passenger vehicles capable of operating on natural gas is relatively low , and there are limited opportunities for converting existing gasoline vehicles to run on natural gas .

the market for ngvs will likely remain limited unless the differential between natural gas and gasoline prices remains high in order to offset the higher purchase price for a natural gas vehicle or if new incentives are established to decrease the differential in initial vehicle purchase prices .

new epa regulations on ngv conversions could help promote the expansion of ngvs by lowering the cost of entry for conversion companies .

