section 1512 applies to the obstruction of federal proceedings — congressional , judicial , or executive .

it consists of four somewhat overlapping crimes: use of force or the threat of the use of force to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( a ) ) ; use of deception or corruption or intimidation to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( b ) ) ; destruction or concealment of evidence or attempts to do so ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( c ) ) ; and witness harassment to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c .

1512 ( d ) ) .

section 1513 prohibits witness or informant retaliation in the form of killing , attempting to kill , inflicting or threatening to inflict bodily injury , damaging or threatening to damage property , and conspiracies to do so .

it also prohibits economic retaliation against a federal witnesses , but only witnesses in court proceedings and only on criminal cases .

its penalty structure is comparable to that of section 1503 .

section 1513 offenses are rico predicate offenses and money laundering predicate offenses , and the provisions for conspirators and accomplices apply as well .

section 1505 outlaws obstructing congressional or federal administrative proceedings , a crime punishable by imprisonment not more than five years ( not more than eight years if the offense involves domestic or international terrorism ) .

the crime has three essential elements .

first , there must be a proceeding pending before a department or agency of the united states .

second , the defendant must be aware of the pending proceeding .

third , the defendant must have intentionally endeavored corruptly to influence , obstruct or impede the pending proceeding .

section 1505 offenses are not rico or money laundering predicate offenses .

conspiracy to obstruct administrative or congressional proceedings may be prosecuted under 18 u.s.c .

371 , and the general aiding and abetting , accessory after the fact , and misprision statutes are likely to apply with equal force in the case of obstruction of an administrative or congressional proceeding .

section 371 contains both a general conspiracy prohibition and a specific obstruction conspiracy prohibition in the form of a conspiracy to defraud proscription .

the elements of conspiracy to defraud the united states are: ( 1 ) an agreement of two more individuals ; ( 2 ) to defraud the united states ; and ( 3 ) an overt act by one of conspirators in furtherance of the scheme .

the fraud covered by the statute reaches any conspiracy for the purpose of impairing , obstructing or defeating the lawful functions of any department of government by deceit , craft or trickery , or at least by means that are dishonest .

the scheme may be designed to deprive the united states of money or property , but it need not be so ; a plot calculated to frustrate the functions of a governmental entity will suffice .

contempt of congress is punishable by statute and under the inherent powers of congress .

congress has not exercised its inherent contempt power for some time .

the statutory contempt of congress provision , 2 u.s.c .

192 , outlaws the failure to obey a congressional subpoena or the refusal to answer questioning at a congressional hearing .

the offense is punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year and a fine of up to $100,000 .

several other federal statutes outlaw use of threats or violence to obstruct federal government activities .

one , 18 u.s.c .

115 , prohibits acts of violence against members of congress , judges , jurors , officials , former officials , and their families in order to impede the performance of their duties or to retaliate for the performance of those duties .

it makes assault , kidnapping , murder , and attempts and conspiracies to commit such offenses in violation of the section subject to the penalties imposed for those crimes elsewhere in the code .

it makes threats to commit an assault punishable by imprisonment for not more than six years and threats to commit any of the other offenses under the section punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years .

another , 18 u.s.c .

1114 , protects federal officers and employees as well as those assisting them , from murder , manslaughter , and attempted murder and manslaughter committed during or on account of the performance of their duties .

the section's coverage extends to government witnesses .

other provisions protect federal officers and employees from kidnapping and assault committed during or account of the performance of their duties , but their coverage of those assisting them is less clear .

beyond these general prohibitions , federal law proscribes the murder , kidnapping , or assault of members of congress , supreme court justices , or cabinet secretaries ; and a number of statutes outlaw assaults on federal officers and employees responsible for the enforcement of particular federal statutes and programs .

other than subsection 1512 ( c ) , there are three federal statutes which expressly outlaw the destruction of evidence in order to obstruct justice: 18 u.s.c .

1519 prohibits destruction of evidence in connection with federal investigation or bankruptcy proceedings , 18 u.s.c .

1520 prohibits destruction of corporate audit records , and 18 u.s.c .

2232 ( a ) prohibits the destruction of property to prevent the government from searching or seizing it .

in addition to the obstruction of justice provisions of 18 u.s.c .

1503 and 1512 , there are four other general statutes that outlaw obstructing the government's business by deception .

three involve perjury: 18 u.s.c .

1623 that outlaws false swearing before federal courts and grand juries ; 18 u.s.c .

1621 the older and more general prohibition that proscribes false swearing in federal official matters ( judicial , legislative , or administrative ) ; and 18 u.s.c .

1622 that condemns subornation , that is , inducing another to commit perjury .

the fourth , 18 u.s.c .

1001 , proscribes material false statements concerning any matter within the jurisdiction of a federal executive branch agency , and to a somewhat more limited extent with the jurisdiction of the federal courts or a congressional entity .

regardless of the offense for which an individual is convicted , his sentence may be enhanced as a consequence of any obstruction of justice for which he is responsible , if committed during the course of the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing for the offense of his conviction .

the enhancement may result in an increase in his term of imprisonment by as much as four years .

the enhancement is the product of the influence of §3c1.1 of the united states sentencing guidelines .

section 3c1.1 instructs sentencing courts to assess an obstruction of justice enhancement: if ( a ) the defendant willfully obstructed or impeded , or attempted to obstruct or impede , the administration of justice with respect to the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the instant offense of conviction , and ( b ) the obstructive conduct related to ( i ) the defendant's offense of conviction and any relevant conduct ; or ( ii ) a closely related offense , increase the offense level by 2 levels .

u.s.s.g .

§3c1.1 .

early on , the supreme court made it clear that an individual's sentence might be enhanced under u.s.s.g §3c1.1 , if he committed perjury during the course of his trial .

moreover , the examples provided elsewhere in the section's commentary and the cases applying the section confirm that it reaches perjurious statements in a number of judicial contexts and to false statements in a number of others .

the courts have concluded that an enhancement under the section is appropriate , for instance , when a defendant has ( 1 ) given preposterous , perjurious testimony during his own trial ; ( 2 ) given perjurious testimony at his suppression hearing ; ( 3 ) given perjurious , exculpatory testimony at the separate trial of his girl friend ; ( 4 ) made false statements in connection with a probation officer's bail report ; ( 5 ) made false statements to the court in an attempt to change his guilty plea ; ( 6 ) made false statements to federal investigators ; and ( 7 ) made false statements to state investigators relating to conduct for which the defendant was ultimately conviction .

when perjury provides the basis for an enhancement under the section , the court must find that the defendant willfully testified falsely with respect to a material matter .

when based upon a false statement not under oath , the statement must still be material , that is , it must "tend to influence or affect the issue under determination. .

the commentary accompanying the section also states that the enhancement may be warranted when the defendant threatens a victim , witness , or juror ; submits false documentations ; destroys evidence ; flees ( in some cases ) ; or engages in any other conduct that constitute an obstruction of justice under criminal law provisions of title 18 of the united states code .

