the inclusion of enforceable labor provisions — that is , those subject to dispute resolution procedures — in various trade agreement authorities and related reciprocal trade agreements has evolved over time .

at first , u.s. trade policy focused on lowering tariffs on goods .

it was later extended to various types of nontariff barriers .

labor principles and standards are not subject to world trade organization ( wto ) rules and disciplines .

the international labor organization ( ilo ) , an arm of the united nations founded in 1919 , is the multilateral organization with responsibility for labor issues .

for nearly 90 years , the ilo has been working to create , through adoption at its annual international labor conferences of member countries , conventions , which set international standards .

the ilo has adopted at least 183 conventions , eight of which define four "core labor" principles .

this occurred when first , a u.n. social summit in copenhagen , denmark , in 1995 declared that four categories of principles and rights at work are fundamental: ( 1 ) freedom of association and collective bargaining ; ( 2 ) the elimination of forced labor ; ( 3 ) the elimination of child labor ; and ( 4 ) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation .

the ilo then responded by pulling these together as the 1998 ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work and its follow - up .

the declaration commits all ilo member states , whether or not they have ratified the specific conventions , to respect the labor principles in these four key areas .

the follow - up , among other things , calls for reports by developing countries that have not ratified one or more of the core conventions , on the status of their implementation of the various rights .

the united states had unilaterally promoted the development of "internationally recognized worker rights," principles similar to those in the ilo declaration , through its trade preference laws for developing countries .

these trade preference laws cover five main programs: the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , 1975 ; the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) , 1983 ; the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) , 1991 ; the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , 2000 ; and the haiti opportunity through partnership act ( hope ) , 2006 .

these laws all require that as a condition of obtaining and maintaining program eligibility , beneficiary countries must take steps to afford their workers " internationally recognized worker rights . .

these rights are listed in trade act of 1974 , as amended ( section 507 ) , as similar to ilo core labor principles listed above , except the u.s. list substitutes for the fourth principle listed above: "acceptable conditions of work with respect to minimum wages , hours of work , and occupational safety and health. .

in 1996 , backed by the united states and other developed countries , the then - 124-member wto debated whether to form a committee to look into the relationship between trade and labor standards .

developing countries , in the majority , argued that the issue had no place in the wto framework ; was little more than a smokescreen for protectionism ; and was a bid by industrial nations to undermine the comparative advantage of lower - wage trading partners .

ultimately they prevailed .

the singapore ministerial declaration , reporting on what they decided , stated that the ilo ( rather than the wto ) would be the "competent body to set and deal with ... internationally recognized core labor standards. .

the ilo has no enforcement tools , but rather promotes labor standards through consensus , moral suasion , and technical assistance .

inclusion of labor provisions in bilateral u.s. trade agreements has evolved .

the first two u.s. ftas with israel , 1985 , and canada , 1988 , did not include labor provisions .

this pattern began to change after 1993 , when a number of factors came into play .

first , the united states began to undertake fta negotiations with lesser - developed countries .

second , it became increasingly accepted that labor issues were related to trade and trade policy .

third , consensus broadened that globalization had both costs and benefits .

the benefits tend to be broadly dispersed and include relatively higher economic growth and productivity and greater access to lower - priced goods .

the costs tend to be concentrated in import - competing sectors where there may be downward pressure on wages and job displacement .

in developing countries , pressures to become a low - cost producer can lead to diminished working conditions and diminished worker rights .

fourth , business groups have increasingly been willing to make some concessions to labor groups in order to promote trade agreements and pave the way for greater trade with and investment in developing countries .

since 1993 , the united states has negotiated 13 ftas that include 19 countries .

these are , chronologically , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) with mexico and canada ; bilateral agreements with jordan , chile , singapore , australia , morocco , bahrain , and oman ; a regional agreement known as cafta - dr , with the dominican republic and the five central american countries ( costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua ) ; and bilateral ftas with peru , colombia , panama , and south korea .

the last four agreements reflect a bipartisan compromise on labor language as delineated in the "bipartisan trade deal" ( popularly known as the "may 10 th agreement," ) jointly agreed to between the leadership in congress and the administration on may 10 , 2007 .

this agreement calls for , among other things , several additional labor provisions in ftas including: ( 1 ) a fully enforceable commitment that fta countries will adopt , maintain , and enforce in their laws and practice , the basic international labor standards as stated in the 1998 ilo declaration ; and ( 2 ) the use of identical enforcement provisions for labor and the other provisions in the agreements .

labor and enforcement provisions in these various trade agreements can be categorized into four different models .

based on the differences between labor and commercial fta provisions articulated in the four models , policy issues can be divided into two categories: the differences in labor vs. commercial provisions themselves ( issues 1-3 below ) ; and the differences stemming from the agencies charged with that enforcement ( issues 4 and 5 below ) .

under models 2 and 4 , all labor provisions in trade agreements are technically enforceable .

in models 1 and 3 , only certain labor provisions in trade agreements are enforceable .

all commercial provisions in trade agreements are fully enforceable under all models .

under nafta , covered by model 1 , the labor side agreement , naalc , as mentioned , includes one enforceable provision: a country must enforce a few of its labor standards — those relating to child labor , minimum wages , and occupational safety and health .

a country is not required to enforce its laws relating to the most basic core labor rights — the right to organize and bargain collectively — issues which account for the majority of the labor submissions filed under the naalc .

the ftas covered by model 3 also include only one enforceable labor provision , but it is broader in scope than that in the naalc: countries must enforce all of their own laws relating to internationally recognized worker rights in a manner affecting trade between the parties .

model 1 has separate and dissimilar enforcement procedures for violation of labor as opposed to other provisions .

model 3 has relatively similar procedures for violations under both types of provisions .

however , both models 1 and 3 place caps on potential maximum monetary penalties for violation of labor provisions , but place no caps on penalties for violations of other provisions .

models 2 and 4 have a single set of enforcement procedures covering labor and other provisions and place no caps on penalties .

however , as mentioned , under the model 2 , u.s. - jordan fta , the parties agree to make every attempt to arrive at a mutually agreeable resolution through consultations and without application of the fta's dispute settlement procedures .

labor provisions in model 4 agreements are "fully enforceable" through the same dispute resolution procedures available for other disputes .

however , a footnote limits a key labor provision — that countries adopt and maintain in their laws and practices , the rights as stated in the ilo declaration .

the footnote limits the scope of the definition , as mentioned , by saying , "the obligations set out in article 17.2 , as they relate to the ilo , refer only to the ilo declaration . .

this would suggest that trading partners could be held to the principles of the declaration , but not the details of the conventions and not the follow - up procedures .

some observers have raised concerns that some of the details in some of the ilo core labor standard conventions conflict with some u.s. labor laws , particularly state laws .

differences in the way that commercial and labor disputes are considered by the department of commerce ( doc ) and the department of labor ( dol ) can be summarized as follows: the doc receives complaints about compliance with trade agreements from the market access and compliance office's trade compliance center "hotline," industry groups , trade associations , congress , u.s. foreign commercial service officers , the ustr national trade estimates report , and other sources .

it uses its many resources to conduct research on compliance cases .

the dol does not have a comparable "hotline," but does have procedures for receiving complaints about labor violations under a free trade agreement .

the dol also states ( 1 ) that its core mission is primarily to protect the needs of u.s. workers , rather than those of other countries , which is where complaints about labor conditions related to trade agreements typically arise ; and ( 2 ) that its international responsibilities include ensuring compliance with labor provisions of trade agreements and trade preference programs .

the dol receives information on foreign labor conditions from a number of sources including trade unions , congress , department of state labor officers at u.s. embassies , and the state department's country reports on human rights practices .

the dol , like the doc , may take action to resolve an issue at any stage prior to dispute resolution .

any case not so resolved , may be referred by the respective agency to the office of the ustr .

labor submissions have been filed with the dol alleging violations of the labor provisions of the ftas involving a number of countries , including guatemala , bahrain , honduras , the dominican republic , mexico , and peru .

however , to date , none of these disputes has resulted in formal consultation between the ustr and a foreign government , potentially leading to dispute resolution .

two cases currently pending are: one involving guatemala , on which negotiations are still proceeding short of formal consultation ; and another involving bahrain , on which the department of labor has recommended to the ustr that the united states launch formal consultations .

should a case not be resolved short of dispute resolution , the ustr must decide which cases it will pursue based on priorities .

the ustr is a small operation .

entering into the dispute resolution process is a lengthy , involved , expensive process in terms of both personnel and resources .

the ustr typically chooses cases to pursue based on a number of factors .

these may include cases that involve clear violations , could clarify particular issues and / or be cases the ustr believes it can win , based on evidence and facts .

