check cashers are nonbank businesses that cash checks for a fee .

check cashing businesses may offer additional fee - based products and services including money orders , processing utility bill payments , pre - paid phone cards , and funds transfers .

these enterprises often operate in neighborhoods not well served by banks .

check cashers provide access to financial services for individuals without accounts at conventional banks .

to provide these services , a check cashing enterprise establishes a business relationship with a bank to clear checks , transfer funds , and open lines of credit for liquidity purposes .

the bank secrecy act regulations define check cashers as money services businesses ( msbs ) .

both banks and nonbank msbs must have written anti - money laundering programs , file currency transaction reports ( crts ) and supicious activity reports ( sars ) , and maintain certain records .

msbs , including check cashers , must register with the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) , a bureau of the u.s. treasury .

banks providing services to check cashers are expected to have systems to manage the risks associated with these accounts .

the following developments created difficulties to obtaining and maintaining access to banking services .

the office of the comptroller of currency ( occ ) a federal bank regulatory agency included check cashers and other msbs in a list of inherently high - risk businesses in its bank secrecy act / anti - money laundering manual .

the occ has also stated that the risk profiles of individual businesses can vary widely based on the variety and range of financial services offered .

fincen strengthened bsa enforcement after the enactment of the usa patriot act and with the increased focus on terrorism financing after 9 / 11 .

banker's compliance costs were affected by the risks associated with a check cashing business .

substantial fines were levied by bank regulators on banking institutions for bsa non - compliance .

the potential price of doing business proved to be prohibitive for a number of banks , resulting in discontinuance of services to check cashers .

in april 2005 , bank regulators issued interagency guidance in response to concerns over the loss of access to banking services by check cashers and other msbs .

concern is twofold: ( 1 ) widespread termination of account relationships could result in the loss of access to financial services and products by the significant market segment currently served by check cashers and ( 2 ) if these businesses are consequently forced "underground" the potential loss of transparency could damage ongoing efforts to safeguard the u.s. financial system .

the guidance addressed both the ability of check cashers and other msbs to obtain services and the caution to be maintained by banks dealing with these businesses .

the goal was to clarify the regulatory expectations for banking institutions providing services to domestic businesses .

it is generally acknowledged that the trend of individual banks terminating account relationships with check cashers has continued .

on june 21 , 2006 , the subcommittee on financial institutions and consumer credit of the house financial services committee held an oversight hearing to assess the impact of the bsa obligations on check cashers and other msbs .

in march 2006 , a fincen news release acknowledged the ongoing concerns of both the banking industry and money service businesses relating to bsa regulations despite the previous steps taken ( including the april 2005 guidance ) to address the issues .

the difficulties involve how to minimize the resources and costs borne by financial institutions while ensuring the effective administration of the anti - terrorism financing and anti - money laundering programs .

the news release announced an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking seeking input on what additional guidance or regulatory action would be appropriate to address the ongoing concerns about check casher's and other msb's access to banking services .

the news release emphasized the important role of msbs and the negative effect on the health and safety of the u.s. financial system if these businesses are driven underground .

comments received by fincen are under review and potential next steps are being considered .

on june 21 , 2006 , the subcommittee on financial institutions and consumer credit of the house committee on financial services held an oversight hearing on the bank secrecy act's impact on money services businesses .

there was general agreement that banks were re - evaluating their businesses strategies in light of bsa due diligence costs .

there were reports of individual institutions concluding that opening and maintaining accounts for msbs did not make economic sense .

regulatory and supervisory adjustments were discussed as a means of easing the burden on banks .

stronger state msb regulatory oversight was encouraged .

joint industry / government training on bsa obligations for banks , bank examiners , and msbs was suggested .

in addition , fisca ( the trade association , representing 6,000 check cashing operations and nonbank financial service centers ) , suggested the need for legislation that would remove state regulated check cashers from "high risk" categories .

in its view , legislation could also limit administrative enforcement actions against banks that service check cashers in good faith .

