the 110 th congress will consider several measures that bear directly on funding for the programs and activities of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the 109 th congress adjourned without completing action on the fy2007 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

5384 ) , which funds most of usda for the current year .

the 110 th congress is expected to combine all unfinished appropriations bills into either an omnibus spending bill or a year - long continuing resolution that likely would hold spending at close to fy2006 levels for most discretionary programs .

these funding decisions for fy2007 might intersect with congressional consideration of the fy2008 budget and appropriations , which begins shortly after the release of the administration's budget request in early february 2007 .

of interest to agriculture is the fy2008 budget resolution , whereby congress will establish a blueprint for all federal spending over a multi - year period , which could set the fiscal parameters of the next omnibus farm bill , to be debated in 2007 .

 ( see crs report rl33412 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2007 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33037 , previewing a 2007 farm bill , by [author name scrubbed] et al. ) .

the 109 th congress debated extensively whether a multi - billion dollar emergency disaster assistance package should be enacted to compensate farmers for 2005 and 2006 production losses caused by natural disasters .

in the final week of the 109 th congress , an amendment ( s.amdt .

5205 ) that would have provided an estimated $3.8 billion in supplemental disaster aid was defeated during debate on the fy2007 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

5384 ) .

the amendment was supported by numerous farm groups primarily in response to a severe drought in the plains states .

opposing the amendment were the administration and fiscal conservatives in congress , who insisted that any assistance needed to be offset with other spending reductions .

in the 110 th congress , supporters have introduced a package of assistance ( s. 284 ) that is similar to s.amdt .

5205 .

a series of severe winter storms in late 2006 and early 2007 could broaden the scope of proposed assistance to include 2007 production losses .

 ( see crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

since most provisions of the current omnibus farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 , the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ) expire in 2007 , the 110 th congress will be making decisions about the content of a new farm bill .

commodity price and income support policy — namely , the methods , levels , and distribution of federal support to producers of farm commodities — is traditionally the most contentious component of a farm bill .

however , other food and agricultural issues , notably those surrounding conservation , rural development , trade , domestic food assistance , and biofuels , also will be debated .

a key question for the 110 th congress will be whether to extend farm support programs as currently designed , or to adopt different approaches given the pressures of tight federal spending constraints , concerns about the distribution of farm program benefits , and the threat of potential world trade organization ( wto ) challenges to farm price and income support spending .

 ( see crs report rl33037 , previewing a 2007 farm bill , by [author name scrubbed] et al. ) .

the 110 th congress will continue to monitor the administration's participation in the current doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , which has focused on agricultural trade liberalization .

negotiations were indefinitely suspended in july 2006 when a compromise agreement on reducing subsidies or expanding market access for agricultural products could not be reached .

while a new multilateral trade agreement may not be in place before congress takes up the 2007 farm bill , a new farm bill will nevertheless have to contend with existing wto commitments in agriculture and possible challenges to u.s. subsidies in wto dispute settlements .

 ( see crs report rl33144 , wto doha round: the agricultural negotiations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

meanwhile , the 110 th congress will consider bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) concluded with colombia , peru , and panama , which are expected to boost u.s. agricultural exports .

separate bilateral agreements with other countries , including malaysia and south korea , are also being negotiated .

congress also might consider the extension of trade promotion authority , which provides for expedited consideration of trade agreements and expires june 30 , 2007 .

other ongoing trade issues of interest to congress include barriers to agricultural trade ( see crs report rl32809 , agricultural biotechnology: background and recent issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33472 , sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) concerns in agricultural trade , by [author name scrubbed] ) ; the scope of restrictions that should apply to agricultural sales to cuba ( see crs report rl33499 , exempting food and agriculture products from u.s. economic sanctions: status and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] ) ; and funding for u.s. agricultural export and food aid programs ( see crs report rl33553 , agricultural export and food aid programs , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

in march 2005 , a wto appellate panel ruled against the united states in a dispute settlement case brought by brazil , stating that elements of the u.s. cotton program are not consistent with u.s. trade commitments .

in response , congress authorized the elimination of the step - 2 cotton program , effective august 1 , 2006 .

following the indefinite suspension of the wto doha round of multilateral trade negotiations in july 2006 , brazil has pressed for further reductions in u.s. cotton support in response to the panel ruling .

consequently , additional permanent modifications to u.s. farm programs may still be needed to fully comply with the "actionable subsidies" portion of the wto ruling .

some policymakers are concerned that a successful challenge of the cotton program in the wto could have implications for the other farm commodity support programs .

for example , on january 8 , 2007 , canada requested consultations with the united states on u.s. domestic corn subsidies , as the first step in pursuing a wto challenge .

any changes to farm commodity programs ultimately will be decided by congress , most likely in the context of the 2007 farm bill .

 ( see crs report rs22187 , brazil ' s wto case against the u.s. cotton program: a brief overview , by [author name scrubbed] , crs report rl33853 , canada ' s wto case against u.s .

agricultural support , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rs22522 , potential challenges to u.s. farm subsidies in the wto: a brief overview , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

although not as energy - intensive as some industries , agriculture is a major consumer of energy — directly , as fuel or electricity , and indirectly , as fertilizers and chemicals .

by raising the overall price structure of production agriculture , sustained high energy prices could result in significantly lower farm and rural incomes , and are generating considerable concern about longer - term impacts on farm profitability .

agriculture also is viewed as a potentially important producer of renewable fuels such as ethanol and biodiesel , although farm - based energy production remains small relative to total u.s. energy needs .

current law requires that biofuels use grow from 4 billion gallons in 2006 to 7.5 billion gallons in 2012 .

this standard , along with tax credit incentives , is expected to encourage significant increases in u.s. ethanol production .

although the increased use of corn for energy improves the prices and income of corn growers , some policymakers are concerned that higher prices for corn will add to livestock grower feed costs .

 ( see crs report rl32712 , agriculture - based renewable energy production , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

spending for conservation programs , which help producers protect and improve natural resources on some farmed land and retire other land from production , has grown rapidly since the 2002 farm bill .

this growth in spending reflects the expanded reach of conservation programs , which now involve many more landowners and types of rural lands .

one topic that continues to attract congressional interest is implementation of the conservation security program , enacted in 2002 .

some stakeholders have questioned why usda has implemented the program in only a few watersheds , and why congress has limited funding even though the program was enacted as a true entitlement .

the environmental , conservation , and agriculture communities have started to identify conservation policy options that might be considered in the next farm bill .

 ( see crs report rl33556 , soil and water conservation: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the potential for terrorist attacks against agricultural targets ( agroterrorism ) is recognized as a national security threat .

"food defense" — protecting the food supply against possible attack — has received increased attention since 2001 .

through increased appropriations , laboratory and response capacities are being upgraded .

national response plans now incorporate agroterrorism .

yet some in congress want additional laws or oversight to increase the level of food defense , particularly regarding interagency coordination , response and recovery leadership , and ensuring adequate border inspections .

 ( see crs report rl32521 , agroterrorism: threats and preparedness , by [author name scrubbed] . ) .

approximately 76 million people get sick and 5,000 die from food - related illnesses in the united states each year , it is estimated .

congress frequently conducts oversight and periodically considers legislation on food safety and could do so again .

some members continue to be interested in such issues as whether appropriate resources and safeguards are in place to limit microbiological contamination of fresh meat , poultry , and produce ; the need , if any , for stronger enforcement or recall authority ; the regulation of bioengineered foods ; human antimicrobial resistance ( which some link partly to misuse of antibiotics in animal feed ) ; and interest among some in reorganizing food safety authorities and responsibilities , possibly under a single agency .

 ( see crs report rl32922 , meat and poultry inspection: background and selected issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

since 2003 , highly pathogenic avian influenza ( h5n1 ) has spread from asia into europe , the middle east , and africa ; however , no cases of h5n1 have been found yet in the united states .

because avian flu is highly contagious in domestic poultry and can be carried by wild birds , usda advocates stringent on - farm biosecurity .

controlling avian flu in poultry is seen as the best way to prevent a human pandemic from developing .

congress has responded to the threat by providing emergency and regular appropriations for surveillance , both domestically and internationally , and holding hearings covering the animal disease and food safety .

further funding will be necessary for surveillance , vaccine stockpiles , and first responder equipment .

 ( see crs report rl33795 , avian influenza in poultry and wild birds , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

many believe that u.s. agricultural producers and food processors should improve their ability to identify and trace their products ( including animals ) through the food chain , whether to facilitate the removal of contaminated products , quickly contain animal disease outbreaks , enable consumers to verify labeling claims , and / or for country of origin labeling ( cool ) .

one issue is whether a more universal animal identification system should be mandated and who should pay .

another is mandatory cool for fresh red meats , produce , and peanuts , which congress required in the 2002 farm bill but has since delayed , until september 30 , 2008 .

 ( h.r .

357 would require mandatory cool implementation on september 30 , 2007. ) .

while some want cool to be implemented , others would prefer voluntary labeling .

 ( see crs report rs22526 , animal agriculture: selected issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is an independent federal agency that regulates the futures trading industry .

the cftc is subject to periodic reauthorization ; current authority expired on september 30 , 2005 .

congress traditionally uses the reauthorization process to consider amendments to the commodity exchange act ( cea ) , which provides the basis for federal regulation of commodity futures trading .

among the issues in the debate are ( 1 ) regulation of energy derivatives markets , where some see excessive price volatility and a lack of effective regulation ; ( 2 ) the market in security futures , or futures contracts based on single stocks , where cumbersome and duplicative regulation is blamed for low trading volumes ; ( 3 ) the regulatory status of foreign futures exchanges selling contracts in the united states ; and ( 4 ) the legality of futures - like contracts based on foreign currency prices offered to retail investors .

 ( see crs report rs22028 , cftc reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] . ) .

hired farmworkers are an important component of agricultural production .

some of these laborers are under guest worker programs , which are meant to assure employers ( eg , fruit , vegetable , and horticulture growers ) of an adequate supply of labor when and where it is needed while not adding permanent residents to the u.s. population .

the connection between farm labor and immigration policies is a longstanding one , particularly with regard to u.s. employers' use of workers from mexico .

the 109 th congress considered the issue without resolution as part of a larger debate over initiation of a broad - based guest worker program , increased border enforcement , and employer sanctions to curb the flow of unauthorized workers into the united states .

 ( see crs report 95-712 , the effects on u.s. farm workers of an agricultural guest worker program , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl30395 , farm labor shortages and immigration policy , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl32044 , immigration: policy considerations related to guest worker programs , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

