under house rules and precedents , opportunities to speak on the house floor about pending legislation are restricted and highly structured .

every time a legislator is recognized on the floor to speak , his or her time is limited .

furthermore , when debating legislation , members generally must confine their comments to the subject of the measure .

members also must observe long - standing principles of decorum and courtesy in debate , including avoiding personal remarks about fellow members .

members direct their comments to the presiding officer , therefore referring to each other in the third person as "the gentleman / woman" from the state represented .

they address the presiding officer as "mr. / madam speaker" during procedures in the house proper , and as "mr. / madam chairman" while in the "committee of the whole. .

it is not in order for a legislator directly to address the "television audience" or the galleries .

the manner in which time is obtained , restricted , and distributed in the house depends on the procedures the house is using to consider a measure , as well as the terms of any special order of the house governing the consideration of the measure .

there are two different methods by which time to speak on legislation is distributed on the house floor .

time for debate is either "controlled," or it is not .

under controlled time , a member is granted a block of time from a member , called a "manager," who determines for each side which members may speak , for how long , and in what order .

if time is not controlled , then a member gains time to speak by seeking recognition from the chair , and the length of time the member can speak is usually limited to five minutes .

most of the time when members are debating legislation , time is equally divided and controlled by two managers .

for example , the house passes bills that enjoy widespread support through the suspension of the rules procedure , which allows for a total of 40 minutes of debate .

under that procedure , two managers , generally the chair and ranking member of the committee or subcommittee of jurisdiction ( or their designees ) each control 20 minutes of which they then yield portions to members , usually on their side of the aisle .

time for debate of special rules , which set the terms for consideration of most major legislation , is also controlled time ; the first ( and usually only ) hour for debate is granted to the rules committee chair ( or his or her designee ) who in turn customarily yields half of that time to the ranking member of the committee ( or his or her designee ) for purposes of debate only .

each side then yields portions of the 30 minutes to other members .

in addition , when the house resolves into the committee of the whole to consider a bill , the first stage is usually a period for general debate , and this is also controlled time .

the chair ( s ) and ranking member ( s ) of the committee ( s ) of jurisdiction typically serve as managers ; if multiple committees have jurisdiction , then managers from each committee control a portion of the time .

in some procedural circumstances , debate time is not controlled by floor managers .

instead , members gain time to speak by seeking recognition directly from the presiding officer .

most prominently , time for debating amendments can take place in the committee of the whole under what is known as the "five minute rule. .

certain types of special rules , especially those referred to as open rules or modified open rules , normally allow for amendments under the five - minute rule .

time is also not controlled during the five minutes of debate permitted to each side on a motion to recommit a bill or joint resolution ( under rule xix , clause 2 ) , and in a few other less common circumstances .

clause 5 ( a ) of house rule xviii states in part a member , delegate , or resident commissioner who offers an amendment shall be allowed five minutes to explain it , after which the member , delegate , or resident commissioner who shall first obtain the floor shall be allowed five minutes to speak in opposition to it .

accordingly , if a member offers an amendment , the presiding officer will recognize him or her for five minutes .

another member ( sometimes the floor manager defending the version of the bill reported by the committee of jurisdiction ) can then be recognized for five minutes to speak against the amendment by standing and stating i rise in opposition to the amendment .

because time under the five - minute rule is not controlled , there is no member acting as a manager and allocating portions of time .

instead , any member may seek recognition from the chair of the committee of the whole to speak for five minutes .

the presiding officer recognizes members from the committee with jurisdiction over the bill first , in order of seniority , alternating recognition from side to side .

a member need not consume the full five minutes , but time cannot be reserved .

when a member's five minutes on an amendment expires , the member sometimes asks unanimous consent to extend his or her time by a specified number of additional minutes , up to five minutes .

a member may be recognized only once under the five minute rule on a given amendment .

although the 5-minute rule technically permits only 10 minutes of debate for each amendment , 5 in favor and 5 against the amendment , members secure additional time through the use of "pro forma" amendments .

pro forma amendments are amendments to strike one or more words of the text under consideration , and they are offered solely for the purpose of gaining recognition to speak for five minutes .

in other words , no change to the text under consideration is substantively proposed ; the proponent is not actually suggesting a word or words be stricken .

after the proponent and the opponent of an amendment have spoken for their allotted five minutes , another member who wishes to speak may rise and state i move to strike the last word .

the chair then recognizes that member for five minutes , technically to speak on the pro forma amendment , but in fact to continue debate on the pending substantive amendment .

any number of pro forma amendments can be offered , but because of a general prohibition against offering the same amendment twice , members sometimes choose to say instead i move to strike the requisite number of words .

pro forma amendments can also be made when no amendment is pending if members wish to discuss the measure itself .

pro forma amendments , however , are not always in order .

if a measure is being considered under a special rule from the committee on rules that prohibits most or all amendments , or that permits only specified amendments , then pro forma amendments are not in order unless the special rule explicitly states otherwise .

a special rule could also limit the total number of pro forma amendments , and it could provide that only floor managers can offer them .

in addition , unanimous consent agreements may restrict the offering of pro forma amendments .

when time is not controlled , members cannot yield portions of their time to other members .

they can , however , remain standing and yield to other members for questions or comments , and the time consumed by the other members is deducted from the time of the yielding member .

a member recognized under the five - minute rule also cannot yield to another member for the purposes of offering an amendment .

the member who wishes to offer an amendment would need to seek recognition for that purpose later from the presiding officer .

