in the mid - 1990s , the army began fielding the m - 4 carbine , a lighter , more compact version of the vietnam - era m - 16 rifle .

both m - 16 and m - 4 carbines are 5.56 mm caliber weapons and are primarily manufactured by colt defense llc , hartford , ct. army officials are said to be satisfied with the m - 16 family of weapons and have suggested that the m - 16 is "simply too expensive to replace with anything less than a significant leap in technology. .

the army's "leap ahead" program to replace the m - 16 family of weapons — the objective individual combat weapon ( oicw ) program — began in 1994 , and one weapon evaluated in that program , heckler & koch's xm - 8 assault rifle , was considered by some as the m - 16's / m - 4's replacement .

as late as 2005 , the xm - 8 was reportedly close to being officially approved as the army's new assault rifle , but alleged acquisition and bureaucratic conflicts compelled the army to cancel the xm - 8 in october 2005 .

the army plans to continue its procurement of m - 16s and m - 4s for "years to come," while some in congress have called for an "open competition" to choose a successor to the m - 16 and m - 4 assault rifles .

reports suggest that soldiers have expressed concerns regarding the reliability and lethality of the m - 4 .

reliability can be described as "the probability that an item can perform its intended function for a specified interval under stated conditions" and lethality as "the killing or stopping power of a bullet when fired from a weapon. .

other reports , however , suggest that the m - 4 has performed well and been generally well - received by troops .

in ussocom's february 2001 study , a number of m - 4 reliability problems were documented .

the ussocom report described the m - 4's shortened barrel and gas tube as a "fundamentally flawed design," which contributed to failures extracting and ejecting spent cartridges during firing .

in recognition of these reported deficiencies , the 1 st special forces operational detachment - delta , also referred to as "delta force," reportedly began working with german arms manufacturer heckler & koch to replace the m - 4's gas system with a piston operating system to improve reliability and increase parts life .

in 2004 , delta reportedly replaced their m - 4s with the hk - 416 — a weapon that combines the operating characteristics of the m - 4 with the piston operating system .

in addition to reliability problems detailed in ussocom's february 2001 study , another possible reason that ussocom might have wanted to replace the m - 4 carbine is that the m - 4 was a weapon procured by the department of defense and subject to military standards and the technical data package , meaning that ussocom could not make changes to the weapon .

if ussocom became the procurement agency for a new carbine , then they could direct the carbine's manufacturer to make changes and modifications .

in early 2003 , ussocom officials initiated efforts to identify potential new combat rifle capabilities .

from may through august 2004 , ussocom evaluated 12 weapons from nine different manufacturers .

in november 2004 , ussocom awarded a contract to fnh usa to develop the special operations combat assault rifle ( scar ) .

the scar will come in two variants — the heavy 7.62 mm scar - h and the light 5.56 mm scar - l. each variant will accommodate three different barrels — a standard 35.7 cm barrel , a 25.5 cm close - combat barrel , and a sniper variant barrel .

all barrels reportedly will take less than five minutes to switch .

the scar - l is intended to replace ussocom m4-a1 carbines .

based on the aforementioned studies and tests , there appears to be not only a wide range of opinions as to the m - 4's reliability and lethality , but also questions if testing of the m - 4 has been consistent and whether performance results are indeed accurate .

if the army does opt to replace the m - 4 and the competition involves comparative testing , efforts might be undertaken to ensure consistency between test weapons .

as previously noted , the army is basing its upcoming carbine competition to a large extent on the small arms cba , which some believe does not present a compelling case to launch a competition to replace the m - 4 .

according to reports , dod — as part of its joint small arms review — is supposed to shortly reach a number of conclusions about the army's small arms cba that might be relevant to any planned m - 4 replacement competition .

the results of dod's review might possibly support the army's planned m - 4 replacement competition or instead suggest an alternative course of action .

congress might benefit from examining the results of dod's service - wide small arms review as it considers the future of the army's small arms modernization efforts .

it has been suggested that ussocom's decision to adopt the fnh scar has implications for the army .

in one sense , the scar is the first modular small arms system adopted by the military .

the scar - l and scar - h will replace the following weapons: m - 4a1 , mk - 18 close quarter carbine , mk - 11 sniper security rifle , mk - 12 special purpose rifle , and the m - 14 rifle .

there is also a 90% parts commonality between the scar - l and scar - h , including a common upper receiver and stock and trigger housing and an enhanced grenade launcher can be attached to either model .

while the scar might not meet all of the conventional army's requirements , its adaptability in terms of missions ( close quarters combat to long - range sniper operations ) , being able to rapidly convert from a 5.56 mm to a 7.62 mm weapon , and the ability to accommodate a variety of modifications such as grenade launchers and special optics , might be factors worth considering as the "modular army" plans future small arms programs .

the rangers' forthcoming combat deployment with the scar and associated lessons learned and performance and lethality data might also have implications for future army small arms development and acquisition efforts .

