the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states ( 37 million ) is at the highest level in our history and has reached a proportion of the u.s. population ( 12.4% ) not seen since the early 20 th century .

of the foreign - born residents in the united states , approximately one - third are naturalized citizens , one - third are legal permanent residents , and one - third are unauthorized ( illegal ) residents .

there is a broad - based consensus that the u.s. immigration system , based upon the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , is broken .

this consensus erodes , however , as soon as the options to reform the u.s. immigration system are debated .

the 110 th congress is faced with a strategic question of whether to continue to build on incremental reforms of specific elements of immigration ( eg , border security , employment verification , temporary workers , or alien children ) or whether to comprehensively reform the ina .

while it appears that bipartisan as well as bicameral agreement on specific revisions to the ina may be achievable , it is also clear that many think a comprehensive overhaul of the ina is overdue and necessary .

president george w. bush has stated that comprehensive immigration reform is a top priority of his second term , and his principles of reform include increased border security and enforcement of immigration laws within the interior of the united states , as well as a major overhaul of temporary worker visas , expansion of permanent legal immigration , and revisions to the process of determining whether foreign workers are needed .

some in the bush administration reportedly advocated to replace or supplement the current legal immigration preference system with a point system that would assign prospective immigrants with credits if they have specified attributes ( eg , educational attainment , work experience , language proficiency ) .

the thorniest of these immigration issues remains the treatment of unauthorized aliens in the united states .

future debates will reflect the divergent views on how to address the more than 12 million illegal alien population , as well as what the level of future permanent immigration should be .

the policy issues for congress are twofold: whether and how to reform the nation's legal immigration system ; and whether border security and interior enforcement provisions — as well as the resources of the immigration agencies charged with the administration and enforcement of immigration laws — are sufficient to implement comprehensive immigration reform .

immigration enforcement encompasses an array of legal tools , policies , and practices to prevent and investigate violations of immigration laws .

the spectrum of enforcement issues ranges from visa policy at consular posts abroad and border security along the country's perimeter , to the apprehension , detention , and removal of unauthorized aliens in the interior of the country .

illustrative among these issues likely to arise in the 110 th congress are border security , worksite enforcement , alien smuggling , and the role of state and local law enforcement .

the challenge inherent in this policy issue is balancing employers' hopes to increase the supply of legally present foreign workers , families' longing to reunite and live together , and a widely - shared wish among the stakeholders to improve the policies governing legal immigration into the country .

the scope of this issue includes temporary admissions ( eg , guest workers , foreign students ) , permanent admissions ( e.g .

employment - based , family - based ) , and legalization and status adjustment for aliens not currently eligible for legal status .

during the 109 th congress , both chambers passed major overhauls of immigration law but did not reach agreement on a comprehensive reform package .

in december 2005 , the house passed h.r .

4437 , the border protection , antiterrorism , and illegal immigration control act of 2005 , which had provisions on border security ; the role of state and local law enforcement in immigration enforcement ; employment eligibility verification ; and worksite enforcement , smuggling , detention , and other enforcement - related issues .

h.r .

4437 also contained provisions on unlawful presence , voluntary departure , and removal .

in may 2006 , the senate passed s. 2611 , the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2006 , which combined provisions on enforcement and on unlawful presence , voluntary departure , and removal with reform of legal immigration .

these revisions to legal immigration would have included expanded guest worker visas and increased legal permanent admissions .

s. 2611 also would have enabled certain groups of unauthorized aliens in the united states to become lprs if they paid penalty fees and met a set of other requirements .

senate action on comprehensive immigration reform legislation stalled at the end of june 2007 after several weeks of intensive debate .

the bipartisan compromise was negotiated with bush administration officials and introduced in the senate on may 21 , 2007 .

the bill includes provisions aimed at strengthening employment eligibility verification and interior immigration enforcement , as well increasing border security .

it would substantially revise legal immigration with a point system and expanded temporary worker programs .

unauthorized aliens in the united states would be able to become lprs if they meet certain requirements , pay penalty fees , and meet other requirements .

a modified version of that compromise ( s. 1639 ) was introduced june 18 , 2007 , but failed a key cloture vote on june 28 , 2007 .

the house judiciary subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law held multiple hearings weekly in april , may , and june on various aspects of comprehensive immigration reform .

