federal campaign finance law provides political parties with three major options for providing financial support to house , senate , and presidential candidates: ( 1 ) direct contributions , ( 2 ) coordinated expenditures , and ( 3 ) independent expenditures .

with direct contributions , parties give money ( or in the case of in - kind contributions , financially valuable services ) to individual campaigns , but such contributions are subject to strict limits ; most party committees are limited to direct contributions of $5,000 per candidate , per election .

since the 1996 colorado i supreme court ruling ( discussed below ) , parties may make independent expenditures , which are not limited , on anything allowable by law , but may not coordinate those expenses with candidates .

coordinated expenditures allow parties ( notwithstanding other provisions in the law regulating contributions to campaigns ) to buy goods or services on behalf of a campaign , and to discuss those expenditures with the campaign .

candidates may request that parties make coordinated expenditures , and may request specific purchases , but parties may not give this money directly to campaigns .

because parties are the spending agents , they ( not candidates ) report their coordinated expenditures to the federal election commission ( fec ) .

coordinated party expenditures are subject to limits based on office sought , state , and voting - age population ( vap ) .

exact amounts are determined by formula and updated annually by the fec .

limits for senate candidates in 2016 , adjusted for inflation , ranged from $96,100 in states with the smallest vaps to approximately $2.9 million in california .

in 2016 , parties may make up to $48,100 in coordinated expenditures in support of each house candidate in multi - district states , and $96,100 in support of house candidates in single - district states .

state party committees may authorize their nat ional counterparts to make coordinated party expenditures on their behalf ( or vice versa ) .

if such agreements exist , one party could essentially assume the spending limit for another in particular states , in which case the designated party could spend up to its own limit and up to the other party's limit .

parties may also make coordinated expenditures on behalf of presidential candidates .

for 2016 , the presidential limit is $23.8 million .

reconsidering coordinated party expenditure limits is a consistent part of the debate over the role of political parties compared with other political committees and "outside groups. .

however , bills devoted specifically to altering the limits have not been considered recently .

perhaps most notably , h.r .

6286 ( cole ) during the 111 th congress , and s. 1091 ( corker ) and h.r .

3792 ( wamp ) during the 110 th congress , would have eliminated existing caps on coordinated party expenditures .

on april 18 , 2007 , the senate committee on rules and administration held a hearing on s. 1091 ; it was not subject to additional legislative action .

h.r .

3792 was introduced on october 10 , 2007 ; it did not receive additional action .

since that time , legislative activity concerning coordinated party expenditures has been limited .

during this period , most proposals to alter coordinated party expenditure limits have been components of other bills .

as table 1 below shows , public financing and appropriations legislation considered during the 114 th congress would increase or eliminate limits on coordinated party expenditures in some cases .

as of this writing , only one such bill , s. 1910 , has advanced beyond introduction , but this appropriations bill was superseded by another measure that excluded the coordinated party expenditure language .

although coordinated expenditures played a large role in party financial activity throughout the 1970s and 1980s , recent elections suggest that party reliance on coordinated expenditures is changing .

as table 2 and figure 1 ( below ) show , although the colorado i decision permitted parties to make unlimited independent expenditures during and after the 1996 cycle , those expenditures remained relatively modest through 2002 .

from 1996 to 2002 , total party coordinated expenditures outpaced independent expenditures — often by large amounts .

beginning in 2004 , however , party spending shifted dramatically , with far more total independent expenditures than coordinated expenditures .

in 2004 , the two major parties made more than four times in independent expenditures what they did in coordinated expenditures .

that allocation of resources continued thereafter , albeit in some cases less dramatically than in 2004 .

in 2014 , the two major parties spent more than eight times on independent expenditures what they did in coordinated party expenditures ( approximately $229 million versus about $28 million ) .

these data do not establish why independent expenditures were so heavily favored compared with coordinated party expenditures in 2014 .

however , some disparity would be expected because spending would be naturally lower without a presidential race on which to make coordinated expenditures .

it also is possible that parties are relying on "outside" spending , such as by super pacs , and are instead focusing their efforts on other activities ( including their own independent expenditures ) .

the decrease also could reflect party decisions about whether to support particular house or senate campaigns .

as the table also shows , at various points since 1996 , each major party has outspent the other in coordinated expenditures .

despite some exceptions , democrats and republicans generally have allocated similar amounts to coordinated party expenditures .

one potential concern about lifting the caps on party coordinated expenditures could be that one party would have an inherent advantage over the other .

recent fundraising totals suggest that the historic fundraising gap between democrats and republicans has narrowed , although disparities between the two parties still exist .

as table 3 and figure 2 show , since 1996 , local , state , and national republican party committees have accumulated more receipts than their democratic counterparts , as has generally occurred since at least the 1970s .

although republicans raised approximately 88% more than democrats in 1996 ( $416.5 million versus $221.6 million ) , beginning in 2004 , the two parties began to raise roughly similar amounts .

despite a 24% republican advantage in 2006 ( $599 million versus $483.1 million ) , differences between the parties have been smaller since 2008 .

in 2012 , the democratic and republican parties both raised about $800 million .

in 2014 , however , democrats raised 16% more than republicans ( $657.2 million versus $565.7 million ) .

on their own , these data do not suggest particular outcomes if caps on party coordinated expenditures were lifted , but they do indicate that one party might not necessarily have a major total financial advantage over the other if the caps are lifted in the near future .

although the parties would not choose to spend all those funds on coordinated party expenditures , the data suggest that they would likely be working with roughly equal resources .

for those who support lifting the caps on coordinated party expenditures , current limits impinge on parties' abilities to orchestrate unified campaigns with their candidates after the limits are reached .

unrestricted coordinated party expenditures could shift party spending away from independent expenditures , although each option would retain unique characteristics .

parties might continue to choose independent expenditures if they wish to distance campaigns from what many political professionals and some candidates view as necessary , but politically unpopular , purchases ( eg , for political advertising attacking opponents ) .

on the other hand , coordinated expenditures would be more attractive for parties wishing to communicate freely with campaigns about campaign - related spending .

raising or eliminating coordinated party expenditure limits might also provide parties with additional resources to compete against independent expenditures from super pacs or other "outside" groups .

additional coordinated expenditures could , therefore , strengthen arguably weakening ties between parties and campaigns .

proponents of limits on party coordinated expenditures contend that the caps reduce the amount of money in politics .

they also potentially prevent circumvention of individual contribution limits by donors who may seek to indirectly support campaigns by making contributions to political parties .

 ( however , it should be noted that feca already restricts "earmarked" contributions. ) .

for those who generally support regulating political money , lifting or raising the caps on party - coordinated expenditures would likely be objectionable on principle , could appear to undercut similar regulatory efforts adopted since the 1970s , and could go against public sentiment generally favoring limiting the amount of money in politics .

finally , revisiting coordinated party expenditure limits might also be relevant following a 2014 u.s. supreme court decision , mccutcheon v. fec .

the mccutcheon case , which concerned now - invalidated aggregate limits on contributions to political parties , is not centrally related to coordinated party expenditures .

however , post - mccutcheon , some might argue that providing parties with increased limits ( or none ) on coordinated party expenditures is a logical extension of their newfound ability to solicit donors who previously would have been unable to contribute to as many party committees as they wished .

additional discussion of mccutcheon and potential party fundraising implications appears in other crs products .

