several statutes authorize the use of administrative subpoenas primarily or exclusively for use in a criminal investigation in cases involving health care fraud , child abuse , secret service protection , controlled substance cases , and inspector general investigations .

the child protection act of 2012 , p.l .

112-206 ( h.r .

6063 ) authorizes the marshals service to use administrative subpoenas to track unregistered sex offenders .

administrative agencies have long held the power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum in aid of the agencies' adjudicative and investigative functions .

there are over 300 instances where federal agencies have been granted administrative subpoena power in one form or another .

the statute granting the power ordinarily describes the circumstances under which it may be exercised: the scope of the authority , enforcement procedures , and sometimes limitations on dissemination of the information subpoenaed .

in some instances , the statute may grant the power to issue subpoena duces tecum , but explicitly or implicitly deny the agency authority to compel testimony .

the statute may authorize use of the subpoena power in conjunction with an agency's investigations or its administrative hearings or both .

authority is usually conferred upon a tribunal or upon the head of the agency .

although some statutes preclude or limit delegation , agency heads are usually free to delegate such authority and to authorize its redelegation thereafter within the agency .

failure to comply with an administrative subpoena may pave the way for denial of a license or permit or some similar adverse administrative decision in the matter to which the issuance of the subpoena was originally related .

in most instances , however , administrative agencies ultimately rely upon the courts to enforce their subpoenas .

generally , the statute that grants the subpoena power will spell out the procedure for its enforcement .

objections to the enforcement of administrative subpoenas must be derived from one of three sources: a constitutional provision ; an understanding on the part of congress ; or the general standards governing judicial enforcement of administrative subpoenas .

constitutional challenges arise most often under the fourth amendment's condemnation of unreasonable searches and seizures , the fifth amendment's privilege against self - incrimination , or the claim that in a criminal context the administrative subpoena process is an intrusion into the power of the grand jury and its concomitant fifth amendment right to grand jury indictment .

in an early examination of the questions , the supreme court held that the fourth amendment did not preclude enforcement of an administrative subpoena issued by the wage and hour administration notwithstanding the want of probable cause .

neither the fourth amendment nor the unclaimed fifth amendment privilege against self - incrimination was thought to pose any substantial obstacle to subpoena enforcement .

soon thereafter a second case echoed the same message — the fourth amendment does not demand a great deal of administrative subpoenas addressed to corporate entities ; a governmental investigation into corporate matters may be of such a sweeping nature and so unrelated to the matter properly under inquiry as to exceed the investigatory power .

but it is sufficient if the inquiry is within the authority of the agency , the demand is not too indefinite , and the information sought is reasonably relevant .

the gist of the protection is in the requirement that the disclosure sought shall not be unreasonable .

a statute or judicial tolerance , however , may require what the constitution does not .

nevertheless when asked if the internal revenue service ( irs ) must have probable cause before issuing a summons for the production of documents , the court intoned the standard often repeated in response to an administrative subpoena challenge , the commissioner need not meet any standard of probable cause to obtain enforcement of his summons .

he must show [1] that the investigation will be conducted pursuant to a legitimate purpose , [2] that the inquiry may be relevant to the purpose , [3] that the information sought is not already within the commissioner's possession , and [4] that the administrative steps required by the code have been followed... .

this does not mean that under no circumstances may the court inquire into the underlying reason for the examination .

it is the court's process which is invoked to enforce the administrative summons and a court may not permit its process to be abused .

the earliest of the three federal statutes ( 21 u.s.c .

876 ) used extensively for criminal investigative purposes appeared with little fanfare as part of the 1970 controlled substances act , and empowers the attorney general to issue subpoenas "in any investigation relating to his functions" under the act .

in spite of its spacious language , the legislative history of section 876 , emphasizes the value of the subpoena power for administrative purposes — its utility in assigning and reassigning substances to the act's various schedules and in regulating the activities of physicians , pharmacists , and the pharmaceutical industry — rather than as a criminal law enforcement tool .

nevertheless , the attorney general has delegated the authority to issue subpoenas under section 876 to both administrative and criminal law enforcement personnel , and the courts have approved its use in inquiries conducted exclusively for purposes of criminal investigation .

section 876 authorizes both testimonial subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum .

it provides for judicial enforcement ; failure to comply with the court's order to obey the subpoena is punishable as contempt of court .

it also contains no explicit prohibition on disclosure .

the language of the inspector general act of 1978 provision is just as general as its controlled substance counterpart: each inspector general , in carrying out the provisions of this act , is authorized to require by subpoena the production of all information necessary in the performance of the functions assigned by this act .

its legislative history supplies somewhat clearer evidence of an investigative tool intended for use in both administrative and criminal investigations .

the justice department reports that the inspector general's administrative subpoena authority is mainly used in criminal investigations , and the courts have held that the act gives the inspectors general both civil and criminal investigative authority and subpoena powers coextensive with that authority .

the act contains no explicit prohibition on disclosure of the existence or specifics of a subpoena issued under this authority .

unlike its companions , there can be little doubt that 18 u.s.c .

3486 is intended for use primarily in connection with criminal investigations .

it is an amalgam of three relatively recent statutory provisions — one , the original , dealing with health care fraud ; one with child abuse offenses ; and one with threats against the president and others who fall under secret service protection .

congress added the final piece to section 3486 in the child protection act of 21012 .

there , it vests section 3486's administrative subpoena power in the marshals service for use in tracking unregistered sex offenders .

section 3486 is both more explicit and more explicitly protective than either of its controlled substance or ig statutory counterparts .

in addition to a judicial enforcement provision , it specifically authorizes motions to quash and ex parte nondisclosure court orders .

it affords those served a reasonable period of time to assemble subpoenaed material and respond and in the case of health care investigations the subpoena may call for delivery no more than 500 miles away .

in child abuse and presidential investigation cases , however , it imposes no such geographical limitation and it may contemplate the use of "forthwith" subpoenas .

it includes a "safe harbor" subsection that shields those who comply in good faith from civil liability ; and in health care investigations limits further dissemination of the information secured .

although the authority of section 3486 has been used fairly extensively , reported case law has been relatively sparse and limited to health care investigation subpoenas .

the first of these simply held that the subject of a record subpoenaed from a third party custodian has no standing to move that the administrative subpoena be quashed .

the others addressed constitutional challenges , and with one relatively narrow exception agreed that subpoenas in question complied with the demands of the fourth amendment .

they cite oklahoma press , powell , and morton salt for the view that administrative subpoenas under section 3486 need not satisfy a probable cause standard .

the fourth amendment only demands that the subpoena be reasonable , a standard that requires that ( 1 ) it satisfies the terms of its authorizing statute , ( 2 ) the documents requested were relevant to the department of justice's investigation , ( 3 ) the information sought is not already in the department of justice's possession , and ( 4 ) enforcing the subpoena will not constitute an abuse of the court's process .

of the three statutes that most clearly anticipate use of administrative subpoenas during a criminal investigation , section 3486 is the most detailed .

neither of the others has a nondisclosure feature nor a restriction on further dissemination ; neither has an explicit safe harbor provision nor an express procedure for a motion to quash .

all three , however , provide for judicial enforcement reinforced by the contempt power of the court .

only the controlled substance authority of 21 u.s.c .

876 clearly extends beyond the power to subpoena records and other documents to encompass testimonial subpoena authority as well .

the inspector general act speaks only of subpoenas for records , documents , and the like , and has been held to not include testimonial subpoenas .

section 3486 strikes a position somewhere in between ; the custodian of subpoenaed records or documents may be compelled to testify concerning them , but there is no indication that the section otherwise conveys the power to issue testimonial subpoenas .

