the jltv is an army - led , multiservice initiative to develop a family of future light tactical vehicles to replace many of the high mobility , multi - wheeled vehicles ( hmmwvs ) used by the armed services today .

hmmwvs , which first entered service in 1985 , were developed during the cold war when improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) and other antivehicle explosive devices were not a major factor in military planning .

the hmmwvs' demonstrated vulnerability to ieds and the difficulties and costs experienced in "up - armoring" hmmwvs already in the inventory have led to renewed emphasis on vehicle survivability .

dod officials have emphasized that jltvs are not intended to replace hmmwvs "one for one. .

in november 2006 , the joint chiefs of staff's joint requirement oversight council ( jroc ) approved the jltv program .

on december 22 , 2007 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics usd ( at&l ) signed an acquisition decision memorandum ( adm ) directing the jltv program to move from the concept refinement phase into the technology development ( td ) phase of the dod system acquisition process .

the army and marines had intended to issue a request for proposal ( rfp ) for technology development phase as early as october 2007 .

concerned with funding adequacy , technical maturity , and shifting requirements , the pentagon's acquisition executive disapproved the issuance of the rfp and directed the army and marines to "go back to the drawing board and develop a robust technology development phase. .

on february 5 , 2008 , an rfp for technology development phase was issued to industry .

the rfp stated the government desired to award three contracts for the jltv technology development phase .

the rfp stipulated that proposals would be due april 7 , 2008 , and the td phase would last 27 months .

contractors would build four test subconfigurations during the first 15 months , followed by 12 months of testing .

the fy2020 presidential budget request includes rdt&e and procurement funding requests , as well as fy2020-requested quantities in the base budget and overseas contingency operations ( oco ) budget request .

a redacted may 2 , 2018 , dod inspector general's ( ig's ) report notes the army and marine corps had not demonstrated effective test results to prepare the jltv program for full - rate production .

the ig's review of test results in august and september of 2017 determined the jltv failed to meet all maintenance - related performance requirements .

the ig suggested certain capabilities be developed to address the shortfall , but specifics were redacted in the public version of the report .

dot&e's fy2018 annual report noted the following: all jltvs are not operationally suitable because of deficiencies in reliability , maintainability , training , manuals , crew situational awareness , and safety .

the jltv close combat weapons carrier ( ccwc ) is not operationally effective for use in combat and tactical missions .

the ccwc provides less capability to engage threats with the tube - launched , optically tracked , wire - guided ( tow ) missiles over the fielded high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle ( hmmwv ) .

the missile reload process is slow and difficult for crews .

military officials involved with the jltv program appear to be minimizing these findings , reportedly suggesting some of these unspecified problems are "minor improvements identified by soldiers and marines during testing. .

another report alleges the army "did not respond to questions about the production decision nor the recent dot&e report , which detailed several jltv problems. .

the army's decision to delay full - rate jltv production affects not just the army , but the other services as well , and can be considered a significant programmatic decision .

to reconcile possible concerns , a detailed look at the dod ig's and dot&e's findings and the actions that will be required to rectify identified deficiencies could be in order .

such an examination could help policymakers determine if these deficiencies are minor in nature , or if more extensive and potentially time - consuming and expensive corrective actions will be required .

while it is not yet known how any delay in full - rate jltv production will affect the program , it might be considered prudent for policymakers to examine the potential consequences of a delayed full - rate production decision .

while a minor delay not invoking a nunn - mccurdy breach may be inconsequential or have a minimal impact , a longer delay , potentially triggering a nun - mccurdy breach , could have significant consequences in terms of program schedule ; program cost ; service allocation of jltvs ; overall fielding plan ; training and readiness of units receiving jltvs ; and potential foreign military sales ( fms ) .

such an examination could prove useful to policymakers in the event that a full - rate production decision is significantly delayed , particularly in terms of both program oversight and fy2020 defense authorizations and appropriations discussions .

the army's march 14 , 2019 , announcement that it was planning to reduce its overall requirement for jltvs by 1,900 vehicles to help free up funding for modernization raises potential issues for congress .

with the army reportedly suggesting it has more light tactical vehicle capability than it needs with existing hmmwvs and isvs , questions could arise as to the accuracy of the army's original jltv requirements process .

other questions could arise as well: with a revised overall jltv requirement , what is the army's new fielding plan to units ? .

with fewer jltvs to be fielded , what is the overall operational impact to the force ? .

with an overall jltv reduction , will the army's reserve components receive fewer jltvs than originally planned ? .

finally , will this new revised jltv requirement be final , or is it possible the army might again reduce overall jltv requirements to free up funding for other higher - priority programs , or if future budget reductions are imposed on the army ? .

