the college cost reduction and access act of 2007 amended the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ) to establish a new loan forgiveness provision under the william d. ford direct loan ( dl ) program for borrowers who are employed full - time in public service jobs for ten years during the repayment of their loans .

borrowers of dl program loans who make 120 monthly payments on or after october 2 , 2007 , according to specified repayment plan terms , while concurrently employed full - time in certain public service jobs , will have any loan balance of principal and interest remaining due after their 120 th payment canceled or forgiven by the secretary of education .

the dl program loan forgiveness provision is available to new and existing borrowers alike .

the dl program loan forgiveness provision for public service employees is available to borrowers of dl program loans who make 120 payments according to specified repayment plans while concurrently employed full - time in specified public service jobs , on or after october 2 , 2007 .

issues regarding the implementation of the loan forgiveness program are expected to be addressed by the department of education ( ed ) in the form of 'dear colleague' letters and regulations .

on january 8 , 2008 , ed published a summary of major changes to the hea , title iv loan programs made by the ccraa , including a brief description of the loan forgiveness for public service employees provision .

also , ed has begun meeting to develop proposed regulations through negotiated rulemaking to implement changes to hea , title iv programs enacted under the ccraa , including the dl program loan forgiveness provision .

if ed publishes final regulations by november 1 , 2008 , these would have an effective date of july 1 , 2009 .

it appears that all payments made by dl program borrowers on or after october 2 , 2007 , while also meeting the terms and conditions of the loan forgiveness provision will apply toward the 120 payments required for loan forgiveness .

however , a number of issues about the new loan forgiveness provision might be clarified by ed and be addressed in future guidance or regulations .

such issues include the procedures borrowers will follow in applying for loan forgiveness , how borrowers will substantiate their full - time employment in public service jobs during repayment , how any breaks in full - time employment in public service jobs will be addressed , and how borrowers may ensure that they have selected a repayment plan under which all of their monthly payments will satisfy the minimum monthly payment amount necessary to be counted toward the 120 monthly payments required for loan forgiveness .

guidance might also be provided to clarify a number of issues concerning consolidation loans .

for example , it is unclear whether payments made by borrowers on their dl program loans will continue to count toward the 120 monthly payments required for loan forgiveness if these borrowers subsequently consolidate their loans into new dl consolidation loans , or whether consolidation loan borrowers must restart counting toward the required 120 monthly payments .

the terms of the loan forgiveness provision indicate that borrowers must make 120 monthly payments on their loans according to either the icr plan , the ibr plan , or another repayment plan that is based on a 10-year repayment period .

since a consolidation loan is a new loan , borrowers of consolidation loans may only be able to count the payments made on their consolidation loan toward the 120 monthly payments required for loan forgiveness .

in addition , for borrowers of consolidation loans , the maximum repayment period under the standard repayment plan may range from 10 years to 30 years , depending on a borrower's total student loan indebtedness .

it appears that consolidation loan borrowers may need to ensure that they repay at least the monthly payment amount calculated according to a 10-year repayment period to maintain eligibility for loan forgiveness , regardless of whether they would otherwise be eligible to repay according to a maximum standard repayment period of 12 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years , depending on their total student loan indebtedness .

finally , prior to july 1 , 2006 , married borrowers were eligible to obtain joint consolidation loans .

future guidance might address the eligibility of joint consolidation loan borrowers to have their loans forgiven under the dl loan forgiveness provision for public service employees .

guidance might address whether one or both borrowers must meet the employment and repayment requirements for loan forgiveness ; and if these requirements are met by only one of the joint borrowers , whether that borrower's proportionate share of the joint loan balance will be forgiven .

guidance might also address how the future eligibility of ffel consolidation loan borrowers to reconsolidate their loans into federal direct consolidation loans for purposes of using the dl program loan forgiveness provision , effective july 1 , 2008 , will apply to joint borrowers .

