the americans with disabilities act has often been described as the most sweeping nondiscrimination legislation since the civil rights act of 1964 .

it provides broad nondiscrimination protection and , as stated in the act , its purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. .

title iii of the ada prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities by places of public accommodations , and has been the basis of numerous legal actions .

several of these have involved the filing of multiple law suits by an individual with a disability based on de minimus violations .

of the actions which have resulted in judicial decisions , some have rejected the allegations , finding that the plaintiff was a vexatious litigant , while others have rejected the suits finding that the plaintiff had no standing since the plaintiff could not establish an intent to return to the entity with the alleged ada violations .

some courts , however , have upheld the plaintiff's action even where numerous previous suits had been filed .

legislation has been introduced since the 106 th congress to require that a plaintiff provide notice of non compliance with the ada to an entity prior to commencing a legal action .

changes in the ada's statutory language to address the issue of vexatious law suits have been proposed since the 106 th congress .

proponents of such legislation have argued that notification requirements would help prevent the filing of suits designed to generate money for plaintiffs and law firms .

those opposed to the legislation have argued that it would undermine enforcement of the ada and that vexatious suits are best dealt with by state bar disciplinary procedures or by the courts .

representative hunter introduced h.r .

881 , the ada notification act of 2011 , 112 th congress , on march 2 , 2011 .

this bill is identical to h.r .

2397 which representative hunter introduced in the 111 th congress .

h.r .

881 would amend title iii of the ada to deny state or federal court jurisdiction in a civil action brought under title iii of the ada , or under a state law that conditions a violation of its provisions on a violation of title iii , except in certain situations .

the courts would have jurisdiction if a plaintiff provides the defendant written notice of the alleged violation by registered mail prior to filing a complaint ; the written notice identifies the facts that constitute the alleged violation , including the location and date of the alleged violation ; a remedial period of 90 days elapses after the date on which the plaintiff provides the written notice ; the written notice informs the defendant that the plaintiff is barred from filing the complaint until the end of the remedial period ; and the complaint states that , as of the date on which the complaint is filed , the defendant has not corrected the alleged violation .

h.r .

881 also provides that a court may extend the remedial period by not more than thirty days if the defendant applies for an extension .

the legislation in previous congresses is similar , but not identical , to that in the 111 th and 112 th .

h.r .

3479 , 110th congress , and h.r .

2804 , 109th congress , had essentially the same notification provisions as those in h.r .

881 , 112 th congress .

however , the notification provisions would not have applied to civil actions brought under rule 65 of the federal rules of civil procedure or civil actions under state or local court rules requesting preliminary injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders .

h.r .

728 , 108 th congress , differed from the more recent legislation by , for example , allowing notice to be provided in person , not just by registered mail .

although the bill was not passed in the 108 th congress , the house subcommittee on rural enterprises , agriculture , and technology of the house small business committee held hearings on the bill on april 8 , 2003 .

the two ada notification acts in the 107 th congress , h.r .

914 and s. 792 , like their predecessors h.r .

3590 and s. 3122 , 106 th cong. , contained similar language .

hearings were held by the subcommittee on the constitution of the house committee on the judiciary on h.r .

3590 on may 18 , 2000 .

