"'extradition' is the formal surrender of a person by a state to another state for prosecution or punishment. .

extradition to or from the united states is a creature of treaty .

the united states has extradition treaties with over a hundred of the nations of the world , although there are many with which the united states has no extradition treaty .

extradition treaties are in the nature of a contract .

subject to a contrary treaty provision , federal law defines the mechanism by which the united states honors its extradition treaty obligations .

although some countries will extradite in the absence of an applicable treaty as a matter of comity , it was long believed that the united states could only grant an extradition request if it could claim coverage under an existing extradition treaty .

dicta in several court cases indicated that this requirement , however , was one of congressional choice rather than constitutional requirement .

extradition is generally limited to crimes identified in the treaty .

early treaties often recite a list of the specific extraditable crimes .

while many existing u.s. extradition treaties continue to list specific extraditable offenses , the more recent ones feature a dual criminality approach , and simply make all felonies extraditable ( subject to other limitations found elsewhere in their various provisions ) .

a foreign country usually begins the extradition process with a request submitted to the state department sometimes including the documentation required by the treaty .

when a requesting nation is concerned that the fugitive will take flight before it has time to make a formal request , it may informally ask for extradition and provisional arrest with the assurance that the full complement of necessary documentation will follow .

in either case , the secretary of state , at his discretion , may forward the matter to the department of justice to begin the procedure for the arrest of the fugitive "to the end that the evidence of criminality may be heard and considered. .

the united states attorneys' manual encapsulates the justice department's participation thereafter in these words: oia [office of international affairs] reviews ... requests for sufficiency and forwards appropriate ones to the district [where the fugitive is found] .

the assistant united states attorney assigned to the case obtains a warrant and the fugitive is arrested and brought before the magistrate judge or the district judge .

the government opposes bond in extradition cases .

a hearing under 18 u.s.c .

ยง3184 is scheduled to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable .

if the court finds the fugitive to be extraditable , it enters an order of extraditability and certifies the record to the secretary of state , who decides whether to surrender the fugitive to the requesting government .

in some cases a fugitive may waive the hearing process .

oia notifies the foreign government and arranges for the transfer of the fugitive to the agents appointed by the requesting country to receive him or her .

although the order following the extradition hearing is not appealable ( by either the fugitive or the government ) , the fugitive may petition for a writ of habeas corpus as soon as the order is issued .

the district court's decision on the writ is subject to appeal , and extradition may be stayed if the court so orders .

the laws of the country of refuge and the applicable extradition treaty govern extradition back to the united states of a fugitive located overseas .

the request for extradition comes from the department of state whether extradition is sought for trial in federal or state court or for execution of a criminal sentence under federal or state law .

the first step is to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable .

the justice department's checklist for determining extraditability begins with an identification of the country in which the fugitive has taken refuge .

if the united states has no extradition treaty with the country of refuge , extradition is not a likely option .

when there is a treaty , extradition is only an option if the treaty permits extradition .

common impediments include citizenship , dual criminality , statutes of limitation , and capital punishment issues .

many treaties permit a country to refuse to extradite its citizens even in the case of dual citizenship .

as for dual criminality , whether the crime of conviction or the crime charged is an extraditable offense will depend upon the nature of the crime and where it was committed .

if the applicable treaty lists extraditable offenses , the crime must be on the list .

if the applicable treaty insists only upon dual criminality , the underlying misconduct must be a crime under the laws of both the united states and the country of refuge .

where the crime was committed matters ; some treaties will only permit extradition if the offense was committed within the geographical confines of the united states .

timing also matters .

the speedy trial features of u.s. law require a good faith effort to bring to trial a fugitive who is within the government's reach .

furthermore , the lapse of time or speedy trial component of the applicable extradition treaty may preclude extradition if prosecution would be barred by a statute of limitations in the country of refuge .

some treaties prohibit extradition for capital offenses ; more often they permit it but only with the assurance that a sentence of death will not be executed .

prosecutors may request provisional arrest of a fugitive without waiting for the final preparation of the documentation required for a formal extradition request , if there is a risk of flight and if the treaty permits it .

the justice department encourages judicious use of provisional arrest because of the pressures that may attend it .

if the justice department approves the application for extradition , the request and documentation are forwarded to the state department , translated if necessary , and with state department approval forwarded through diplomatic channels to the country from which extradition is being sought .

the treaty issue most likely to arise after extradition and the fugitive's return to this country is whether the fugitive was surrendered subject to any limitations such as those posed by the doctrine of specialty .

the existence of an extradition treaty does not preclude the united states acquiring personal jurisdiction over a fugitive by other means , unless the treaty expressly provides otherwise .

waiver or "simplified" treaty provisions allow a fugitive to consent to extradition without the benefit of an extradition hearing .

although not universal , the provisions constitute the least controversial of the alternatives to extradition .

whether by a process similar to deportation or by simple expulsion , the united states has had some success encouraging other countries to surrender fugitives other than their own nationals without requiring recourse to extradition .

ordinarily , u.s. immigration procedures , on the other hand , have been less accommodating and have been called into play only when extradition has been found wanting .

they tend to be time consuming and usually can only be used in lieu of extradition when the fugitive is an alien .

moreover , they frequently require the united states to deposit the alien in a country other than one that seeks his or her extradition .

yet in a few instances where an alien has been naturalized by deception or where the procedures available against alien terrorists come into play , denaturalization or deportation may be considered an attractive alternative or supplement to extradition proceedings .

although less frequently employed by the united states , "irregular rendition" is a familiar alternative to extradition .

an alternative of last resort , it involves kidnaping or deceit and generally has been reserved for terrorists , drug traffickers , and the like .

kidnaping a defendant overseas and returning him to the united states for trial does not deprive american courts of jurisdiction unless an applicable extradition treaty explicitly calls for that result .

nor does it ordinarily expose the united states to liability under the federal tort claims act or individuals involved in the abduction to liability under the alien tort statute .

the individuals involved in the abduction , however , may face foreign prosecution , or at least be the subject of a foreign extradition request .

moreover , the effort may strain diplomatic relations with the country from which the fugitive is lured or abducted .

a final alternative when extradition for trial in the united states is not available , is trial within the country of refuge .

the alternative exists primarily when a u.s. request for extradition has been refused because of the fugitive's nationality and / or when the crime occurred under circumstances that permit prosecution by either country for the same misconduct .

the alternative can be cumbersome and expensive and may be contrary to u.s. policy objectives .

