depending on one's point of view , new chemicals legislation in the european union ( eu ) is likely to vastly improve environmental and public health protections and serve as a model for future u.s. law , or it might unnecessarily burden commercial enterprises with regulations and interfere with international trade .

the subject of such conjecture is an eu law for registration , evaluation , authorization , and restriction of chemicals ( reach ) in eu commerce , which went into force june 1 , 2007 .

this report summarizes reach and progress in its implementation .

for information about u.s. chemical law , see crs report rl34118 , the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) : implementation and new challenges , by [author name scrubbed] .

on june 1 , 2007 , the eu began to implement a new approach to the management of chemicals in eu commerce .

the reach directive simplifies and consolidates more than 40 former regulations in an effort to balance two eu goals: to protect public health and the environment from hazardous chemicals and to ensure the continuing competitiveness of european industry .

although certain chemicals are exempt entirely , and requirements for the other chemicals are being phased in over 11 years , the law generally will apply to nearly all chemicals in eu commerce , including imported chemicals , chemical mixtures , and certain articles that release chemicals to the environment .

the reach legislation is based on a proposal developed by the eu general directorates for enterprise and environment , which was adopted by the european commission in february 2001 .

the draft law was revised several times in response to public comments and amendments adopted by the european parliament and council of ministers ( which is comprised of the executive officers of eu member states ) .

the final regulation is binding on all member states .

the u.s. government was actively engaged throughout the development of reach .

the bush administration expressed concerns about its trade implications for u.s. - produced chemicals .

specific concerns included increased costs of and timelines for testing chemicals exported to the eu ; placement of responsibility on businesses ( as opposed to governments or consumers ) to generate data , assess risks , and demonstrate the safety of chemicals ; possible inconsistency with international rules for trade adopted by the world trade organization ( wto ) ; and the effect of the legislation on efforts to improve the coherence of chemical regulatory approaches among countries in the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) .

some u.s. chemical industry representatives believe that reach is "impractical. .

industry has expressed objections to the proposed list of "high concern" chemicals , some of which are essential building blocks for the manufacture of other chemicals .

the eu chemical industry is concerned about the cost of compliance , and what it might mean to innovation and international competitiveness .

some national governments of the eu also are concerned about the impact of reach on their economies and employment , especially if reach leads to companies relocating outside the eu ( i.e. , no longer producing or selling products in the eu ) .

the eu has estimated that about 12% of chemicals in commerce will be withdrawn by chemical producers , because continued production under reach will be costly and distribution not sufficiently profitable to recoup costs .

in cases where no substitute is available , loss of a production source might leave some end users without the chemicals they need .

many environmental , health , and u.s. and eu labor organizations strongly supported the original proposal for reach , but some are less enthusiastic about the final regulation , which retains its basic purpose and shape but exempts some chemicals from requirements .

nevertheless , these groups agree that reach addressed some of what they saw as flaws in older eu laws covering chemicals .

for example , reach reduces and coordinates eu regulatory requirements for providing health and safety information about chemicals new to the eu market ( as well as the number of new chemicals subject to such requirements ) , while at the same time increasing collection of such information for chemicals already in the eu market , thus potentially removing disincentives to innovation and encouraging substitution of less toxic for more toxic chemicals in various chemical applications .

in addition , to address concerns about the slow pace of chemical risk assessment and management by the eu government , reach shifts responsibility for assessing and managing the safety of chemicals away from the government and onto chemical manufacturers , importers , and users .

some public interest groups are urging u.s. legislators to adopt a similar legislative approach .

for more discussion of the perceived flaws of u.s. law , see crs report rl34118 , the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) : implementation and new challenges , by [author name scrubbed] .

