credit suisse gave the court the opportunity — not exercised since 1981 — to reiterate and apply its previously stated standards for granting implied antitrust immunity .

an antitrust suit ( originally a class action ) was filed by a group of ipo purchasers against the underwriters of those issues ( 10 major investment banks ) alleging conspiracy , price fixing - related , and tying violations of § 1 of the sherman act .

the particular , allegedly harmful practices included ( 1 ) required investor promises to place bids in the aftermarket at prices above the initial public offering price , referred to as "laddering" ; ( 2 ) required investor commitments to purchase other , less attractive securities , a kind of tying arrangement ; and ( 3 ) investor payment of excessive commissions .

these requirements , according to the investors , artificially inflated the share prices of the securities and constituted per se price fixing .

at first glance , this system of agreement by the issuer and all of the major underwriters of size and pricing of the offering does appear , in fact , to be antitrust - violative price manipulation .

however , not all underwriter manipulations have been prohibited .

a "little price manipulation" has been permitted in order to further appropriate market goals .

the securities and exchange commission has traditionally recognized certain types of manipulative activities , considered "stabilizing" activities , as permissible under § 9 ( a ) ( 6 ) of the securities exchange act and sec rule 10b - 1 .

in fact , the court itself indicated that the complaint was an attack not on the existence of the sec - approved joint ipo activity , but rather , the abuse of that activity .

the court , in an opinion authored by justice breyer , began its analysis of the availability of implied antitrust immunity in this instance by noting that all of the challenged activities meet the basic prerequisite for implied antitrust immunity in the regulated securities industry: they are "central to the proper functioning of well - regulated capital markets. .

further , the sec has , and has exercised , its specific authority to supervise those activities .

moreover , injured investors are specifically authorized to recover damages , and have successfully sued under the securities statutes , for violation of applicable sec regulations "for conduct virtually identical to the conduct at issue here. .

further , the court observed , the challenged practices all seemed to describe "conditions that the investors apparently were willing to accept in order to obtain an allocation of new shares that were in high demand. .

continuing , the opinion noted the variously nuanced sec decisions concerning , for example , commissions and future sales , and "laddering," the court observing that it would "often be difficult for someone who is not familiar with accepted syndicate practices to ... distinguish what is forbidden from what is allowed" — the more so because "evidence tending to show unlawful antitrust activity and evidence tending to show lawful securities marketing activity may overlap. .

further , since antitrust challenges to securities - marketing activities could be brought "throughout the nation in dozens of different courts with different nonexpert judges," the decision to defer to the sec's expertise seemed only logical .

we believe it fair to conclude that , where conduct at the core or the marketing of new securities is at issue ; where securities regulators proceed with great care to distinguish the encouraged and permissible from the forbidden ; where the threat to antitrust lawsuits , through error and disincentive , could seriously alter underwriter conduct in undesirable ways , to allow an antitrust lawsuit would threaten serious harm to the efficient functioning of the securities markets .

127 s.ct .

at 2396 .

given ( 1 ) congress's expressed concern that securities markets become and remain stable , ( 2 ) the continued oversight and actions of a single expert regulatory agency versus the probability of diverse and possibly conflicting decisions by nonexpert judges in the event of securities / antitrust lawsuits , and ( 3 ) the likelihood of conflict between the mandates of antitrust law and allowable activities under the securities laws , the court found that "the securities laws are 'clearly incompatible' with the application of the antitrust laws. .

accordingly , implied immunity from prosecution under the antitrust laws is accorded to participants in securities markets .

justice stevens concurred separately to emphasize that , in his opinion , neither the incompatibility between the antitrust and securities laws , nor the question of implied antitrust immunity for regulated entities should have been the issue .

in my view , agreements among underwriters on how best to market ipos , including agreements on price and other terms of sale to initial investors , should be treated as procompetitive joint ventures for purposes of antitrust analysis .

in all but the rarest of cases , they cannot be conspiracies in restraint of trade within the meaning of § 1 of the sherman act .... 127 s.ct .

at 2398 .

justice thomas's dissent found fault with the court's assertion that the securities acts were silent on whether the antitrust laws should be applicable to entities in the securities industry .

he noted that both the securities act of 1933 and the securities and exchange act of 1934 state , in "savings clauses," that their remedies "shall be in addition to any and all other rights and remedies that may exist at law or in equity": therefore , both statutes explicitly save the very remedies the court holds to be impliedly precluded .

127 s.ct .

at 2399 .

