i n 2007 , the supreme court issued its decision in massachusetts v. epa , its first pronouncement on climate change and still one of the most important environmental law decisions in the past decade .

by a vote of 5-4 , the court held that the environmental protection agency ( epa ) in 2003 had improperly denied a petition asking the agency to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles under the clean air act ( caa ) .

contrary to epa's position , the court said that the caa definition of "air pollutant" was unambiguously broad enough to include ghgs .

accordingly , the court reversed the lower court decision upholding the petition denial .

the supreme court decision did not compel epa to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles , but it did limit the range of options available to the agency so that doing so was its most defensible course of action .

this report confines itself to the massachusetts v. epa litigation and leaves to other crs reports the numerous epa actions taken as a result of the supreme court decision .

the report traces the events leading up to the court's decision , describes the decision itself , notes some general implications , and then comments on the decision's continuing force .

the saga of massachusetts v. epa began in 1999 .

in that year , 19 environmental and energy organizations petitioned epa to regulate emissions of ghgs ( carbon dioxide [co 2 ] , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons ) from new motor vehicles .

the petition argued that epa had a mandatory duty to do so under caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) , which directs the epa administrator to prescribe "standards applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of new motor vehicles ... which , in his judgment cause , or contribute to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. .

in 2003 , after receiving about 50,000 comments , epa denied this petition .

much of the agency's rationale followed a general counsel memorandum issued the same day .

contrary to a precursor memorandum authored under the clinton administration , this new general counsel memorandum concluded that the caa does not grant epa authority to regulate co 2 and other ghg emissions based on their climate change impacts .

thus , epa concluded that it had no choice but to reject the petition , though it also described policy reasons for doing so .

epa's denial of the section 202 petition prompted a lawsuit , massachusetts v. epa , in the d.c .

circuit seeking review of the denial .

petitioners were 12 states ( california , connecticut , illinois , massachusetts , maine , new jersey , new mexico , new york , oregon , rhode island , vermont , and washington ) ; three cities ( new york , baltimore , and washington , dc ) ; two u.s. territories ( american samoa and northern mariana islands ) ; and several environmental groups .

opposing the challenge , besides epa , were 10 state intervenors ( alaska , idaho , kansas , michigan , north dakota , nebraska , ohio , south dakota , texas , and utah ) , plus several automobile - and truck - related trade groups .

in 2005 , a split panel of the d.c .

circuit rejected the suit — in effect upholding epa's denial of the petition .

the two judges supporting rejection of the suit , however , did so for different reasons .

judge randolph concluded that epa had properly exercised its discretion in choosing not to wield its section 202 authority .

as to this discretion issue , as noted above , caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) directs the epa administrator to prescribe standards for any motor vehicle emissions that "in his judgment" cause harmful air pollution ; judge randolph read "in his judgment" broadly to allow epa consideration of not only scientific uncertainty about the effects of ghgs , but also policy considerations that justify not regulating .

thus epa , in his view , was entitled to rely on such factors as the george w. bush administration's policy preference for voluntary ghg control measures , and its belief that regulating motor vehicle emissions was a piecemeal and inefficient approach to dealing with climate change .

judge sentelle , the other judge supporting rejection of the petition , held that petitioners lacked standing .

in dissent , judge tatel asserted that massachusetts had demonstrated standing through past and future loss of shore land as a result of climate - change - induced sea level rise .

on the merits , he found that epa has authority under section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) to regulate ghg emissions .

he further concluded that epa's 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) discretion does not extend to policy considerations , as judge randolph held , but relates exclusively to whether the emissions cause harmful air pollution .

the supreme court agreed to review the d.c .

circuit decision in massachusetts v. epa , although the d.c .

circuit majority had not ruled on the key issue of whether caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) authorizes regulation of ghg emissions .

as the supreme court stated in its decision , "the unusual importance of the underlying issue persuaded us to grant the writ. .

the court ruled 5-4 for petitioner states and environmental groups on all three issues in the case .

it held first that at least one petitioner , the commonwealth of massachusetts , had standing to sue , so the court could proceed to the merits .

on the merits , it found that the caa gives epa authority to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles , and does not give epa discretion to inject policy considerations into its decision whether to so regulate .

the ruling in favor of petitioners was forecast early in the majority opinion by its opening sentences: "a well - documented rise in global temperatures has coincided with a significant increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere .

respected scientists believe the two trends are related. .

the dissenters did not dispute these statements .

the court's decision left epa with three options for responding to the petition: ( 1 ) find that new motor vehicle ghg emissions may "endanger public health or welfare," the prerequisite to limiting them under section 202 , then issue emission standards ; ( 2 ) find that they do not satisfy that prerequisite , or ( 3 ) decide that climate change science is so uncertain as to preclude making either finding ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) .

given the state of climate change science by 2007 , it was widely believed at the time that option ( 1 ) was the only legally defensible one for epa .

this is the option that epa took .

based on the supreme court ruling in massachusetts v. epa , epa has engaged in efforts to control ghg emissions under a range of caa programs , beginning with a section 202 "endangerment" finding in 2009 .

since this finding , the agency has regulated ghg emissions from new motor vehicles .

under other sections of the caa , epa has regulated ghg emissions from various stationary sources .

most recently , the agency issued its clean power plan rule to regulate ghg emissions from existing fossil fuel fired power plants , but this rule was stayed by the supreme court while the rule is challenged in litigation .

as indicated earlier , these post - massachusetts agency actions are described in other crs reports ; here , only a few select points are made in relation to the continuing impact of the massachusetts v. epa decision .

the massachusetts ruling remains in full effect .

its holding that the caa authorizes epa to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles is the governing law , barring supreme court reversal or congressional amendment .

so far , the finding of standing in massachusetts generally has not proved helpful to non - state plaintiffs seeking to establish standing in other climate change litigation .

climate change cases since massachusetts involving non - state plaintiffs and non - caa causes of action ( such as common law nuisance ) have largely rejected extending its lenient standard for standing .

the holding of massachusetts was used by a 2011 supreme court decision to bar federal common law claims ( such as nuisance ) against entities on the basis of their contribution to climate change .

massachusetts strengthened the argument that congress in the caa intended to leave no room for courts to develop overlapping federal common law restricting ghg emissions , since it made clear that a congressional enactment , the caa , was available for that same purpose .

perhaps ironically , this result meant that the victory for the "environmental" side in massachusetts v. epa contributed to the defeat for that side in the federal common law case .

though the 2011 ruling of the court involved plaintiffs seeking a damages remedy , the ruling has been held to displace federal common law actions seeking injunctive relief as well .

the availability of state common law claims for reducing ghg emissions remains an open question .

with ghgs being regulated under caa section 202 , epa proceeded with regulating ghgs under other caa authorities for stationary sources .

in particular , the agency interpreted the mobile source ghg regulations as triggering regulations under the prevention of significant deterioration ( psd ) program and title v permitting program .

in 2014 , in utility air regulatory group v. epa ( uarg ) , the supreme court held that epa cannot regulate a power plant under these authorities solely due to its ghg emissions , but affirmed the agency's authority under the caa to regulate ghg emissions from power plants if the source is already regulated for other air pollutants .

in sum , uarg held that epa "may not treat greenhouse gases as a pollutant for purposes of defining a 'major emitting facility' … in the psd context or a 'major source' in the title v context.… epa may , however , continue to treat greenhouse gases as a "pollutant subject to regulation under this chapter" for purposes of requiring bact for 'anyway' sources. .

the court in uarg interpreted the massachusetts decision , saying that it "did not hold that epa must always regulate greenhouse gases as an "air pollutant" everywhere that term appears in the statute.... massachusetts does not strip epa of authority to exclude greenhouse gases from the class of regulable air pollutants under other parts of the act where their inclusion would be inconsistent with the statutory scheme. .

the massachusetts ruling upholding caa coverage of section 202 ghg emissions contributed to a 2010 litigation settlement that committed epa to establishing new source performance standards ( nspss ) for ghg emissions from new fossil fuel fired power plants , and emission guidelines for existing fossil fuel fired power plants , under caa section 111 .

epa published section 111 nspss and emission guidelines for ghgs from power plants in october 2015 .

both rules have been challenged in the d.c .

circuit ; the emission guidelines rule , known as the clean power plan , is , as noted above , stayed during the litigation .

while some amici curiae supporting the challenges to the clean power plan in that litigation object to the "endangerment findings" that epa has issued since massachusetts , the petitioners and intervenors challenging the clean power plan do not dispute or , for the most part , reference the decision .

epa , in defense of the clean power plan , cites massachusetts repeatedly in its brief , as do several of the intervenors and amici curiae supporting epa .

massachusetts may continue to have further reverberations not only in the clean power plan litigation but also in other elements of epa's clean air program , given its discussion of caa terms found not only in the caa sections that epa has used so far to regulate ghgs .

examples include "air pollutant," "in his judgment," and "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health and welfare. .

