the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) plays a central role in shaping and implementing u.s. global health policy .

the agency is one of three agencies tasked with leading the global health initiative ( ghi ) , an initiative created by the obama administration to coordinate ongoing presidential health initiatives and raise investments in other health areas , including maternal and child health , neglected tropical diseases , and family planning and reproductive health ( figure 1 ) .

usaid also coordinates and acts as an implementing partner in three presidential initiatives that comprise the bulk of u.s. global health assistance .

the agency leads the implementation of the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) and the neglected tropical diseases ( ntd ) program , and is an implementing partner of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , which is coordinated by the state department .

in addition , usaid manages its own bilateral health programs .

this report highlights the health - related activities conducted by usaid worldwide , outlines how much the agency has spent on such efforts from fy2001 to fy2011 , and highlights fy2012 proposed funding levels .

since usaid was created in 1961 through the foreign assistance act of 1961 , congressional support for global health , in general , and usaid's global health programs , in particular , have grown .

appropriations for usaid rose from $1.4 billion in fy2001 to $2.5 billion in fy2011 .

funding growth occurred most precipitously during the george w. bush administration , when congress provided unprecedented resources to fight new and re - emergent diseases , including hiv / aids , multi - and extremely drug - resistant tuberculosis ( mdr - and xdr - tb ) , severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , h5n1 ( bird flu ) , and h1n1 pandemic flu .

congressional support also followed the launching of several presidential health initiatives — pepfar ( hiv / aids ) , pmi ( malaria ) , ntd program ( neglected tropical diseases ) .

congress funds usaid's global health activities through the state , foreign operations and related programs ( state - foreign operations ) appropriations .

through this vehicle , congress appropriates funds directly to usaid through the global health and child survival ( ghcs ) account and usaid uses additional funds from other accounts within state - foreign operations , including the development assistance and the economic support fund accounts , to support its global health programs .

appropriators do not specify how much usaid should spend through these other accounts on its global health programs .

the additional funds provided through other accounts for other usaid global health programs can be significant ( table 1 ) .

congress specifies support for five usaid global health program areas: child survival and maternal health aims to reduce morbidity and mortality from diseases like polio , measles , and diarrhea ; provide vaccines and immunizations ; support safe delivery ; and address malnutrition .

vulnerable children aims to provide services to vulnerable children and orphans , particularly those affected by blindness or war ( support for children made vulnerable by hiv / aids is provided through hiv / aids funds ) .

hiv / aids aims to prevent , treat , and address the impacts of hiv / aids — particularly among vulnerable populations such as women , girls , and orphans — through voluntary counseling and testing , awareness campaigns , and antiretroviral medicines , among other activities .

other infectious diseases aims to address a number of diseases and resultant outbreaks , such as those related to pandemic and avian influenza , malaria , tb , and neglected tropical diseases ( ntds ) .

family planning and reproductive health aims to increase access to related services , such as reproductive health education , and to improve awareness about birth spacing , contraception , and sexually transmitted diseases .

funding for these programs has mostly been on an upward trajectory , though increased support has been aimed primarily at fighting infectious diseases .

successive waves of infectious disease outbreaks have garnered significant attention from congress and have generated rigorous debate on balancing efforts to address infectious disease threats , including hiv / aids , malaria , pandemic influenza , and tuberculosis , with other long - standing health challenges like high maternal and child mortality rates , widespread morbidity from neglected tropical diseases , and strengthening the capacity of poor countries to address their own health challenges .

in 2009 , president barack obama announced the global health initiative to increase investments in health areas that he deemed underfunded , bolster the health systems of weak and impoverished states , and improve the coordination of presidential health initiatives established during the bush administration ( pepfar , pmi , and the ntd program ) as well as other usaid and centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) bilateral health programs .

congress has generally supported presidential health initiatives , including the global health initiative , and has mostly met funding requests associated with these efforts .

on april 15 , 2011 , the president signed the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

112-10 ) , into law .

the act provided $2.5 billion to usaid for global health programs in fy2011 but did not specify how much usaid should spend on each activity .

as of june 28 , 2011 , many program details about fy2011 funding levels remain unavailable .

the bulk of u.s. global health assistance is aimed at mitigating the impact of infectious diseases , through three presidential initiatives: pepfar ( hiv / aids ) , pmi ( malaria ) , and the ntd program ( neglected tropical diseases ) .

in fy2010 , for example , nearly 81% of all u.s. global health spending was aimed at these initiatives .

the global health initiative is distinct from pepfar , pmi , and the ntd program , because it is not aimed at a particular disease and does not call for significant adjustments to ongoing efforts .

instead , the initiative intends to coordinate ongoing u.s. global health activities and , through ghi - plus countries , identify strategies for improving the efficacy , impact , and sustainability of u.s. bilateral global health programs .

usaid plays an important role in each of these initiatives , both as an implementing and coordinating agency .

the sections below briefly describe each initiative and usaid's role in carrying out these efforts .

the obama administration requests an estimated $3.1 billion in support of usaid's global health efforts through the ghcs account for fy2012 .

after pepfar was launched , u.s. efforts to address hiv / aids dominated congressional discussions and appropriations for global health .

since announcing ghi in 2009 , the president has gradually increased requests for non - hiv / aids programs .

congress has fully funded these requests , which has led to a slight shift in how usaid global health funds are distributed ( figure 3 ) .

the vast majority of usaid's global health programs are funded through the global health and child survival account .

the account is also used to fund the coordination of pepfar programs by the department of state .

these amounts are not included in the figure below .

additional funds that usaid uses to support its global health programs through other accounts in the state - foreign operations appropriations are also not included in the figure below , as congress does not typically direct spending for global health through these other accounts ( see table 1 ) .

the obama administration requests that in fy2012 , congress provide approximately 25% more for usaid's global health activities funded through the ghcs account than in fy2010 .

the majority of the increases are aimed at areas the administration has prioritized through ghi , including strengthening national health systems and raising investments in areas where progress has lagged .

the most notable increases include $846 million for child survival and maternal health programs , up 78.5% from the $474 million congress provided in fy2010 ; $100 million for neglected tropical diseases , up 54% from the $65 million provided in fy2010 ; and $626 million for family planning and reproductive health , up 19% from the $525 million provided in fy2010 .

since the george w. bush administration , successive congresses have mostly appropriated funds for usaid's global health programs in excess of presidential requests .

as concerns about the u.s. economy have heightened , however , congress has sought ways to reduce federal spending .

some members of the 112 th congress have begun to question u.s. foreign aid levels , in general , and to argue for the reduction or elimination of health assistance .

although some members of congress argue that cuts to these programs could yield important savings , others contend that such reductions would have little impact on the federal deficit but could significantly imperil the lives of vulnerable populations reliant on u.s. health assistance .

congressional debate over funding levels for global health programs is tied to broader , longstanding discussions over the value , design , and funding levels of foreign aid programs .

these debates are related to concern over aid effectiveness and reform of usaid , as well as the u.s. federal budget deficit and efforts to reduce government spending .

some members have long - questioned the impact of u.s. global health investments , have called attention to corruption practices by various recipient governments receiving global health assistance , and have encouraged greater commitment to global health issues by these states .

in march 2011 , members of the house appropriations subcommittee on state - foreign operations raised some of these concerns at oversight and budget hearings .

in relation to the administration's fy2012 budget request , some members of congress have argued that investing significant resources in global health represents "misplaced priorities" in a difficult fiscal environment .

some have also argued that delaying spending cuts for global health now might necessitate more drastic cuts in the future .

usaid is reportedly responding to concerns over aid effectiveness .

for example , usaid administrator rajiv shah created a new suspension and debarment task force , led by deputy administrator don steinber , to monitor , investigate , and respond to suspicious activity .

usaid also requests $19.7 million to implement a new evaluation policy that would require all major projects to undergo an independent evaluation with results being released within three months of completion .

finally , administrator shah announced usaid would begin to fund programs based on "unit cost of impact" and that usaid would aim investments at programs that were the most efficient and effective and divest from those that had "a unit cost of impact that is unnecessarily high. .

