in snap elections on october 21 , 2007 , poles turned out the rightist law and justice ( pis ) party , which had ruled the country for a tumultuous 15 months .

led by identical twins jaroslaw and lech kaczynski , who served as prime minister and president , respectively , pis had held a slight lead in early polls , but an unusually strong performance by opposition leader donald tusk in a nationally televised debate with jaroslaw on october 15 apparently convinced many poles that they should turn the reins of government over to tusk and his party .

on election day , tusk's center - right civic alliance ( po ) won a 41.5% plurality ; pis captured 32% , while the left and democrats ( lid ) picked up 13% , and the polish peasants' party received 8.9% .

the vote , held a full two years ahead of schedule , was prompted by the collapse of the pis - led government .

after the late 2005 elections , the kaczynskis' party had ruled together with the populist - nationalist self defense ( so ) party , and the league of polish families ( lpr ) , an ultra - conservative party aligned with the catholic church .

the two smaller parties had at times blocked pis initiatives .

the coalition was dissolved in early august 2007 , when members of so withdrew from the government after their leader , andrej lepper , was fired from his cabinet post on bribery charges .

when lpr also left the coalition , pis was left with just 150 members in the 460-seat lower house of parliament , and decided to call elections in hopes of strengthening its mandate .

the decision to hold early elections proved to be a political miscalculation by jaroslaw , who underestimated popular dissatisfaction with his government and the consequent determination of poles to oust pis .

turnout on election day was 55.3% — the largest since the end of the communist era .

this unprecedented voter participation , particularly by young people , is considered to have been a key factor .

although pis received more votes in 2007 than it had in the 2005 elections , the increase came largely at the expense of its former coalition partners , so and lpd , neither of which managed to pass the 5% threshold necessary for representation in parliament .

in addition , the increase in pis votes was more than offset by the big jump in turnout — 15% over earlier elections .

tusk's party won 209 seats , and its coalition partner , the centrist polish peasants party , took 31 ; together , they hold a comfortable majority in parliament , and tusk was sworn in as prime minister in november 2007 .

however , the new government will likely face staunch resistance on some issues from president lech kaczynski , whose term runs until 2010 .

since a 60% vote is necessary to override a presidential veto , the government may need occasional help from the leftist lid .

some analysts believe that the elections reflected a tug - of - war between the emerging liberal ( i.e. , free - market ) poland , embodied by tusk's po , and the poland of "social solidarity," which advocates continued government intervention in the economy represented by pis .

however , on a practical level , many poles believed that , rather than addressing needed reforms , pis had embarrassed poland internationally and had wasted precious time and resources in its hunt to expose members of the so - called uklad — the "web" of former communist elites that the kaczynski brothers were convinced had manipulated successive governments from behind the curtain since 1989 .

in addition , pis's conduct during the campaign was criticized by both domestic and international media .

the financial times , for example , claimed that the former ruling party " ... resorted to blatant abuse of power: dominating state television , threatening opponents with legal action and using confidential police files to blacken rivals' reputations. .

during october presidential debates , tusk asserted that "poles at home and abroad feel ashamed for the last two years. .

some have argued that po's approach to governance — and to international relations — likely will differ more in style than in content from the outgoing regime .

po's coalition partner , the polish peasants' party ( psl ) , is a centrist party that seeks to advance rural interests .

some analysts have predicted that the coalition partners might disagree on domestic proposals such as social security reforms and the introduction of a flat tax , and over international issues , such as acceptance of proposed reductions in the eu's common agricultural policy budget .

poland's economy is among the most successful transition economies in east central europe ; most of the post - 1989 governments have generally supported free - market reforms .

today the private sector accounts for over two - thirds of economic activity .

in recent years , poland has enjoyed rapid economic development , and the economy has performed well in spite of the political turmoil .

gdp grew by 6.2% in 2006 , around 6.6% in 2007 , and is predicted to rise by 5.2% in 2008 .

the employment picture has brightened ; though still high at 11.4% in december 2007 , joblessness is at its lowest level in several years .

analysts attribute the reduction to improved job prospects and also to the emigration of 1-2 million polish workers , mainly to other eu countries .

despite its center - right label , pis was characterized as having somewhat statist economic policies .

for example , it espoused that "national champions" in certain sectors be identified and nurtured .

in addition , pis sought to revise the previous , leftist government's reforms that had introduced greater flexibility in the labor code .

however , some observers contend that economic policy generally did not appear to be a priority for pis , perhaps because most of the major indicators were positive .

po is often referred to in the media as "business - friendly. .

in fiscal policy , the new government may seek to curtail certain subsidies and redirect spending toward such areas as education .

for now , it has apparently backed away from its campaign promise to institute a flat tax , as has been done in other countries in the region ; such a plan would have encountered resistance from the psl .

instead , the government has opted to reduce tax brackets from three to two .

po has also announced that it will seek to move ahead with the privatization of state - owned enterprises , and to install competent managers — rather than political cronies — in firms that remain under government control .

energy is one area where po will maintain some of the policies instituted by pis .

although po is reportedly encouraging the resumption of privatization in the sector — which pis resisted — it will continue the policy of seeking to reduce dependence upon russia , which supplies a large part of poland's gas and oil .

for example , the pis government instituted talks with norway over laying a pipeline and constructing lng ( liquefied natural gas ) terminals on the baltic coast .

in addition , poland and the baltic states are exploring a joint nuclear power project .

over the past three years , poland has contributed a significant number of troops to the u.s. - led operation in iraq .

observers note that the deployment is providing the polish military with invaluable experience , not the least of which includes commanding a multinational division .

however , poland's presence in iraq remains unpopular at home — a recent poll showed 85% opposition to the deployment .

to date , 21 polish soldiers have died in iraq .

during the fall election campaign , candidate tusk pledged to pull out polish troops if elected ; jaroslaw kaczynski countered that poles were not "deserters or cowards. .

on december 18 , 2007 , the new government requested that poland's 900-troop presence in iraq be extended until october 2008 , at which time the soldiers would be withdrawn .

poland also has 1200 soldiers in afghanistan — the new government proposes an additional 400 be dispatched there , although polls show clear public disapproval of the mission .

poland has been a member of the european union ( eu ) since may 2004 and has already experienced economic benefits from membership , particularly in the agricultural sector .

nevertheless , poland was not reluctant to assert itself in a number of issue areas before joining the eu , and was even less hesitant to do so when it became a member .

some analysts view the poland - eu dynamic as the most important foreign policy issue for the last government , as it highlighted the inward - turning , populist tendencies of pis .

during its relatively short tenure , the kaczynski government clashed with fellow eu member states on a number of issues , including energy , banking rules , voting rights , the death penalty , and russia .

in turn , poland's eu partners back poland on some issues , such as the meat ban , but not on others .

poland's intransigence during the negotiations over the eu reform treaty drew strong criticism .

according to the financial times , jean - claude junker , prime minister of luxembourg , "said poland's stance at [the june 2007] summit was 'very near to having been unacceptable.' .

there may have been some political backlash to behavior of the pis government as poles became increasingly aware of the benefits of belonging to the eu — not only of the generous subsidies , but also of unimpeded travel and trade ; a post - election poll showed 72% approval of eu membership .

prime minister tusk has indicated that he intends to consult more closely with fellow members on eu matters .

however , although the tone of its debates with the eu may become less confrontational , poland's new government will continue to staunchly defend warsaw's perceived interests vis - a - vis brussels .

for example , the polish peasants party reportedly will be negotiating budget reform of the common agricultural policy , and will seek to fend off cuts in subsidies .

nevertheless , according to one analyst , poland's new government "will think twice before vetoing eu decisions. .

the new government is set to cast a wider net internationally than its predecessor .

at a recent meeting with foreign diplomats in warsaw , tusk indicated that , in addition to working more closely with the eu , his government will explore opportunities for greater regional cooperation through such forums as the weimar triangle ( poland - france - germany ) , and the visegrad group ( poland - slovakia - hungary - czech republic ) .

poland may also seek to cooperate on energy matters with georgia , azerbaijan , and kazakhstan .

finally , the prime minister announced he will travel to south america in 2008 .

under the kaczynski government , poland's bilateral relations with germany and russia became strained at times .

poland raised alarm in the eu and nato after russia temporarily cut gas supplies to ukraine and other states in 2006 and 2007 .

many poles were incensed over the russo - german agreement to construct a natural gas pipeline through the baltic sea , rather than overland , through the baltic states and poland .

during the 2005 presidential campaign , lech kaczynski said that , if elected , he would maintain a "firm but friendly" relationship with russia .

he also reminded poles of the devastation wrought by germany during world war ii , but denied that raising this issue was an attempt to influence the election outcome .

in mid - 2006 , lech cancelled his attendance at a regional summit meeting after the german government , citing freedom of the press , declined to apologize for a german newspaper article satirizing the kaczynski brothers .

prime minister tusk has sought to effect a speedy improvement in relations with the two countries .

in december , he traveled to germany , where he met with chancellor angela merkel .

he also recruited holocaust survivor and former foreign minister wladyslaw bartoszewski as an advisor , and tasked him with mending ties with berlin .

several important bilateral issues , such as the proposed pipeline , are still pending , but the new government appears to believe they can be better solved through cooperation rather than confrontation .

in his first major post - election address , tusk mentioned the need for greater dialog with russia .

after the new government was settled in , two actions seemed to signal an improvement in relations: in late november , the tusk government dropped poland's objection to russia joining the organization of economic cooperation and development , and the following month russia announced that it would lift its two year - old restrictions on the importation of polish meat .

poland and the united states have historically close relations .

under successive governments since 9 / 11 , warsaw has been a reliable supporter and ally in the global war on terrorism and , as noted earlier , has contributed troops to the u.s. - led coalitions in afghanistan and in iraq .

poland also has cooperated with the united states on "such issues as democratization , nuclear proliferation , human rights , regional cooperation ... and un reform. .

during prime minister jaroslaw kaczynski's september 2006 visit to washington , d.c. , secretary of state condoleezza rice described the two countries as "the best of friends. .

one month later , however , tusk accused kaczynski of servility toward the united states .

immediately after the elections , tusk said he hoped for "better cooperation with the united states in which poland will be a true partner. .

tusk highlighted two areas in particular: the iraq conflict ( see above ) and missile defense .

early in 2007 , the bush administration began formal negotiations with poland and the czech republic over a plan to establish missile defense facilities on their territory to protect against missiles from countries such as iran ; the plan would entail placing radar in the czech republic and interceptor launchers in poland .

some poles believe their country would risk being targeted by rogue state missiles and terrorist attacks because of the presence of the u.s. interceptors on their soil .

in addition , many poles are concerned over russia's vehement objections to the proposal .

former polish defense minister radek sikorski reportedly pressed for a special security guarantee from the united states , as well as for patriot missiles to shield poland against short - and medium - range missiles .

in july 2007 , president kaczynski stated that a missile defense agreement "is largely a foregone conclusion," prompting some critics to fault him for approving the u.s. plan without having ensured that poland's interests would be sufficiently addressed .

after the elections , tusk was more circumspect about the plan , and there were indications that his government might wish to delay an agreement until after the november 2008 u.s. elections .

on february 2 , 2008 , during a visit by now - foreign minister sikorski to washington , d.c. , u.s. secretary of state rice voiced support for strengthening poland's air defenses .

although there was said to be agreement "in principle" on the missile defense issue , it is not expected that an accord will be signed when prime minister tusk visits the united states in march .

finally , some poles have argued that , despite the human casualties and financial costs their country has borne in iraq and afghanistan , their loyalty to the united states has gone largely unrewarded .

many have hoped that the bush administration would respond favorably by providing increased military assistance and particularly by changing its visa policy , which currently requires poles to pay a $100 non - refundable fee , and then submit to an interview at a u.s. embassy or consulate — requirements that are waived for most western european countries , which qualify to be included in the visa waiver program .

