the united states extends duty - free treatment to certain imports from ecuador under a regional trade preference program that began under the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) .

atpa was enacted on december 4 , 1991 ( title ii of p.l .

102-182 ) , and was originally authorized for 10 years with bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru as designated beneficiary countries .

it lapsed on december 4 , 2001 , and was renewed and modified on august 6 , 2002 , under the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( atpdea ; title xxxi of p.l .

107-210 ) .

atpdea amended atpa by expanding trade preferences to include additional products that were previously excluded under atpa .

these products include certain items in the following categories: petroleum and petroleum products , textiles and apparel products , footwear , tuna in flexible containers , and others .

since the enactment of atpdea , congress has favored extending atpa for short periods of time .

the 113 th congress may consider whether or not to renew atpa , especially since ecuador is now the only remaining designated beneficiary country .

the most recent extension renewed trade preferences for colombia and ecuador until july 31 , 2013 , as part of the implementing legislation for the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement ( fta ) .

the fta , formally known as the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement , was approved by the congress on october 12 , 2011 , and signed into law on october 21 ( p.l .

112-42 ) .

section 201 of the implementing legislation specifically directed the president to terminate colombia's designation as an atpa beneficiary country upon the agreement's entry into force , which took place on may 15 , 2012 .

peru is no longer a designated beneficiary country under atpa because the united states and peru also have a free trade agreement , which entered into force on february 1 , 2009 ( p.l .

110-138 ) .

bolivia's designation as a beneficiary country was terminated in november 2008 by president george w. bush because of bolivia's failure to meet the eligibility criteria due to its lack of cooperation on counter - narcotics efforts .

in 2009 , president barack obama continued the determination that bolivia was not meeting the eligibility criteria .

the president's option of reinstating bolivia as an atpa beneficiary country expired on june 30 , 2009 .

thus , bolivia can only be reinstated as a beneficiary country under atpa if congress approves legislation to do so .

atpa , as amended by atpdea , is part of a broader u.s. initiative with andean countries to address the drug trade problem with latin america .

the act ( as a complement to crop eradication , interdiction , and other counter - narcotics efforts ) was intended to promote economic growth in the andean region and to encourage a shift away from dependence on illegal drugs by supporting legitimate economic activities .

increased access to the u.s. market was expected to help create jobs and expand legitimate opportunities for workers in the andean countries in alternative export sectors .

the effects of atpa on the u.s. economy have likely been minimal because the amount of u.s. trade with the region is low and the value of atpa imports is very small as a percentage of total u.s. trade .

the effect on the beneficiary countries was likely higher , especially in those industries that benefitted from atpa trade preferences .

at least one study suggests that atpa may have had a small , indirect effect on coca production in the region .

some members of congress have stated that atpa preferences should not be extended because of ecuador's failure to support u.s. policies .

the ecuadorian government's announcement that it no longer wanted to receive atpa preferences may have ended the debate for congress on whether or not to renew atpa .

on june 27 , 2013 , top ecuadorian government officials announced that the country was renouncing trade preferences from the united states under atpa .

the government's communication minister , fernando alvarado , stated at a june 27 press conference that ecuador "renounces unilaterally and irrevocably trade preferences with the united states. .

some observers believe that ecuador made this announcement to avoid possible political blackmail in the case of edward snowden , who was seeking political asylum from ecuador at the time .

supporters of atpa have argued that the program reinforced the u.s. commitment to an "alternative development" counternarcotics strategy and supports thousands of jobs in ecuador .

u.s. importers of fresh flowers from ecuador maintain that their companies and their customers would be adversely affected if atpa is not extended .

critics of atpa argue that unilateral trade programs are ineffective ; that the atpa has forced u.s. producers to compete with lower - cost andean imports ; and that trade preferences should not be extended to countries that do not support u.s. foreign and trade policies .

in the andean countries , atpa supporters have stated that the program has had a positive impact in the region by increasing investor confidence ; creating thousands of jobs in alternative sectors ; preventing organized crime ; and reducing the production of drugs .

policymakers may be interested in the economic effects of atpa on ecuador and the possible effects of allowing atpa trade preferences to expire .

the effects of atpa on the number of jobs , income , or investment in ecuador are difficult to measure because of other factors affecting the economy and trade .

though the impact of atpa on ecuador's economy is likely small , a suspension of atpa would likely increase investor uncertainty .

this would likely adversely affect long - term investment .

any potential job losses would likely be statistically small on a national level ; however , they would likely be concentrated in certain regions of the country and could potentially come at a cost to some communities .

for example , the flower industry in ecuador has been one of the key beneficiaries from atpa preferences .

after crude petroleum oil , the leading u.s. import item from ecuador under atpa is fresh cut flowers .

the value of flower imports from ecuador in 2012 totaled $166.1 million .

ecuador is also a beneficiary of the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program .

the atpa offers broader product coverage for ecuador than the gsp .

the government of ecuador estimates that if atpa is not renewed , it will negatively impact thousands of workers in various industries .

for this reason , ecuador asked the u.s. government to add certain products to the list of products eligible for gsp preferences .

the embassy of ecuador and several private entities petitioned the office of the united states representative ( ustr ) to modify the gsp eligible product list to include fresh cut roses and certain vegetables .

these petitions are included in ustr's 2012 annual product review for gsp .

in june 2013 , the trade policy staff committee deferred the decision on ecuador's petitions to add additional products to the gsp program .

if these products are added to the gsp program and congress extends gsp , the adverse effects from a termination of atpa may be mitigated .

an issue of concern for policymakers has been related to ecuador's ability to meet the country eligibility criteria .

one group of business associations contends that congress should , at a minimum , require periodic reviews of ecuador's fulfillment of atpa eligibility criteria .

the group contends that ecuador is falling short of atpa criteria related to rule of law , foreign investment , and intellectual property rights protection .

a major issue has to do with a long - running , multibillion - dollar lawsuit brought against the u.s. oil company chevron by ecuadorian indigenous peoples in which they claim they are the victims of toxic waste .

the case goes back to a period between 1964 and 1990 in which texaco ( which has since merged with chevron ) is accused of dumping more than 18 billion gallons of toxic wastewater into ecuador's waterways and forests .

chevron claims that the environmental damage was caused by texaco and that the government of ecuador exempted the oil companies from liability in exchange for a cleanup and payment in the early 1990s .

on february 9 , 2011 , an ecuadorean judge ordered chevron to pay $18.2 billion in cleanup costs for environmental damages in the amazon region .

chevron appealed the ruling in ecuador .

chevron has long argued that the judgment was based on fraudulent evidence and that the legal system in ecuador will not provide a fair forum because ecuador's courts are politically influenced .

some observers maintain that the chevron dispute demonstrates that ecuador has failed to meet atpa eligibility criteria pertaining to recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards .

chevron corporation submitted documents to the united states trade representative in which it argues that ecuador is in violation of atpa eligibility criteria because the government of ecuador has failed to enforce or recognize arbitral awards under the u.s. - ecuador bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) .

in 2006 , chevron filed a claim with the permanent court of arbitration in the hague to look into whether ecuador breached international law under the rules of the united nations ( u.n. ) commission on international trade law .

in march 2010 , the u.n. arbitration panel ruled that the ecuadorian government violated the bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) with the united states with a series of unnecessary court delays in a long - running dispute between chevron and the government of ecuador .

on august 31 , 2011 , the international tribunal in the hague ruled in chevron's favor with monetary compensation .

on june 6 , 2013 , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia upheld the international arbitration award against ecuador .

in a letter submitted to ustr in may 2013 , ambassador nathalie cely of ecuador states that the government of ecuador "has been and continues to be in compliance with the mandatory and discretionary eligibility criteria" of atpa .

the letter urges the united states to extend trade preferences beyond the current expiration date of july 31 , 2013 .

it states that atpa supports thousands of jobs for farmers , transportation and distribution employees , and vendors and customers in both the united states and ecuador .

according to the letter , atpa has been an effective tool in fighting the narcotics trade in the andean region ; supported women business owners in ecuador ; created jobs in tuna processing plants in provinces that are highly vulnerable to narcotics trade ; and helped expand exports in industries that employ thousands of workers .

the debate surrounding a renewal of atpa may be overshadowed by recent diplomatic tensions between the united states and ecuador .

in april 2011 , diplomatic ties between the united states and ecuador deteriorated when the u.s .

ambassador to ecuador , heather m. hodges , was expelled by ecuadorean president rafael correa's government as a result of a cable exposed by wikileaks .

parts of a sensitive u.s. government cable exposed by wikileaks were published on april 4 , 2011 , by the spanish newspaper el pais .

the government of ecuador reportedly issued the following statement after the cable was published: "this information , in addition to being unacceptable , is malicious and imprudent. .

in retaliation to the expulsion , the obama administration expelled the ecuadorean ambassador to the united states on thursday , april 7 , 2011 .

in september 2011 , the two countries announced that they would resume ambassadorial - level relations .

some observers contend that certain actions and statements by president correa demonstrate a lack of willingness and commitment by the ecuadorian government to cooperate with the united states .

last year , president correa granted asylum to julian assange in the ecuadorean embassy in london , on the grounds that he faced the risk of persecution in the united states for revealing secret state department cables and other materials .

more recently , in june 2013 , president correa announced that he was willing to consider granting asylum to edward snowden , the fugitive former intelligence contractor who revealed details of classified u.s. government surveillance programs to the press .

snowden is fleeing a u.s. extradition request and had reportedly asked ecuador for asylum .

