a july 2005 joint statement resolved to establish a u.s. - india "global partnership" through increased cooperation on economic issues , on energy and the environment , on democracy and development , on non - proliferation and security , and on high - technology and space .

u.s. policy is to isolate iran and to ensure that its nuclear program is used for purely civilian purposes .

india has never shared u.s. assessments of iran as an aggressive regional power .

india - iran relations have traditionally been positive and , in january 2003 , the two countries launched a "strategic partnership" with the signing of the "new delhi declaration" and seven other substantive agreements .

indian leaders regularly speak of "civilizational ties" between the two countries , a reference to the interactions of persian and indus valley civilizations over a period of millennia .

as u.s. relations with india grow deeper and more expansive in the new century , some in washington believe that new delhi's friendship with tehran could become a significant obstacle to further development of u.s. - india ties .

however , india - iran relations have not evolved into a strategic alliance and are unlikely to derail the further development of a u.s. - india global partnership .

at the same time , given a clear indian interest in maintaining positive ties with iran , especially in the area of energy commerce , new delhi is unlikely to abandon its relationship with tehran , or accept dictation on the topic from external powers .

many in congress voice concern about india's relations with iran and their relevance to u.s. interests .

some worry about new delhi's defense relations with tehran and have sought to link this with congressional approval of u.s. - india civil nuclear cooperation .

there are further u.s. concerns that india plans to seek energy resources from iran , thus benefitting financially a country the united states seeks to isolate .

indian firms have in recent years taken long - term contracts for purchase of iranian gas and oil , and india supports proposed construction of a pipeline to deliver iranian natural gas to india through pakistan .

the bush administration expresses strong opposition to any pipeline projects involving iran , but top indian officials insist the project is in india's national interest .

some analysts believe that geostrategic motives beyond energy security , including great power aspirations , drive india's pursuit of closer relations with iran .

of immediate interest to some member of congress are press reports on iranian naval ships visiting india's kochi port for "training. .

indian officials downplayed the significance of the port visit , and secretary rice challenged the report's veracity , although she did state that , "the united states has made very clear to india that we have concerns about their relationship with iran. .

such concerns include the proposed gas pipeline .

secretary of energy sam bodman , visiting new delhi in march 2007 , reiterated u.s. opposition to the pipeline project .

according to the 2006-2007 annual report of the indian ministry of external affairs , india's relations with iran are underlined by historical , civilizational and multifaceted ties .

the bilateral cooperation has acquired a strategic dimension flourishing in the fields of energy , trade and commerce , information technology , and transit .

during 2006-07 , relations with iran were further strengthened through regular exchanges .

past reports have lauded "further deepening and consolidation of india - iran ties," with "increased momentum of high - level exchanges" and "institutional linkages between their national security councils. .

iranian leaders , always looking for new allies to thwart u.s. attempts to isolate iran , reciprocate new delhi's favorable view and insist that warming u.s. - india relations will not weaken their own ties with new delhi .

however , there are signs that , following the 2005 launch of a u.s. - india "global partnership" and plans for bilateral civil nuclear cooperation , new delhi intends to bring its iran policy into closer alignment with that of the united states .

yet india is home to a sizeable constituency urging resistance to any u.s. pressure that might inhibit new delhi - tehran relations or which prioritize relations with the united states in disregard of india's national interests .

while top indian leaders state that friendly new delhi - tehran ties will continue concurrent with — or even despite — a growing u.s. - india partnership , some observers see such rhetoric as incompatible with recent developments .

the indian government has made clear that it does not wish to see a new nuclear weapons power in the region and , in this context , it has aligned itself with international efforts to bring iran's controversial nuclear program into conformity with non - proliferation treaty and iaea provisions .

at the same time , new delhi's traditional status as a leader of the "nonaligned movement," its friendly links with tehran , and a domestic constituency that includes tens of millions of shiite muslims , have presented difficulties for indian policymakers .

there are also in new delhi influential leftist and opposition parties which maintain a high sensitivity toward indications that india is being made a "junior partner" of the united states .

these political forces have been critical of proposed u.s. - india civil nuclear cooperation and regularly insist that india's closer relations with the united states should not come at the expense of positive ties with iran .

the current indian national congress - led coalition government has thus sought to maintain a careful balance between two sometimes conflicting policy objectives .

india's main opposition , the bharatiya janata party , has voiced its approval of the present government's policy toward iran's nuclear program .

there were reports in 2005 that india would oppose bringing iran's nuclear program before the u.n. security council and was likely to abstain on relevant iaea board votes .

however , on september 24 , 2005 , in what many saw as the first test of india's position , new delhi did vote with the majority ( and the united states ) on an iaea resolution finding iran in noncompliance with its international obligations .

the vote brought waves of criticism from indian opposition parties and independent analysts who accused new delhi of betraying a friendly country by "capitulating" to u.s. pressure .

in january 2006 , the u.s. ambassador to india explicitly linked progress on proposed u.s. - india civil nuclear cooperation with india's upcoming iaea vote , saying if india chose not to side with the united states , he believed the u.s. - india initiative would fail in the congress .

new delhi rejected any attempts to link the two issues , and opposition and leftist indian political parties denounced the remarks .

yet , on february 4 , 2006 , india again voted with the majority in referring iran to the security council , even as it insisted that its vote should not be interpreted as detracting from india's traditionally close relations with iran .

overt u.s. pressure may have made it more difficult for new delhi to carry out the policy it had already chosen .

some independent observers saw india's iaea votes as demonstrating new delhi's strategic choice to strengthen a partnership with washington even at the cost of its friendship with tehran .

in july 2006 , the house passed legislation ( h.r .

5682 ) to enable proposed u.s. civil nuclear cooperation with india .

the bill contained non - binding language on securing india's cooperation with u.s. policy toward iran ( an amendment seeking to make such cooperation binding was defeated by a vote of 235-192 ) .

the senate version of enabling legislation ( s. 3709 ) contained no language on iran .

the resulting "hyde act," which became p.l .

109-401 in december , preserved the house's "statement of policy" language and added a prerequisite that the president provide to congress , inter alia , a description of india's efforts to participate in u.s. efforts to prevent iran from obtaining weapons of mass destruction .

in their explanatory statement ( h.rept .

109-721 ) , congressional conferees called securing india's participation "critical" and they emphasized an "expectation" of india's full cooperation on this matter .

in recent years there have been occasional revelations of indian transfers to iran of technology that could be useful for iran's purported weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) programs .

these transfers do not appear to be part of an indian - government - directed policy of assisting iran's wmd , but could represent unauthorized scientific contacts that have resulted from growing india - iran energy and diplomatic ties .

some indian persons have been sanctioned by the bush administration under the iran non - proliferation act ( ina , p.l .

106-178 ) .

according to determinations published in the federal register , in 2003 an indian chemical industry consultancy was sanctioned under the iran - iraq arms nonproliferation act ( p.l .

102-484 ) .

in a september 2004 determination , two indian nuclear scientists , dr. chaudhary surendar and dr. y.s.r .

prasad , were sanctioned under the ina .

the two formerly headed the nuclear power corp. of india and allegedly passed to iran heavy - water nuclear technology .

surendar denied ever visiting iran and sanctions against him were ended in december 2005 .

in that same december determination , two indian chemical companies were sanctioned under the ina for transfers to iran .

in august 2006 , the united states formally sanctioned two additional indian chemical firms under the ina for sensitive material transactions with iran .

the firms denied any wmd - related transfers and new delhi later said the sanctions were "not justified. .

in february 2007 , india moved to impose restrictions on nuclear - related exports to iran in accordance with u.n. security council resolution 1737 of december 2006 .

india and iran have established steady but relatively low level defense and military relations since the formation of an indo - iran joint commission in 1983 , three years after the start of the iran - iraq war .

there is no evidence that india provided any significant military assistance to iran during that war , which ended in 1988 .

iran reportedly received some military advice from pakistan during the conflict .

following the war , iran began rebuilding its conventional arsenal with purchases of tanks , combat aircraft , and ships from russia and china .

no major purchases from india were reported during this time .

however , iran reportedly turned to india in 1993 to help develop batteries for the three kilo - class submarines iran had bought from russia .

the submarine batteries provided by the russians were not appropriate for the warm waters of the persian gulf , and india had substantial experience operating kilos in warm water .

there have been expectations that iran - india military ties would further expand under the 2003 "new delhi declaration," in which the two countries "decided to explore opportunities for cooperation in defense and agreed areas , including training and exchange of visits. .

some experts see this as part of broad strategic cooperation between two powers in the persian gulf and arabian sea , but the cooperation has generally stalled since it was signed and has not evolved into a noteworthy strategic alliance .

instead , the cooperation appears to represent a manifestation of generally good indo - iranian relations and an opportunity to mutually enhance their potential to project power in the region .

india had reportedly hoped the declaration would pave the way for indian sales to iran of upgrades of iran's russian - made conventional weapons systems .

major new iran - india deals along these lines have not materialized to date , but iran reportedly has sought indian advice on operating iran's missile boats , refitting iran's t - 72 tanks and armored personnel carriers , and upgrading iran's mig - 29 fighters .

under the declaration , the two countries have held some joint naval exercises , most recently in march 2006 .

the first joint exercises were in march 2003 .

in march 2007 , apparently at iran's request , the two countries formed a joint working group to implement the 2003 accord , which iran apparently feels has languished .

during a visit of the commander of iran's regular navy — the first such high level exchange since 2003 — india reportedly deferred specific iranian requests , such as an exchange of warship engineers .

india - iran commercial relations are dominated by indian imports of iranian crude oil , which alone account for some 90% of all indian imports from iran each year .

the value of all india - iran trade in the fiscal year ending march 2007 topped $9 billion ( by comparison , u.s. - india trade was valued at about $32 billion in 2006 ) .

iran possesses the world's second - largest natural gas reserves , while india is among the world's leading gas importers .

with a rapidly growing economy , india is building energy ties to iran , some of which could conflict with u.s. policy and the iran sanctions act ( isa ) .

isa requires certain sanctions on investments over $20 million in one year in iran's energy sector .

under a reportedly finalized 25-year , $22 billion deal , the state - owned gas authority of india ltd. ( gail ) is to buy 5 million tons of iranian liquified natural gas ( lng ) per year .

to implement the arrangement , gail is to build an lng plant in iran , which iran does not now have .

some versions of the deal include development by gail of iran's south pars gas field , which would clearly constitute an investment in iran's energy sector .

india currently buys about 100,000-150,000 barrels per day of iranian oil , or some 7.5% of iran's oil exports .

it is also widely reported that indian refineries supply a large part of the refined gasoline that iran imports .

gasoline is heavily subsidized and sells for about 40 cents per gallon in iran , and iranian refining capacity is insufficient to meet demand .

the purchase of iranian petroleum product is not generally considered an isa violation .

a major aspect of the iran - india energy deals is the proposed construction of a gas pipeline from iran to india via pakistan , with a possible extension from pakistan to china .

some of the indian companies that reportedly might take part in the pipeline project are ongc , gail , indian oil corporation , and bharat petroleum corporation .

iran , india , and pakistan have repeatedly reiterated their commitment to the $4 billion - $7 billion project , which is tentatively scheduled to begin construction later in 2007 and be completed by 2010 .

pakistani president musharraf said in january 2006 that there is enough demand in pakistan to make the project feasible , even if india declines to join it .

since january 2007 , the three countries have agreed on various outstanding issues , including a pricing formula , and the indian and pakistani split of the gas supplies , but talks continue on several unresolved issues , including the pipeline route , security , transportation tariffs , and related issues .

during her march 2005 visit to asia , secretary of state rice expressed u.s. concern about the pipeline deal .

other u.s. officials have called the project "unacceptable," but no u.s. official has directly stated that it would be considered a violation of isa .

successive administrations have considered pipeline projects that include iran as meeting the definition of "investment" in isa .

india and iran are tacitly cooperating to secure their mutual interests in afghanistan .

iran has perceived the sunni islamic extremism of the taliban regime as a threat to iran's shiite sect .

india saw the taliban as a manifestation of islamic extremism that india is battling in kashmir , and which is held responsible for terrorist attacks in india .

india and iran both supported afghanistan's minority - dominated "northern alliance" against the taliban during 1996-2001 ( in contrast to pakistan , which supported the taliban ) .

both countries also seek to prevent a taliban return to power and have each given substantial economic aid to the u.s. - backed government in kabul .

india's presence in afghanistan is viewed by pakistan as a potential security threat as a policy of "strategic encirclement. .

