in early 2007 , secretary of state condoleezza rice was said to have promised moderate arab regimes that the united states would become more engaged in the israeli - arab peace process in exchange for their support for countering increasing iranian influence in the middle east .

the secretary made eight trips to the region during the year , initially to work with israeli prime minister ehud olmert and palestinian authority ( pa ) president mahmud abbas on developing a "political horizon" that would lead to a resumption of the long - stalled performance - based road map to a permanent two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict , issued by the international quartet ( the united states , european union , united nations , and russia ) on april 30 , 2003 .

each side maintains that the other has not fulfilled its obligations under the three - phase road map ; independent observers agree that neither has done so .

phase i calls , inter alia , for israel to freeze all settlement activity ( including natural growth of settlements ) and for the palestinians to confront terrorists and dismantle their infrastructures .

from february until june 2007 , a palestinian unity government included hamas , a u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) , and hamas's participation impeded rice's efforts .

olmert refused to negotiate with abbas as long as hamas failed to recognize israel , disavow violence , and accept prior israeli - palestinian agreements , i.e. , met conditions that the quartet laid down in january 2006 after hamas won the palestinian parliamentary elections .

in june 2007 , however , palestinian infighting ended with hamas in complete control of the gaza strip , and abbas reacted by dissolving the unity government .

the bush administration and the israeli government viewed the ouster of hamas as an opportunity to return to diplomacy .

on july 16 , president bush promised to support abbas in order to lay the foundation for serious negotiations toward the creation of a palestinian state .

the president called for an international meeting "of representatives from nations that support a two - state solution , reject violence , recognize israel's right to exist , and commit to all previous agreements between the parties. .

when announced , the meeting was intended mainly to review progress toward building palestinian institutions and to look for ways to support further reform , although participants also were to provide support for the parties in their bilateral negotiations on a palestinian state .

olmert and abbas , and later negotiating teams led by israeli foreign minister tzipi livni and former palestinian prime minister ahmed quray ( alternate spellings: qurei , qureia ) , met over the next four months to work on a declaration of principles on final status or core issues: jerusalem , borders , settlements , refugees , security , and water .

olmert sought to keep the declaration vague in order to avoid concessions that would prompt his domestic political opponents to bring down his government , while abbas wanted it to address core issues substantively in order to show his people that negotiations could lead to an improvement in the quality of their lives , an end to the occupation , and the establishment of a palestinian state .

they failed to produce a document .

the united states invited 49 countries and international organizations to send representatives to a conference at the u.s .

naval academy in annapolis , md .

attendees included members of the arab league follow - on committee ( algeria , bahrain , egypt , jordan , lebanon , morocco , qatar , saudi arabia , sudan , syria , tunisia , and yemen ) , the g - 8 group of industrialized countries , permanent members of the u.n. security council , fellow members of the international quartet , members of the organization of the islamic conference , and representatives of the international monetary fund and the world bank .

the size of the gathering signaled strong international support for a peace process .

the size of the arabs' turnout was attributed to their need for a strategic alliance with the united states against iran , but also may have indicated support for abbas over hamas .

the presence of saudi arabian foreign minister prince saud al faisal was considered significant because the desert kingdom is a pro - western arab state that does not have relations with israel .

the foreign minister clearly stated that normalization of relations would come as a result of peace and not before it .

the attendance of syria suggested that the bush administration , which had been trying to isolate damascus because of its support for terrorist groups , its destabilization of lebanon , and its alliance with iran , may now be willing to engage syria and revive its dormant peace track with israel .

saudi arabia and other arab governments reportedly had demanded that syria be invited to annapolis and that the conference call for a "comprehensive peace" that would include the return of the golan heights .

syria would only attend if the golan were on the agenda and sent deputy foreign minister faisal al miqdad , while almost all other governments were represented by foreign ministers .

miqdad's rank may have reflected a belief that a renewed peace process would not address the golan .

however , russia reportedly wants a follow - up meeting in moscow to address syria's concerns .

olmert publicly has said that "conditions have not yet matured" for the start of a dialogue with syria , but israel and syria have been talking via turkish and russian intermediaries .

iran and hamas , which have the potential to act as spoilers of the peace process , were conspicuously missing from annapolis .

iran denounced the conference before , during , and after it took place .

its influence may have been felt in the absence of the shiite - led maliki government of iraq , an invitee which declined to send a representative but which said that it would welcome peace .

yet , president mahmoud ahmadinejad was unable to dissuade syrian president bashar al asad , his presumed ally , from sending a representative .

for their part , hamas officials described the meeting as "useless" and stridently escalated their rhetoric , vowing not to abandon their goal of a palestinian state "from the river to the sea," i.e. , destroying israel .

the conference began on november 26 , when president bush held separate meetings with abbas and olmert at the white house and secretary rice hosted a dinner for attendees at the state department .

a plenary session convened in annapolis on november 27 .

after remarks by bush , abbas , and olmert , the agenda included international support for the peace process , institutional reform , and capacity building ; a comprehensive peace to include israel - syria and israel - lebanon ; and advancing normal relations and security between israel and the arab states .

on november 28 , president bush briefly met jointly with abbas and olmert .

instead of a declaration of principles , president bush read a "joint understanding" at the conference that dealt with the process or structure of negotiations .

in it , prime minister olmert and president abbas express their determination to "immediately launch bilateral negotiations in order to conclude a peace treaty to resolve all core issues without exception , as specified in previous agreements. .

they agree to engage in continuous negotiations in an effort to conclude an agreement before the end of 2008 .

for this purpose , a steering committee to oversee negotiating teams will meet continuously beginning on december 12 .

abbas and olmert will meet biweekly to follow and assist the negotiations .

negotiations will be bilateral .

the joint understanding does not specify a role for the united states in the negotiations , although one may emerge with time .

president bush will not be playing a role similar to that of presidents carter and clinton in the past , and the united states will not necessarily make proposals in the event of a deadlock .

this is in line with a long - standing administration view that it is the parties themselves who must make peace .

however , it is anticipated that secretary of state rice will travel to the region frequently to provide encouragement and assistance .

the resumption of negotiations after a seven - year hiatus is viewed as the main achievement of the conference , although the process may be said to have resumed with the olmert - abbas talks in mid - 2007 .

in the joint understanding , the parties also commit to immediately implement their respective obligations under the road map .

the united states will lead a tripartite u.s. - israeli - palestinian mechanism to follow up on implementation .

the parties further commit to continue implementing the road map until they reach a peace treaty .

unless otherwise agreed by the parties , implementation of the future peace treaty will be subject to the implementation of the road map , as judged by the united states .

the united states will monitor and judge fulfillment of their road map commitments , a task that may prove to be extremely difficult .

the president named general james l. jones ( ret .

 ) , former commander of u.s. european command , supreme allied commander europe , commandant of the marine corps , as special envoy for middle east security .

the general will report to secretary rice , who said that jones will oversee "the full range of security issues for the israelis and palestinians as well as security cooperation with neighboring countries , and american efforts to provide assistance to the palestinian authority. .

he will not monitor compliance with the road map nor replace lt. gen. keith dayton , the u.s. middle east security coordinator , who has been assisting the palestinians with improving their security forces .

the domestic political weaknesses of olmert and abbas may create challenges to or constraints on progress on the road map and a peace treaty and have prompted much skepticism about the prospects for the renewed peace process .

the two sides are no more able to fulfill their obligations under phase i of the road map now than they have been for the past four and a half years and still disagree about implementation .

phase i calls on israel to cease settlement activity .

israel has more than 275,000 settlers in the west bank ( not including east jerusalem ) and , at annapolis , olmert referred to a letter that president bush gave to former israeli prime minister ariel sharon in april 2004 .

in it , the president noted the need to take into account changed "realities on the ground , including already existing major israeli population centers," ( i.e. , settlements ) , asserting "it is unrealistic to expect that the outcome of final status negotiations will be full and complete return to the armistice lines of 1949. .

at the time , the palestinians denounced the president's "legitimization" of settlements and prejudgment of final status .

on november 19 , 2007 , olmert stated that he does not view a freeze on building beyond the 1967 border as part of the road map's requirements .

he also said that israel would not build new settlements or outposts or appropriate more land for settlement use .

in addition , israel does not believe that construction in east jerusalem is required in a freeze .

palestinians argue that a freeze means a complete cessation of all settlement construction , including in existing settlements .

phase i also requires the palestinians to confront terrorists and dismantle terrorist infrastructures .

palestinian officials claim that their limited actions against hamas - supporting charities and deployment of police in nablus and tulkarm prove that they are fulfilling their obligations under phase i .

yet , they lack the capability to truly confront hamas and other terror groups , even with the assistance provided thus far by the united states and israel .

final status issues also remain intractable .

for example , on the issue of refugees , abbas referred at annapolis to u.n. general assembly resolution 194 , which the palestinians believe grants refugees the "right to return" to their homes ( now in israel ) .

 ( the resolution also provides for an alternative right to compensation. ) .

however , he also had joined the arab initiative which calls for an agreed upon solution to the issue .

israel maintains its right to remain a jewish state , the identity of which would be lost if the palestinian refugees were allowed to return .

it says that the refugees should resettle only in palestine and in arab lands and be compensated .

for support , israelis cite another part of president bush's 2004 letter to sharon , which stated that a solution to the refugee issue will be found by settling palestinian refugees in a palestinian state , "rather than in israel," and thereby rejected a "right of return. .

the 2000 camp david talks failed largely because of the issue of jerusalem .

olmert has expressed willingness to cede the arab neighborhoods and refugee camps in the city ( the boundaries of which the israeli knesset had enlarged after the 1967 war ) .

it may be more difficult for him to compromise on the control / sovereignty over holy sites .

as noted above , rightwing israeli parties could bring down the government over any steps they consider threatening to "divide" the city .

in annapolis , abbas spoke of a palestinian capital in east jerusalem and of guaranteed access for all religions to holy sites .

