in october 2000 , a coalition of democratic parties defeated serbian strongman slobodan milosevic in presidential elections , overturning a regime that had plunged the country into bloody conflicts in the region , economic decline , and international isolation in the 1990s .

the country's new rulers embarked on a transition toward western democratic and free market standards , but success has been uneven .

serbia has held largely free and fair elections , according to international observers .

a new constitution adopted in 2006 marked an improvement over the earlier , socialist - era one .

however , the global economic crisis dealt a setback to serbia's economy .

organized crime and high - level corruption remain very serious problems .

serbia has set integration in the european union as its key foreign policy goal , but its prospects have been clouded by concerns of some eu countries that it has not done enough to normalize relations with its former kosovo province , which declared independence in 2008 .

u.s. - serbian relations , although positive in many respects , have also been negatively affected by the leading role played by the united states in promoting kosovo's independence .

one of serbia's most difficult political and foreign policy challenges in recent years has been its relations with its former kosovo province .

belgrade strongly opposed kosovo's declaration of independence in february 2008 .

serbia won an important diplomatic victory when the u.n. general assembly voted in october 2008 to refer the question of the legality of kosovo's declaration of independence to the international court of justice ( icj ) .

however , serbia's diplomatic strategy suffered a setback when the icj ruled in july 2010 that kosovo's declaration of independence did not contravene international law .

after the icj ruling , under strong eu pressure , serbia agreed to hold talks with kosovo under eu mediation .

the dialogue , which began in march 2011 , at first focused on technical issues , although it has been difficult to separate technical issues from the main political one — kosovo's status as an independent state .

in an effort to make better progress in the talks , talks were moved to a higher political level in october 2012 , when prime minister dacic and kosovo prime minister hashim thaci met .

such meetings became a regular feature of the negotiations in the following months .

the technical agreements reached so far have included ones on free movement of persons , customs stamps , mutual recognition of university diplomas , cadastre ( real estate ) records , civil registries ( which record births , deaths , marriages , etc .

for legal purposes ) , integrated border / boundary management ( ibm ) , and on regional cooperation .

implementation of most of these accords has lagged .

a technical protocol on ibm went into effect at the end of 2012 , with the opening of several joint kosovo / serbia border / boundary posts .

the two sides also agreed to exchange liaison personnel ( to be located in eu offices in belgrade and pristina ) to monitor the implementation of agreements and address any problems that may arise .

since 2008 , serbia's foreign policy has focused on two main objectives — integration into the european union and hindering international recognition of the independence of serbia's former kosovo province by legal and diplomatic means .

to this end , serbia has focused on seeking good relations with the eu , in order to achieve its long - term goal of eu membership .

it has tried to avoid conflicts with the 22 eu countries that have recognized kosovo's independence , while cultivating the five states whose non - recognition of kosovo serves to block a closer formal relationship between the eu and kosovo .

serbia has also bolstered ties with russia and china , partly in an effort to secure loans , investment , and other economic advantages and partly to ensure they maintain their opposition to kosovo's independence .

u.s. - serbian ties have improved since u.s. recognition of kosovo's independence in february 2008 , but appear not to play a central role in either country's foreign policy at present .

although the united states has offered to "agree to disagree" with serbia over kosovo , the issue may continue to affect relations , particularly as the united states remains kosovo's most powerful international supporter .

serbia has played a key role in u.s. policy toward the balkans since the collapse of the former yugoslavia in 1991 .

u.s. officials came to see the milosevic regime as a key factor behind the wars in the region in the 1990s , and pushed successfully for u.n. economic sanctions against serbia .

on the other hand , the united states drew milosevic into the negotiations that ended the war in bosnia in 1995 .

the united states bombed serbia in 1999 to force belgrade to relinquish control of kosovo , where serbian forces had committed atrocities while attempting to suppress a revolt by ethnic albanian guerrillas .

u.s. officials hailed the success of serbian democrats in defeating the milosevic regime in elections in 2000 and 2001 .

the united states has seen a democratic and prosperous serbia , at peace with its neighbors and integrated into euro - atlantic institutions , as an important part of its key policy goal of a europe "whole , free , and at peace. .

u.s. aid to serbia has declined sharply in recent years , perhaps reflecting overall u.s. budgetary stringency , changing u.s. global priorities , and serbia's eu membership candidacy , which is expected to result in greater eu aid to the country .

in fy2011 , serbia received $45 million in u.s. aid for political and economic reforms , $1.896 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) , $0.9 million in imet military training funds , and $1.15 million in nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining and related ( nadr ) aid .

in fy2012 , serbia was expected to receive $33.5 million in aid for political and economic reform for serbia , $2 million in fmf , $0.9 million in imet , and $2.65 million in nadr funding .

for fy2013 , the administration requested $19.913 million to aid serbia's political and economic reforms in the economic support fund ( esf ) account , $3 million in international narcotics control and law enforcement funding ( incle ) , $0.9 million in imet , and $1.8 million in fmf .

for fy2014 , the administration aid request for serbia includes $16.103 million in esf assistance , $3 million in the incle account , $1.05 million in imet aid , and $1.8 million in fmf .

the goal of u.s. aid for political reform is to strengthen democratic institutions , the rule of law , and civil society .

it includes programs to strengthen the justice system , support local governments , help fight corruption , foster independent media , and increase citizen involvement in government .

aid is being used to help serbia strengthen its free market economy by reforming the financial sector and promote a better investment climate .

other u.s. aid is targeted at strengthening serbia's export and border controls , including against the spread of weapons of mass destruction .

u.s. military aid helps serbia participate in nato's partnership for peace program and prepare for international peacekeeping missions .

the signing of a status of forces agreement with serbia in september 2006 has permitted greater bilateral military cooperation between the two countries , including increased u.s. security assistance for serbia as well as joint military exercises and other military - to - military contacts .

the ohio national guard participates in a partnership program with serbia's military .

however , despite u.s. urging , serbia declined to contribute troops to the nato - led isaf peacekeeping force in afghanistan .

in 2005 , the administration granted duty - free treatment to some products from serbia under the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) .

the most serious cloud over u.s. - serbian relations is the problem of kosovo .

the united states recognized kosovo's independence on february 18 , 2008 .

on the evening of february 21 , 2008 , serbian rioters broke into the u.s. embassy in belgrade and set part of it on fire .

the riot , in which other western embassies were targeted and shops were looted , took place after a government - sponsored rally against kosovo's independence .

the embassy was empty at the time .

observers at the scene noted that serbian police were nowhere to be found when the incident began , leading to speculation that they had been deliberately withdrawn by serbian authorities .

police arrived later and dispersed the rioters at the cost of injuries on both sides .

one suspected rioter was later found dead in the embassy .

u.s. officials expressed outrage at the attack and warned serbian leaders that the united states would hold them personally responsible for any further violence against u.s. facilities .

president tadic condemned the attack and vowed to investigate why the police had allowed the incident to occur .

in april 2013 , 12 persons went on trial in belgrade for the attack .

the united states also continues to raise with serbian authorities the case of the bytyqi brothers .

during the 1999 war in kosovo , the three u.s. citizens were murdered by serbian interior ministry troops , who were never brought to justice .

in may 2009 , vice president joseph biden set the tone for the obama administration's policy toward serbia , in a trip to the region that also included kosovo and bosnia , in addition to serbia .

biden said the united states wanted to improve ties with serbia .

he acknowledged that serbia must play "the constructive and leading role" in the region for the region to be successful .

he expressed the belief that the united states and serbia could "agree to disagree" on kosovo .

biden stressed that the united states did not expect serbia to recognize kosovo's independence , and would not condition u.s. - serbian ties on the issue .

however , he added that the united states expects serbia to cooperate with the united states , the european union , and other key international actors "to look for pragmatic solutions that will improve the lives of all the people of kosovo," including the serbian minority .

biden said the united states also looks to serbia to help bosnia and herzegovina become "a sovereign , democratic , multi - ethnic state with vibrant entities. .

u.s. officials have often asked serbia to use its influence with bosnian serb leaders to persuade them to cooperate with international officials there .

finally , biden called on belgrade to cooperate fully with the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia .

biden said that the united states "strongly supports serbian membership in the european union and expanding security cooperation between serbia , the united states , and our allies. .

he called for strengthening bilateral ties , including military - to - military relations , economic ties , and educational and cultural exchanges .

more recently , in february and march 2012 , secretary of state clinton praised progress in the serbia - kosovo negotiations and hailed the eu's subsequent granting of eu membership candidate status to serbia .

in june , she congratulated nikolic on his victory in the presidential election and said that the united states wanted to cooperate with serbia .

she said serbia should continue its path toward eu integration and establish open and transparent relations with kosovo .

in the wake of the surprising decision of the progressives and socialists to form a new government , deputy assistant secretary of state philip reeker visited belgrade in early july 2012 , followed by assistant secretary gordon a few days later .

serbian press sources claimed that the u.s. diplomats were trying to break up the coalition , or at least to secure the participation in it of the democrats .

gordon denied these claims , saying the visit was intended to reinforce the message that the new government should continue on the path of eu integration and normalizing relations with kosovo , including the implementation of existing agreements .

he said serbia must dismantle the serbian security presence in northern kosovo , although some serbian government civilian infrastructure such as healthcare facilities could remain .

secretary of state hillary clinton visited the region again in late october and early november 2012 , stopping in bosnia , serbia , kosovo , croatia , and albania .

in a move that underlined the u.s. focus on coordination with the eu , she visited bosnia , serbia , and kosovo jointly with eu foreign policy chief baroness catherine ashton .

at every stop , clinton emphasized the solidarity between brussels and washington on balkan policy .

during visits to serbia and kosovo , clinton stressed the importance for both sides to negotiate in good faith in the eu - brokered talks aimed at normalizing their relationship so that they can integrate with the european union .

clinton stressed that the united states regards kosovo's sovereignty and territorial integrity as completely non - negotiable .

although most eu countries would agree with the statement , ashton could not make such a comment , as the eu is divided on the issue of kosovo's independence .

on april 19 , 2013 , secretary of state john kerry issued a statement hailing the agreement on northern kosovo , and calling on both sides to speedily implement it and the other agreements they have reached .

kerry also commended baroness ashton for her role in facilitating the talks .

he said the united states remained deeply committed to seeing serbia and kosovo and the region achieve their goals of integrating into a europe whole , free , and at peace .

on april 24 , the subcommittee on europe , eurasia , and emerging threats of the house foreign affairs committee held a hearing on kosovo - serbia relations .

acting deputy assistant secretary of state jonathan moore expressed strong administration support for the april 19 agreement and underlined that close u.s. - eu policy coordination helped bring it about .

subcommittee chairman representative dana rohrabacher expressed strong skepticism about the viability of the agreement .

he reiterated his long - standing support for referendums to be held in serb - majority areas of northern kosovo and ethnic albanian - majority areas of southern serbia on which country the populations there want to belong to .

such referendums would likely result in a swap of territories between the two countries .

moore repeated the administration's opposition to this approach , claiming it could lead to further conflict in the region .

