i n situations where a private - sector company goes out of business , questions may arise concerning how the company's pension plan may be terminated .

the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , provides a comprehensive federal scheme for the regulation of pension and other employee benefit plans , and the act includes a plan termination insurance program for defined benefit pension plans .

various types of pension plans are not covered by the insurance program , including defined contribution plans ( individual account plans ) , government plans , and church plans .

the insurance program distinguishes between single - employer plans and multiemployer plans ( i.e. , collectively bargained plans to which more than one company makes contributions ) .

this report only discusses the termination of single - employer plans .

the insurance program is administered by the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) .

the pbgc has two primary responsibilities .

first , it oversees plan terminations , which is the focus of this report .

second , the pbgc pays certain guaranteed benefits under the plan , should the plan be terminated with insufficient funds to pay these benefits .

for more information on the pbgc and its payment of benefits , see crs report 95-118 , pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) : a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

this report provides an overview of the three types of plan terminations and the pbgc's role in each type of termination .

the report also provides a brief overview of the liability of an employer following a plan termination , enforcement and penalties relating to the plan termination provisions .

erisa provides for three types of single - employer plan terminations: standard , distress , and involuntary .

the plan administrator initiates a standard or distress termination , whereas the pbgc initiates an involuntary termination .

the pbgc is broadly authorized to make any investigation it deems necessary to enforce erisa and may assess a penalty against anyone who fails to provide a required notice or other material information .

the penalty is limited to $1,000 for each day the failure occurs .

in addition , plan participants , beneficiaries , fiduciaries , and sponsors who are adversely affected by an action of another ( other than the pbgc ) that violates the termination provisions may file suit in u.s. district court to enjoin the action or obtain other equitable relief .

employee organizations representing affected participants and beneficiaries are also able to file a claim , and the pbgc has the right to intervene in any action .

