bisphenol a ( bpa ) is a synthetic chemical compound produced in the united states in large quantities , approximately 2.3 billion pounds annually .

bpa is not found in nature .

two notable uses are in manufacturing certain forms of plastic: relatively hard , clear polycarbonate ( pc ) , and epoxy resins that are used to line food cans .

under certain conditions , bpa may migrate or leach ( i.e. , be released ) from pc containers and plastic - lined cans into the food or liquids they contain .

the widespread use of bpa and the potential for human exposure , together with accumulating scientific evidence about possible bpa toxicity , led the national toxicology program ( ntp ) at the national institutes of health ( nih ) to select bpa for a comprehensive review .

ntp released a draft "brief" on bpa in april 2008 , and a final monograph in september 2008 .

ntp's conclusions prompted some to call for federal restrictions on certain bpa uses , and sparked congressional and media interest in the past and current positions of the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

fda regulates bpa and other chemicals used in food containers , and until recently maintained that current uses of bpa are safe .

in august 2008 , fda reiterated this finding in a published risk assessment .

the finding prompted criticism from an agency advisory committee and others .

fda is now reviewing its bpa risk assessment for food exposures , and considering exposures from other products it regulates ( such as drugs and medical devices ) , in response to the committee's critique .

in january 2010 , fda announced that it is evaluating recent scientific evidence and conducting additional studies .

fda has announced no further subsequent action .

exposure to large amounts of bpa is acutely toxic to humans and animals , but typical levels of bpa exposure from plastics are low .

the possibility of human health effects from exposure to low doses of bpa is controversial , although animal evidence of possible harmful effects has been mounting for about 10 years .

it is clear that bpa is capable of interfering with the action of estrogen , an important regulator of reproduction and development .

 ( interference with hormonal action is often referred to as endocrine disruption . ) .

therefore , many recent studies have focused on the potential effects of low levels of bpa exposure on fetal or newborn rats or mice .

some of the developmental effects seen among rodents exposed to low doses of bpa include changes in brains and behaviors ; precancerous lesions in the prostate and mammary glands ; altered prostate and urinary tract development ; and early onset of puberty .

these low - dose experiments are difficult to conduct , in part because bpa is ubiquitous in the environment .

thus , different studies have produced different results .

scientists employed by bpa manufacturers and some independent contractors argue that the hundreds of studies conducted so far have produced inconsistent results and are insufficient justification for more stringent bpa regulation .

other scientists maintain that well - designed and executed studies of sufficient statistical power on sensitive strains of laboratory rodents have clearly demonstrated the toxicity of low doses of bpa in mammals , and justify actions to reduce exposure for potentially vulnerable human populations .

in 2001 , an expert workshop to evaluate the data on low - dose effects of endocrine disruptors concluded that biological effects have been shown to occur in rodents following exposure to some estrogenic compounds at very low levels .

the question remains whether those effects would adversely affect rodent health and are a useful predictor of human health impacts .

some researchers have proposed that low levels of bpa exposure may interfere with functions other than reproduction and development , potentially causing additional types of health effects .

the body of research in this area is less extensive than that into bpa's potential effects on reproductive hormones , but this appears to be an active field of investigation .

recent studies using animal models , human cells , or epidemiological data on humans have demonstrated effects on the regulation of insulin or other metabolic hormones , leading authors to posit that environmental bpa exposure may increase susceptibility to obesity and diabetes .

some investigators have called for long - term studies to determine whether high bpa levels are associated with specific health effects later on .

such long - term , prospective studies would provide stronger evidence , one way or the other , regarding a possible causal role of bpa on adverse health effects .

the so - called "low - dose hypothesis" is controversial because it appears to challenge a tenet of toxicology , that "the dose makes the poison. .

that is , at some low level of exposure , any potentially toxic chemical is innocuous , and conversely , above some other level of exposure , any substance may be toxic .

the low - dose hypothesis does not necessarily contradict the traditional tenet , but it states that some chemicals that are known to be toxic at high levels of exposure , and that may have no observable health effect ( using traditional toxicological methods ) , may nonetheless harm health at a still lower level of exposure .

in other words , endocrinologists argue , the relationship between the dose and effect is not always in the direction that more exposure is worse .

moreover , health effects from a low exposure may differ in type from effects observed at a higher dose .

for example , some scientists who specialize in the study of hormones say that endocrine - disrupting chemicals like bpa have been shown to cause adverse developmental effects at a level of exposure lower than that at which no adverse effects have been identified using traditional high - dose test methods , particularly when the lower - level exposure occurred at a critical point during fetal development .

such effects are plausible , these scientists argue , because hormones work by regulating or modulating ( i.e. , by stimulating or dampening ) responses of organs so as to maintain optimal physiological conditions that will vary depending on the tissue , dose , and timing in development .

normal responses of endocrine systems sometimes are regulated by very slight changes in hormone levels , and changes in these hormonal systems could be caused by low - dose exposure to external agents such as bpa .

bisphenol a exposure in the general population comes primarily from consumption of food and beverages .

the latest national survey by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) found bpa in the urine of more than 90% of the people studied , which included children six years of age and older and adults .

among these people , the highest average concentrations were found in children .

the ntp monograph estimates that the highest daily intakes of bpa occur in infants and children .

bpa has been found in human breast milk ; however , the ntp monograph estimates that infants who are formula - fed have higher daily bpa intake levels than those who are breast - fed , because there is more bpa in infant formula than in breast milk , and because bpa may increase when pc baby bottles are used for formula feeding , especially if the bottles are heated .

these bpa exposure levels in humans "are similar to levels of [bpa] associated with several 'low' dose laboratory animal findings of effects on the brain and behavior , prostate and mammary gland development , and early onset of puberty in females," according to the ntp monograph .

more recently , some scientists have concluded that sources of exposure other than food may be important .

for example , there have been calls for assessments of human exposure from other fda - regulated products such as drugs and medical devices .

some are especially concerned about medical devices , such as feeding and breathing tubes , that could leach the chemical into tissues , and , in particular , the possible health effects of such exposures in premature or critically ill infants , in whom such products may be used for long periods of time .

other potential sources of exposure are regulated by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

for example , in july 2010 , several studies indicated that skin contact with bpa in thermal paper coatings ( for example , the paper used for cash register receipts ) may contribute significantly to human exposure .

depending on its use , bpa is potentially regulated by various regulatory agencies , including the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) , the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , epa , and fda .

epa is responsible for protecting public health and the environment from unreasonable risks associated with production , interstate commerce , and use of industrial chemicals , including bpa , when they are not specifically regulated under other federal laws , such as those covering alcohol , food , drugs , or consumer products .

epa has made bpa the focus of a "chemical action plan" to gather information and possibly to regulate the chemical .

the plan was released in march 2010 .

it proposes to include bpa on a list of chemicals of concern , a list created under the authority of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) , section 5 ( b ) ( 4 ) , "on the basis of its potential for long - term adverse effects on growth , reproduction and development in aquatic species at concentrations similar to those found in the environment. .

a chemical of concern is "a substance that may present an unreasonable risk of injury to the environment. .

listed chemicals may be subject to additional rulemaking .

in addition , epa sent an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to the white house office of management and budget in december 2010 .

the notice requests comment on whether it should initiate rulemaking under section 4 ( a ) of tsca to develop data with respect to effects on the environment .

specifically , epa intends to request comment on requiring toxicity testing to determine the potential for bpa to cause endocrine - related adverse effects in environmental organisms at low concentrations .

the anprm will also seek comment on requiring sampling and monitoring of surface water , ground water , drinking water , soil , sediment , sludge , and landfill leachate in the vicinity of expected bpa releases to determine whether potentially sensitive organisms may currently be exposed to concentrations of bpa in the environment that are at or above levels of concern for adverse effects , including endocrine - related effects .

finally , epa has initiated "collaborative alternatives assessment activities" under its design for the environment ( dfe ) program .

these activities aim to reduce bpa releases and environmental exposures .

the first partnership is searching for alternatives to bpa in thermal paper .

the safety of most foods , thought to be the primary source of human exposure to bpa , is the responsibility of fda .

current bpa - containing pc polymers and epoxy resins used in food containers — such as baby bottles and infant formula cans , respectively — are regulated by fda as food additives , based on approvals issued more than 40 years ago .

under this approach , any manufacturer may use bpa - containing packaging without notifying fda of that use .

in its january 2010 announcement , fda said that it is considering regulating bpa - containing substances under its newer and more rigorous food contact notification program , under which manufacturers advise fda of specific uses , giving the agency an opportunity to review and consider safety information .

fda also announced that its national center for toxicological research was conducting additional studies on the effects of low - dose bpa exposure , to guide future regulatory efforts .

fda plans to complete a draft technical report on its research before the end of 2011 .

a final report is expected to be issued in 2012 .

fda is also responsible for the safety of drugs and medical devices .

in october 2008 , fda issued a request for information regarding bpa in all types of products it regulates .

subsequently , fda has asked its science board , which advises the commissioner , to review the agency's proposals to study the possible effects of exposure to bpa from drugs and medical devices , noting that there is limited information available at this time with which to balance possible bpa exposure risks against the therapeutic benefits provided by the drugs and devices .

although bpa has been in use in food contact substances and other applications for several decades , the debate among scientists , consumers , and government authorities about the safety of the chemical has escalated in recent years .

table 1 below provides a brief chronology of events , which are discussed in additional detail in this section .

in the 112 th congress , companion bills , h.r .

432 and s. 136 , would ban the use of bpa in food containers .

the 111 th congress considered several bills that addressed bpa , but none was enacted .

companion bills ( s. 593 / h.r .

1523 ) would have prohibited the use of bpa in food and beverage containers regulated by the fda .

a second pair of bills ( s. 753 / h.r .

4456 ) would have required the cpsc to prohibit bpa use in children's food and beverage containers under the federal hazardous substances act .

another bill ( h.r .

4341 ) would have required a warning label on any food container containing bpa .

another bill in the 111 th congress , h.r .

5820 , would have placed bpa on a priority list of chemicals for which epa would assess safety , authorize specific uses , and impose conditions under the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) .

activities under h.r .

5820 would have been required to ensure that a chemical would meet a stringent standard of safety , namely that the authorized use of the chemical under the conditions imposed "is not reasonably anticipated to present a risk of injury to health or the environment , … provides a reasonable certainty of no harm , including to vulnerable populations," taking into account aggregate and cumulative exposure to the chemical , and "protects the public welfare from adverse effects , including effects on the environment. .

for uses of bpa when no substitute was available , the bill would have allowed continued bpa use provided that conditions were imposed to reduce risk "to the greatest extent feasible. .

the house acted on another approach to bpa regulation on july 30 , 2009 , when it amended and approved h.r .

2749 , the food safety enhancement act of 2009 .

section 215 of the bill would have required fda to determine whether there was "a reasonable certainty of no harm for infants , young children , pregnant women , and adults , for approved uses of polycarbonate plastic and epoxy resin made with bisphenol a in food and beverage containers ... under the conditions of use prescribed in current [fda] regulations. .

fda would have been required to notify congress about any uses of bpa for which such a determination could not be made and how the agency would regulate such use to protect the public health .

the senate did not act on this bill .

senator dianne feinstein sought to amend comprehensive food safety legislation in the senate ( s. 510 ) with an amendment that would have banned the use of bpa in baby bottles and sippy cups , but facing substantial opposition , she abandoned that effort prior to the final vote on the bill on november 30 , 2010 .

there is scientific consensus that exposure to high levels of bpa can cause adverse reproductive effects in mammals .

there is growing concern among the public , and among many scientists , about low - dose bpa exposures , sharpened by the fact that such exposures within the general population are , without question , highest in infants .

the scientific debate about the safety of bpa is likely to continue , and further reaction in the policy , regulatory , and commercial arenas , as well as in congress , is expected .

