the administration proposes $825 million for discretionary conservation programs , down over $20 million from fy2007 and $160 million from fy2006 .

it also proposes changing mandatory programs , increasing outlays by $221 million to $4.0 billion .

for discretionary programs , $802 million is requested for conservation operations ( the largest discretionary program ) , which is an increase of about $42 million from fy2007 .

the request does not fund the grazing lands conservation initiative , which received $27 million in fy2007 .

among other discretionary programs , the request calls for no funding for watershed and flood prevention operations ( $0 enacted in fy2007 ) or the watersheds surveys and planning ( $6 million in fy2007 ) .

the request reduces the watershed rehabilitation program by about $25 million ( to $6 million ) , and reduces the resource conservation and development program by $36 million ( to $15 million ) .

the latter reduction is based on a proposal to reduce the natural resource conservation service ( nrcs ) staff assigned to this program from 454 to about 123 and adjust their responsibilities and duties .

mandatory conservation programs are funded and administered by two agencies .

programs of the nrcs would increase by $195 million to $2.0 billion in fy2008 .

the conservation reserve program ( crp ) in fsa would increase by $26 million to $2.0 billion .

the request reflects recommended changes in the administration's broader farm bill proposal , which proposes to consolidate some existing conservation programs .

the recommendations seek to consolidate several existing cost - share programs into a newly designed environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) that would include the current eqip , the ground and surface water conservation ( gswc ) program , the wildlife habitat incentives program ( whip ) , agricultural management assistance ( ama ) , the forest land enhancement program , and the klamath basin program .

the recommendations also seek to consolidate three existing easement programs into a new private lands protection program , including the farm and ranch lands protection program ( frpp ) , the grasslands reserve program ( grp ) , and the healthy forests reserve program .

the request also calls for additional fy2008 funding of $157 million for conservation funding activities that were in the 2002 farm bill , which expire at the end of fy2007 .

the request calls for $17 million in reductions for eqip to $1.0 billion in fy2008 .

increases are proposed for crp , the conservation security program ( up $57 million to $316 million ) , and the wetlands reserve program ( up $191 million to $455 million , and 250,000 acres ) .

the administration's budget request for fy2008 would provide a total of $2.31 billion for usda's research , extension , and economics mission area .

the request calls for $1.03 billion for usda's intramural science agency , the agricultural research service .

of that amount , $1.02 billion would support ars's research activities , and $16 million would support the planning and design of a biocontainment laboratory and consolidated poultry research facility in athens , georgia .

as in previous years , the administration proposes termination of more than 100 research projects that it does not consider to be of high priority , and redirects some of the funds to support research on avian influenza , bioterrorism protection , and obesity prevention .

the administration proposes $1.02 billion in fy2008 for the cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) , the agency that sends federal funds to land grant colleges of agriculture .

of the total , $562.5 million would support state - level research and teaching programs .

the request would increase the proportion of research funds awarded competitively , primarily by providing $256.5 million for the national research initiative ( nri ) competitive grants program , up from $190 million in fy2007 .

reductions in formula funds for state - level research in agriculture , forestry , and veterinary science would partially offset the proposed nri increase , with the exception of formula funds for the 1890 historically black land grant schools , which would receive a $1 million increase ( about +3% ) .

the administration proposes a $3 million increase , to $40.5 million , in funding for academic programs at the state level .

budget categories under which congress usually provides support for research projects at specific land grant institutions are targeted for a substantial decrease in funding , as in past budget requests .

the budget contains $431 million for the continuing education and outreach activities of the extension system in the states ( level with fy2007 ) .

formula funds for extension are proposed to increase slightly , while funding for budget categories under which congress traditionally provides support for extension projects at specific land grant institutions would decrease substantially .

the administration is requesting $82.5 million for usda's economic research service , an increase from $75 million in fy2007 .

for the national agricultural statistics service , the budget proposes $167.7 million , an increase from $146.5 million in fy2007 .

usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) conducts mandatory inspection of meat , poultry , and processed egg products to insure their safety and proper labeling .

the fy2008 budget proposes a $1.065 billion program level for fsis , of which $135 million would be funded by existing user fees , and $930 million by appropriation .

the $930 million is about $44 million above the enacted fy2007 level .

within the overall increase is $22 million to expand fsis activities related to usda food defense and biosurveillance .

the administration also proposes new user fees to offset another $96 million in annual appropriations , beginning in fy2009 .

for the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , the usda agency that protects u.s. agriculture from domestic and foreign pests and diseases , the fy2008 budget request proposes an appropriation of $946 million , an increase of about $100 million above the fy2007 appropriation .

the administration notes that aphis would receive $77 million of the $82 million slated for all usda efforts on highly pathogenic avian influenza ( particularly the h5n1 strain that has spread overseas ) .

the fy2008 budget requests a nearly constant appropriation for the agricultural marketing service ( ams ) , and a nearly $7 million increase ( +18% ) for the grain inspection , packers , and stockyards administration ( gipsa ) .

each agency receives user fees in addition to appropriations , and the administration again proposes new user fees for aphis ( $9 million ) , as well as for gipsa ( $22 million ) .

usda's international activities are funded by discretionary appropriations ( eg , foreign food assistance under p.l .

480 ) and by using the borrowing authority of the ccc ( eg , export credit guarantees , market development programs , and export subsidies ) .

combined , the total program value for fy2008 would be $4.6 billion , with $1.49 billion appropriated .

the fy2008 program level is $392 million more than fy2007 , with most of the difference accounted for by anticipated increases in the value of short - term export credit guarantees .

the administration requests an appropriation of $173 million for the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) to administer its international programs .

for p.l .

480 foreign food assistance , the administration requests a $1.2 billion appropriation ( $1.3 billion program value with carryover and reimbursements ) , all of it for title ii commodity donations .

the president's budget requests no funds for p.l .

480 title i loans , nor any for the bill emerson humanitarian trust , which currently holds 900,000 metric tons of wheat and $107 million in cash .

the budget assumes $163 million of ccc funds for the food for progress ( ffp ) program , which provides food aid to emerging democracies .

the absence of title i funds would effectively reduce spending on ffp .

for the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program , the request is for a constant $100 million appropriation .

proposed appropriations language ( and the administration's farm bill proposal ) would allow the administrator of usaid to use up to 25% of p.l .

480 title ii funds for local or regional purchases of commodities in food crises .

congress rejected a similar request in fy2006 and fy2007 .

ccc export credit guarantee programs secure commercial financing of u.s. agricultural exports .

the estimated fy2008 program level of $2.4 billion , all for short - term guarantees , reflects the u.s. response to the world trade organization ruling in the u.s. - brazil cotton dispute .

long - term guarantees are suspended , the fee structure is risk - based , and high - risk countries are eliminated .

the supplier credit guarantee program would receive $200 million "pending review," but usda's farm bill proposal would repeal the program due to defaults and evidence of fraud .

the market access program , which primarily promotes sales of high - value products , would receive $200 million of ccc funds ( the authorized level ) .

the foreign market development program , mainly promoting bulk commodities , would receive the farm bill - authorized $34.5 million .

three agencies are responsible for rural development: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) .

the mission area also administers the rural portion of the empowerment zones and enterprise communities initiative , the rural economic partnership zones , and the national rural development partnership .

for fy2008 , the administration is requesting a program level of $14.9 billion for direct and guaranteed loans , grants , and loan subsidies .

this program level would be supported by a requested appropriation of $2.05 billion ( including salaries and expenses ) .

the fy2008 request is approximately $23 million more in budget authority and $985 million more in program level than estimated for fy2007 .

the request is about $550 million less in budget authority and $719 million less in program level than for fy2006 .

the administration is requesting that the three funding accounts in the rural community advancement program ( rcap ) no longer be combined under rcap .

instead , each account would be funded separately with separate appropriations language .

for the community facilities account in rhs , the administration requests budget authority of $24.5 million and would terminate a grant program .

for water and waste water loan and grants , and the solid waste management programs in rus , the administration requests $503 million .

for the business development account in rbs , the request is $43.2 million in budget authority .

the administration requests no appropriation for direct loans for the distance learning and telemedicine program ; grants would remain at the fy2007 level of $25 million .

for broadband programs , the administration requests $300 million in direct loans ; no funding is requested for grants ( $9 million enacted in fy2007 ) .

the administration also requests terminating the "community connect" broadband program .

funding for the value - added producer grants program would decrease from fy2007 levels to $15 million ( 25% percent decrease ) , and give priority to special crop projects .

the administration also proposes terminating direct loans for the rural multifamily rental housing program and the single family housing program .

other programs proposed for termination include the empowerment zone and enterprise community ( ez / ec ) program , the community facility grant program , and the economic impact grants program .

some funding in the rural business account and the community facilities program from rcap , however , is targeted to ez / ec and rural economic areas program ( reap ) sites .

the administration also proposes eliminating rural business enterprise grants and rural business opportunity grants .

domestic food assistance represents the majority of the usda budget .

most of these programs are mandatory spending , including food stamps , the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , nutrition assistance grants for puerto rico and outlying areas , the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , and child nutrition programs ( school lunches ) .

in addition , two significant programs receive discretionary funding: the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( the wic program ) and the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) .

with the exception of the wic program and the csfp , the budget proposes "full funding" for domestic food assistance , based on projections of participation and inflation .

it also provides contingency funds for the food stamp and wic programs in case the administration's estimates prove off the mark .

fy2008 appropriations covering usda - funded domestic food aid would total $59.4 billion ( including $3 billion in contingency funding ) , an estimated increase of $2.5 billion from fy2007 .

projected total spending ( obligations ) would increase by slightly less ( $2.4 billion ) , to about $56.4 billion .

costs funded from the food stamp account are expected to rise by some $1.7 billion , and child nutrition spending would grow by $700 million — to $36.9 billion and $13.9 billion , respectively .

these increases are driven by expected new participants and benefit indexing .

separate from its fy2008 budget , the administration's 2007 farm bill recommendations include changes affecting food stamps , the fdpir , and child nutrition programs .

major food stamp proposals would loosen eligibility rules for those with retirement / education savings , increase benefits for those with dependent - care expenses , and limit eligibility for those receiving other public assistance ; the fdpir would receive added administrative funding .

for child nutrition programs , the administration has proposed new spending for fruit and vegetables .

fy2008 appropriations for the wic program would grow by about $200 million over the estimated amount available for fy2007 , to $5.4 billion .

the estimated net spending increase would be relatively minimal ( about $70 million ) because of a proposal to limit payments for wic nutrition services and administration , and to restrict wic eligibility for medicaid recipients .

in the case of the csfp , the administration's fy2008 budget proposes ( as it did , unsuccessfully , for fy2007 ) to terminate the program .

the more than $100 million savings from this action would be offset with some increased costs for food stamp outreach and benefits to former csfp recipients .

