in december 2008 , the united states and russia signed a protocol aimed at resolving various emerging trade issues between the two countries in order to continue u.s. livestock and poultry exports to russia through the end of 2009 .

by december 2009 , however , russia had escalated these trade issues in a series of actions that threatened to effectively shut out u.s. livestock and poultry exports .

these actions , in part , followed on russia's threats throughout 2008 and 2009 regarding its concerns about antimicrobial use in u.s. meat production .

efforts to resolve these issues were making progress in early 2010 .

in 2003 , when russia announced the imposition of quotas and trqs for meat and poultry , the united states and other meat - exporting wto member countries expressed stiff opposition , claiming that the restrictions would slow the process of russia's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the united states and others specifically argued that russia was violating the "standstill" principle , under which countries applying for wto membership are to refrain from imposing new trade restrictions during the accession process .

russia countered that it was imposing the restrictions to protect its domestic meat producers from import surges , a right that is enjoyed by wto members .

as noted earlier , in june 2005 the united states and russia signed an agreement on livestock and poultry trade , which set the u.s. share of russia's worldwide quota for poultry , and its share of the trqs for pork and beef , through the end of calendar 2009 ( table 2 ) .

the "2005 u.s. - russia agreement on trade in certain types of poultry , beef , and pork" also set rules for the allocation of veterinary permits and import licenses necessary to ship products to russia , and established mechanisms for resolving trade - related problems , including sanitary issues .

in november 2006 , the united states and russia reached a bilateral market access agreement associated with russia's request to join the wto .

the agreement provided for phased reductions in russia's tariffs for a range of u.s. export sectors , including agricultural products .

these commitments would come into force upon russia's accession to the wto .

the agreement allowed the united states to address a broad number of sensitive issues in its economic relations with russia , although it did not accomplish all of the original u.s. objectives .

with regard to agriculture , the u.s. - russia 2006 bilateral market access agreement , or side letters , committed russia to: permitting the immediate resumption of imports of de - boned beef , bone - in beef , and beef by - products from cattle younger than 30 months and allowing imports of beef and beef by - products from cattle of all ages , once the united states received a positive evaluation as a beef producer from the world organization for animal health ; accepting safety certifications by the u.s. department of agriculture's food safety inspection service ( fsis ) of pork and poultry slaughter , processing , and cold storage facilities to export products to russia , along with procedures to expedite the certification process ; accepting u.s. freezing treatments as an adequate measure to prevent trichinae infestation in pork to be sold for retail sale as well as for further processing ( russia previously had only allowed frozen pork to be imported for further processing ) ; and continuing to apply until 2009 the provisions of the 2005 u.s. - russia bilateral agreement on meat that established tariff - rate quotas , including in - and over - quota tariff rates , and to conduct bilateral negotiations on the treatment of meat imports after the agreement expires .

in december 2008 , the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announced that the united states and russia had signed a protocol to the 2005 agreement that was aimed at continuing u.s. poultry , pork , and beef exports there through the end of 2009 .

the protocol adjusted previously set 2009 quota levels for poultry and pork , but did not address other issues affecting u.s. - russia livestock and poultry trade .

the protocol to the 2005 agreement followed several months of uncertainty after russia blocked meat exports from several u.s. meat processing companies , as discussed in the following section .

russian officials also signaled that they might reduce u.s. permits to import poultry and pork under that country's quota system .

russian prime minister putin further indicated that the country might suspend several trade agreements reached during its wto accession negotiations , including those covering pork trqs as well as poultry quotas .

putin reportedly said that , under the agreements , russia had not received anything in return of benefit to the economy , including agriculture .

any suspensions could be reversed once russia joined the wto , he added .

despite these agreements , throughout 2008 , 2009 , and early 2010 , a number of issues continued to plague u.s. - russian livestock and poultry trade relations .

for example , according to the ustr report , in october 2008 russia's official veterinary service announced "that it no longer recognized usda's authority to inspect and relist [meat and poultry] plants that completed corrective actions. .

this announcement contradicts a key provision in the 2006 agreements that russia would accept u.s. safety certifications .

by december 2009 , russia had escalated these trade issues in a series of actions that threatened to effectively shut out u.s. livestock and poultry exports to russia .

information on current requirements for u.s. livestock and poultry exports to russia is available from usda .

among the concerns were russia's delisting of major u.s. livestock and poultry processors that had been eligible for import ( and were importing ) into russia , and russia's implementation of a ban prohibiting the use of chlorine in antimicrobial washes to kill surface pathogens on poultry .

as noted , russia already has further reduced its import quotas and trqs for u.s. livestock and poultry exports .

russia continued to cite food safety concerns , including but not limited to its findings of antimicrobial residues ( legal in the united states ) and the use of chlorine rinses on u.s. meat exports .

many u.s. market analysts viewed the delisting of u.s. plants as a precursor to additional actions regarding allowable import quotas for u.s. meat that could further constrain u.s. livestock and poultry exports to russia .

a discussion of these issues specifically as they relate to u.s. pork and poultry products follows .

members of congress with important poultry and meat industry constituents have been closely monitoring events and ongoing negotiations between the united states and russia to resolve these trade disputes .

several have weighed in with their concerns in communications with the administration .

for example , the chair and the ranking republican on the senate agriculture committee sent a january 15 , 2010 , letter to the president urging him "to fully engage all administration resources to address these agricultural trade issues , especially with respect to u.s. exports of pork , poultry , and beef. .

other members of congress have proposed alternative measures to address these types of issues .

in particular , in response to the most recent developments regarding antibiotic residues and chlorine rinses , representative slaughter has recommended that the united states take more proactive steps and consider legislation that she has introduced in h.r .

1549 ( preservation of antibiotics for medical treatment act of 2009 , pamta ) .

this bill aims to curtail the use of certain medically significant antibiotics in animal production , similar to legislation enacted in other countries .

a similar bill has been introduced in the senate ( s. 619 ) by senator reid ( for senator kennedy ) .

for more information on h.r .

1549 and s. 619 , see crs report r40739 , antibiotic use in agriculture: background and legislation .

