mine - resistant , ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicles are a family of vehicles produced by a variety of domestic and international companies .

they generally incorporate a "v" - shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) .

dod originally intended to procure three types of mraps .

these included category i vehicles , capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations ; category ii vehicles , capable of carrying up to 11 personnel and intended for a variety of missions such as supporting security , convoy escort , troop or cargo transport , medical , explosive ordnance disposal , or combat engineer operations ; and category iii vehicles , intended to be used primarily to clear mines and ieds , capable of carrying up to 13 personnel .

the army and marines first employed mraps in limited numbers in iraq and afghanistan in 2003 , primarily for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal ( eod ) operations .

these route clearance mraps quickly gained a reputation for providing superior protection for their crews , and some suggested that mraps might be a better alternative for transporting troops in combat than up - armored hmmwvs .

dod officials have stated that the casualty rate for mraps is 6% , making it "the most survivable vehicle we have in our arsenal. .

by comparison , the m - 1 abrams main battle tank was said to have a casualty rate of 15% , and the up - armored hmmwv , a 22% casualty rate .

as previously noted , many older mraps shipped to afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness .

if a large number of mraps are , in fact , not being used then a fundamental question is , why were they shipped to afghanistan in the first place ? .

were these vehicles shipped to afghanistan , as some say , for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and , if so , what is the total cost for these unused vehicles to be shipped and maintained in theater ? .

if these vehicles are not being used , is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of u.s. forces ? .

it was reported that pentagon agreed to loan 300 mraps in afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently fighting in afghanistan .

approximately 85 mraps are already out on loan to poland , romania , georgia , and the czech republic .

all countries that are loaned mraps can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles .

loaning unused mraps to coalition partners could not only help to reduce allied casualties but can also help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of these vehicles .

in august 2009 briefings to the house armed services committee air and land forces , and seapower and expeditionary forces subcommittees , the government accountability office ( gao ) noted that "the introduction of mrap , m - atv and eventually the jltv creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities ; a risk that needs to be managed. .

defense officials have also been asked if there is a need for the mrap / m - atv and jltv programs , as these programs share as many as 250 requirements .

while dod leadership notes that there are 450 additional requirements that the mraps and m - atvs cannot meet , thereby justifying the jltv program , some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs , particularly in light of anticipated defense budget cuts .

if the services continue to look for "the next best thing" in terms of tactical wheeled vehicles instead of committing to the m - atv and jltv programs , they could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the hmmwv fleet .

the use of larger and more lethal ieds by afghan insurgents has necessitated adding additional armor to m - atvs .

while this course of action is intended to provide additional protection for the vehicle's occupants , it might also result in a less maneuverable vehicle that might be too heavy for many afghan roads ( the main reason why many mraps deployed to afghanistan are not in use ) and perhaps more prone to roll over accidents .

congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified m - atvs in greater detail with dod to ensure that a proper balance between protection and operational utility is reached .

another consideration is whether unused mraps — even if less maneuverable than m - atvs — might be used on certain afghan routes that can accommodate their weight .

substituting mraps whenever operationally feasible might be a more timely and cost - effective option as opposed to dod's plans to arbitrarily uparmor approximately 7,000 m - atvs .

