the u.s. congress is contemplating a $700 billion government assistance package to arrest the financial crisis in the united states .

president bush argued that failure to enact legislation quickly could result in a wholesale failure of the u.s. financial sector .

as discussion of the administration's plan unfolded , however , questions in congress arose over issues of magnitude and management of the "bailout," the need for oversight , and the possibility that less costly and perhaps more effective alternatives might be available .

in this light , chile's response to its 1981-84 systemic banking crisis has been held up as one example .

the cost was comparable relative to the size of its economy to that facing the u.s. government today .

in 1985 , central bank losses to rescue financially distressed financial institutions were estimated to be 7.8% of gdp ( equivalent to approximately $1 trillion in the united states today ) .

the policy options chile chose had similarities as well as differences from those contemplated in the united states today .

their relevance is debatable , but they do highlight an approach that succeeded in eventually stabilizing and returning the chilean banking sector to health , while keeping the credit markets functioning throughout the crisis .

the seeds of the chilean financial crisis were much different than those in the united states .

nonetheless , in both cases , the financial sector became the primary problem , with policy makers concerned over the prospect of a system - wide collapse .

chile's problems originated from large macroeconomic imbalances , deepening balance of payments problems , dubious domestic policies , and the 1981-82 global recession that ultimately led to financial sector distress .

although most of these are not elements of the u.s. crisis , there are a number of similar threads woven throughout both cases .

broadly speaking , both countries had adopted a strong laissez - faire orientation to their economies and had gone through a period of financial sector deregulation in the years immediately prior to the crisis .

a group of scholars characterized chile's orientation toward the financial sector as the "radical liberalization of the domestic financial markets" and "the belief in the 'automatic adjustment' mechanism , by which the market was expected to produce a quick adjustment to new recessionary conditions without interference by the authorities. .

in both cases , given the backdrop of financial sector deregulation , a number of similar economic events occurred that ultimately led to a financial crisis .

first , real interest rates were very low , giving rise to a large expansion of short - term domestic credit .

with credit expansion came the rise in debt service , all resting on a shaky assumption that short - term rates would not change .

in both cases , but for different reasons , rates did rise , causing households and firms to fall behind in payments and , in many cases , to default on the loans .

the provision for loan losses was inadequate causing financial institutions to restrict credit .

soon , many found themselves in financial trouble or insolvent , resulting in the financial crisis .

chile's response may prove useful as policy makers evaluate options .

following the coup against socialist president salvador allende in 1973 , general augusto pinochet immediately re - privatized the banking system .

banking regulation and supervision were liberalized .

macroeconomic conditions and loose credit gave way to the economic "euphoria of 1980-81. .

the exuberance included substantial increases in asset prices ( reminiscent of a bubble ) and strong wealth effects that led to vastly increased borrowing .

the banking system readily encouraged such borrowing , using foreign capital , that because of exchange rate controls and other reasons , provided a negative real interest rate .

from 1979 to 1981 , the stock of bank credit to businesses and households nearly doubled to 45% of gdp .

this trend came to a sudden halt with the 1981-82 global recession .

the financial sector found itself suddenly in a highly compromised position .

weak bank regulations had allowed the financial sector to take on tremendous amounts of debt without adequate capitalization .

debt was not evaluated by risk characteristics .

most debt was commercial loans , but banks also carried some portion of consumer and mortgage debt .

as firms and households became increasingly financially stressed , and as asset prices plummeted , the solvency of national banks became questionable .

two issues would later be identified: the ability of borrowers to make debt payments , and more importantly , the reluctance of borrowers to do so given there was a broadly - held assumption that the government would intervene .

by november 1981 , the first national banks and financial institutions that were subsidiaries of conglomerates failed and had to be taken over by regulatory authorities .

most debt was short term and banks were in no position to restructure because they had no access to long - term funds .

instead , they rolled over short - term loans , capitalized the interest due , and raised interest rates .

this plan was described by one economist as an unsustainable "ponzi" scheme , and indeed was a critical factor in bringing down many banks as their balance sheets rapidly deteriorated .

from 1980 to 1983 , past - due loans rose from 1.1% to 8.4% of total loans outstanding .

the sense of crisis further deepened because many of the financial institutions were subsidiaries of conglomerates that also had control over large pension funds , which were heavily invested in bank time deposits and bank mortgage bonds .

in the end , although the roots of the banking crisis were different than those in the united states , the chilean government faced the possibility of a complete failure of the financial sector as credit markets contracted .

the central bank of chile took control of the crisis by enacting three major policies intended to maintain liquidity in the financial system , assist borrowers , and strengthen lender balance sheets .

these were: 1 ) debt restructuring for commercial and household borrowers ; 2 ) purchases of nonperforming loans from financial institutions ; and 3 ) the expeditious sale , merger , or liquidation of distressed institutions .

the overriding goal of a strategy to correct systemic crisis in the financial sector is to ensure the continued functioning of credit markets .

chile succeeded in accomplishing this goal and restoring a crisis - ridden banking system to health within four years .

the single most important lesson of the chilean experience was that the central bank was able to restore faith in the credit markets by maintaining liquidity and bank capital structures through the extension of household and consumer loan maturities , the temporary purchase of substandard loans from the banks , and the prompt sale and liquidation of insolvent institutions .

substandard loans remained off bank balance sheets until the viable institutions could provision for their loss from future profits .

other losses were covered by the government .

in addition , a number of other insights emerged from the chilean crisis: the market could not resolve a system - wide failure , particularly in the case where there was a high expectation of a government bailout .

the expectation of a bailout became self - fulfilling and increased the cost .

appropriate prudential supervision and regulation were critical for restoring health and confidence to the financial system .

observers lamented the a priori lack of attention to proper regulation .

private institutions that survived shared in the cost and responsibility to resolve the crisis to the apparent long - term benefit of the financial sector .

the fiscal cost of the three policies discussed above was high .

liquidating insolvent institutions had the highest cost followed by the purchase of non - performing loans and rescheduling of domestic debts .

the strategy , however , is widely recognized as having allowed the financial system and economy to return to a path of stability and long - term growth .

