the commerce clause provides that "congress shall have power ... to regulate commerce ... among the several states...." the supreme court has long held that the clause prohibits states from unduly burdening interstate commerce even in the absence of federal regulation .

this restriction , known as the dormant or negative commerce clause , "reflect[s] a central concern of the framers" that "the new union would have to avoid the tendencies toward economic balkanization that had plagued relations among the colonies and later among the states under the articles of confederation. .

thus , the dormant commerce clause "prevent[s] a state from retreating into economic isolation or jeopardizing the welfare of the nation as a whole , as it would do if it were free to place burdens on the flow of commerce across its borders that commerce wholly within those borders would not bear. .

a further rationale is that out - of - state entities subject to any burden are likely not in a position to use the state's political process to seek relief .

the dormant commerce clause prohibits state laws that discriminate against interstate commerce .

thus , while a state law that "regulates even - handedly to effectuate a legitimate local public interest" and has "only incidental" effect on interstate commerce is constitutionally permissible "unless the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the putative local benefits" ( "the pike test" ) , a discriminatory state law is "virtually per se invalid. .

traditionally , such laws have only been permissible if they meet the high standard of "advanc[ing] a legitimate local purpose that cannot be adequately served by reasonable nondiscriminatory alternatives. .

it would appear , therefore , that the bond taxing schemes used by almost all of the states , which exempt the interest on state - issued bonds while taxing the interest on other states' bonds , are facially discriminatory and should be subject to a high level of scrutiny .

however , a wrinkle to this analysis was added in april 2007 when the supreme court decided a case , united haulers ass ' n , inc. v. oneida - herkimer solid waste mgmt .

authority , in which a plurality of the court subjected a facially discriminatory state law to a lower standard of scrutiny because it benefitted a public entity , as opposed to an in - state private entity .

the challenged law required trash haulers to deliver waste to a processing facility owned by a public entity .

the court had previously struck down a similar law , but distinguished the two cases because the processing facility in the prior case was privately owned while the united haulers facility was publicly owned .

in united haulers , the court found "[c]ompelling reasons" for distinguishing between state laws that favor governmental units and those that favor in - state private entities over their competitors .

the court , stating that "any notion of discrimination assumes a comparison of substantially similar entities," reasoned that state and local governments are not substantially similar to private entities due to their public welfare responsibilities .

these responsibilities , the court explained , meant that laws favoring governmental units have "any number of legitimate goals," while laws favoring in - state private entities generally represent "simple economic protectionism. .

thus , the court reasoned , such laws should not be viewed with "equal skepticism. .

the court explained that treating them equally "would lead to unprecedented and unbounded interference by the courts with state and local government," which was particularly inappropriate when the challenged law addressed a traditional government function such as waste disposal .

a majority of the court could not agree on the standard under which to examine laws favoring public entities .

a plurality of four justices stated that the proper standard was the pike test — that is , whether "the burden imposed on interstate commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the putative local benefits. .

the plurality did not find the challenged law's burden to be excessive to its benefits , which included providing health and environmental benefits and an effective way to finance waste - disposal services .

the dormant commerce clause is not implicated when a state acts as a market participant as opposed to a market regulator .

this is because the "commerce clause responds principally to state taxes and regulatory measures impeding free private trade in the national marketplace," and "[t]here is no indication of a constitutional plan to limit the ability of the states themselves to operate freely in the free market. .

the market participant doctrine does not apply when the state is acting in its governmental capacity by assessing and computing taxes .

it appears only two cases have addressed whether state laws taxing interest earned on bonds issued by other states while exempting interest earned on bonds issued by that state violate the commerce clause .

in 1994 , an ohio appellate court held in shaper v. tracy that such treatment was constitutional .

in 2006 , the kentucky court of appeals held the opposite in kentucky department of revenue v. davis .

in november 2007 , the u.s. supreme court heard oral arguments in davis .

congress's authority under the commerce clause has been described as plenary and limited only by other constitutional provisions .

congress may , therefore , regulate by expressly authorizing the states to take an action that would otherwise be an unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce .

thus , if the court were to hold that kentucky's taxing scheme violates the dormant commerce clause , it appears congress could authorize such tax treatment so long as it did not violate any other constitutional provision .

