section 203 of the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) prohibits corporate or labor union treasury funds from being spent for "electioneering communications. .

bcra defines "electioneering communication" as any broadcast , cable , or satellite transmission made within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election ( sometimes referred to as the "blackout periods" ) that refers to a candidate for federal office and is targeted to the relevant electorate .

in a 2003 decision , mcconnell v. federal election commission ( fec ) , the u.s. supreme court upheld section 203 of bcra against a first amendment facial challenge even though the provision regulates not only campaign speech or "express advocacy," ( speech that expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate ) , but also "issue advocacy," ( speech that discusses public policy issues , while also mentioning a candidate ) .

specifically , the court determined that the speech regulated by section 203 was the "functional equivalent" of express advocacy .

on july 26 , 2004 , wisconsin right to life ( wrtl ) , a corporation that accepts contributions from other corporations , began broadcasting advertisements exhorting viewers to contact senators feingold and kohl to urge them to oppose a senate filibuster to delay and block consideration of federal judicial nominations .

wrtl planned to run the ads throughout august 2004 and to finance them with its general treasury funds , thereby running afoul of section 203 , as such ads would have been broadcast within the 30-day period prior to the september 14 , 2004 , primary .

anticipating that the ads would be illegal "electioneering communications," but believing that they nevertheless had a first amendment right to broadcast them , wrtl filed suit against the fec , seeking declaratory and injunctive relief and alleging that section 203's prohibition was unconstitutional as applied to the ads and any future ads that they might plan to run .

just prior to the bcra 30-day blackout period , a three - judge district court denied a preliminary injunction , finding that mcconnell v. fec left no room for such an "as - applied" challenge .

accordingly , wrtl did not broadcast its ads during the blackout period , and the district court subsequently dismissed the complaint in an unpublished opinion .

on appeal , in wisconsin right to life , inc. v. fec ( wrtl i ) , the supreme court vacated the lower court judgment , finding that by upholding section 203 against a facial challenge in mcconnell , "we did not purport to resolve future as - applied challenges. .

on remand , after permitting four members of congress to intervene as defendants , the three - judge district court granted wrtl summary judgment , determining that section 203 was unconstitutional as applied to wrtl's ads .

it concluded that the ads were genuine issue ads , not express advocacy or its "functional equivalent" under mcconnell , and held that no compelling interest justified their regulation .

the fec appealed .

as a result of the supreme court's decision in wrtl ii , application of the federal law prohibiting corporate and labor union treasury funds from being spent on ads that are broadcast 30 days before a primary and 60 days before a general election has been limited .

that is , only those ads that are susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other than an exhortation to vote for or against a candidate can be regulated .

while the court's ruling was careful not to overrule explicitly mcconnell v. fec where it upheld this portion of the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) , wrtl ii seems to indicate that the fec's ability to regulate the "electioneering communication" ban has nonetheless been circumscribed .

in a case currently pending before the u.s. supreme court , citizens united v. federal election commission ( fec ) , the constitutionality of the bcra "electioneering communication" provision is once again under consideration .

on march 24 , 2009 , the supreme court heard oral argument in this case and again on september 9 , after ordering the parties to file supplemental briefs addressing whether the court should overrule its earlier holdings in austin v. michigan chamber of commerce and the portion of its decision in mcconnell v. fec addressing the facial validity of section 203 of bcra , the "electioneering communication" prohibition .

a decision in this case is expected in early 2010 .

