unemployment compensation ( uc ) is a joint federal - state program financed by federal payroll taxes under the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) and by state payroll taxes under state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) .

these revenues are deposited into the appropriate account within the federal unemployment trust fund ( utf ) .

originally , the intent of the uc program , among other goals , was to help counter economic fluctuations such as recessions .

this intent is reflected in the current uc program's funding and benefit structure .

when the economy grows , uc program revenue rises through increased tax revenues .

at the same time , uc program spending falls because fewer workers are unemployed .

the effect of collecting more taxes while decreasing spending on benefits dampens demand in the economy .

it also creates a surplus of funds , or a reserve fund , for the uc program to draw upon during a recession .

these reserve balances are credited in the state's account within the utf .

during an economic slowdown or recession , uc tax revenue falls and uc program spending rises as more workers lose their jobs and receive uc benefits .

the increased amount of uc payments to unemployed workers dampens the economic effect of lost earnings by injecting additional funds into the economy .

the federal unemployment account ( fua ) is the federal loan account within the utf .

the fua is primarily funded from the statutory transfer of excess revenue from the extended unemployment compensation account ( euca ) being deposited into the fua .

if needed , the fua may borrow funds from other federal accounts within the utf or from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

from fy2009 to fy2015 , the fua had to borrow funds from the u.s. treasury to finance loans to the state accounts .

1 .

revenue from additional futa taxes paid by employers when a reduced credit against federal unemployment taxes exists because the state has an outstanding unpaid loan from fua is deposited into the fua .

 ( see the discussion below on " federal tax increases on outstanding loans through credit reductions " for a more detailed explanation of these additional taxes. ) .

2 .

federal law allows the fua to borrow available funds from the other federal ( euca and esaa ) accounts within the utf .

3 .

federal law also authorizes appropriations as loans from the general fund of the u.s. treasury if balances in the federal accounts are insufficient to cover their expenditures .

 ( for example , if the states' borrowing needs exceed the available fua balance. ) .

such appropriations require discretionary action by congress and the president .

once a state recognizes that it does not have sufficient funds to pay uc benefits , the mechanism for receiving a loan from the utf is straightforward .

the state's governor ( or the governor's designee ) must submit a letter requesting that the u.s. labor secretary advance funds to the state account within the utf .

once the loan is approved by the u.s. labor secretary , the funds are placed into the state account in monthly increments .

states with outstanding loans from the utf must repay them fully by the november 10 following the second consecutive january 1 on which the state has an outstanding loan .

if the outstanding loan is not repaid by that time , the state will face an effective federal tax increase .

thus , a state may have approximately 22 months ( if borrowing began on january 1 ) to 34 months ( if borrowing began on january 2 ) to repay the loan without a federal tax increase , depending on when it obtained the outstanding loan .

as of january 29 , 2019 , approximately $68.3 million in federal utf loans to the states were outstanding .

a current list of states with outstanding loans may be found at the department of labor's ( dol's ) website , https: / / oui.doleta.gov / unemploy / budget.asp .

since april 1 , 1982 ( p.l .

97-35 as amended ) , states have been charged interest on new loans that are not repaid by the end of the fiscal year in which they were obtained .

 ( before april 1 , 1982 , states could receive these loans interest free. ) .

the interest is the same rate as that paid by the federal government on state reserves in the utf for the quarter ending december 31 of the preceding year but not higher than 10% per annum .

the interest rate for calendar year loans is determined by section 1202 ( b ) ( 4 ) of the social security act .

the interest rate for a calendar year is the earnings yield on the utf for the quarter ending december 31 of the previous calendar year .

the u.s. treasury department calculated the fourth - quarter earnings yield in 2018 to be 2.3081% .

thus , loans made in calendar year 2019 are subject to an interest rate of 2.3081% .

states may not pay the interest directly or indirectly from suta revenue or funds in their state account within the utf .

if a state does not repay the interest , or if it pays the interest with funds from suta taxes , dol is required by federal law to refuse to certify that state's program as being in compliance with federal law .

not being in compliance with federal unemployment law would mean that the state would not be eligible to receive administrative grants and employers in that state would not receive the state unemployment tax credit in the calculation of their federal unemployment taxes .

states may borrow funds without interest from the utf during the year .

to receive these interest - free loans , the states must meet five conditions: 1 .

the states must repay the loans by september 30 .

2 .

for those repaid ( by september 30 ) loans to maintain their interest - free status , there cannot be any loans made to that state in october , november , or december of the calendar year of such an interest - free loan .

if loans are made in the last quarter of the calendar year , the "interest - free" loans made in the previous fiscal year will retroactively accrue interest charges .

3 .

the states must meet funding goals relating to their account in the utf , established under regulations issued by dol .

in addition to these first three requirements , the phase - in of two new requirements began in 2014 .

the full effect of the requirements began in 2019 .

4 .

states must have had at least one year in the past five calendar years before the year in which advances are taken in which the average high cost multiple ( ahcm ) was greater than or equal to 1.0 .

5 .

additionally , states must meet two criteria for maintenance - of - tax effort in every year from the most recent year the ahcm was at least 1.0 and the year in which loans are taken .

a .

the average state unemployment tax rate ( total state unemployment tax amount collected over total taxable wages ) was at least 80% of the prior year's rate .

b .

the average state unemployment tax rate was at least 75% of the average benefit - cost ratio over the preceding five calendar years , where the benefit - cost ratio for a year is defined as the amount of benefits and interest paid in the year divided by the total covered wages paid in the year .

 table 2 lists outstanding state loans .

 ( at this time , only the u.s. virgin islands has an outstanding loan. ) .

the table also includes information on accrued interest payments for fy2019 .

the third column provides information on whether the state was subject to a credit reduction for tax year 2018 .

the last column provides the net futa tax faced by employers in each state that had an outstanding loan .

