in the anglo - american linguistic tradition , the word "charter" has been used to refer to many legal writs , including "articles of agreement," "founding legislation," "contracts," "articles of incorporation," and more .

the varied uses of this term to refer to so many different legal writs may reflect the term's etymology .

"charter" is derived from the latin "charta" or , perhaps , the ancient greek "chartês," both of which mean "paper. .

as used in federal statutory law , the term "charter" usually has carried a much more specific meaning .

a congressional or federal charter is a federal statute that establishes a corporation .

such a charter typically provides the following characteristics for the corporation: ( 1 ) name ; ( 2 ) purpose ( s ) ; ( 3 ) duration of existence ; ( 4 ) governance structure ( eg , executives , board members , etc .

 ) ; ( 5 ) powers of the corporation ; and ( 6 ) federal oversight powers .

beyond conferring the powers needed to achieve its statutorily assigned goal , a charter usually provides a corporation with a set of standard operational powers: the power to sue and be sued ; to contract and be contracted with ; to acquire , hold , and convey property ; and so forth .

many of the original 13 colonies were established by royal charters , and both colonies and states incorporated governmental and private entities before the united states was established .

however , at the constitutional convention in philadelphia in 1787 , the founders disagreed over the wisdom of giving the proposed federal government the power to charter corporations .

nevertheless , congress chartered its first corporation — the bank of the united states — in february of 1791 ( 1 stat .

192 section 3 ) .

any dispute over congress's power to charter corporations was effectively put to an end by the supreme court's decision in mcculloch v. maryland in 1819 ( 17 u.s. ( 4 wheat. ) .

315 ) .

the court ruled that incorporation could be a "necessary and proper" means for the federal government to achieve an end assigned to it by the u.s. constitution .

after chartering the national bank , though , for the next century , congress issued charters mostly in its role as manager of the affairs of the district of columbia ( article i , section 8 , clause 17 ) .

the district of columbia , which became the seat of the federal government in 1790 , had neither a general incorporation law nor a legislature that could grant charters .

so it fell to congress incorporate the district's corporations .

thus , congress issued charters to establish the office of the mayor and the "council of the city of washington" in 1802 ( 2 stat .

195-197 ) and to found the washington city orphan asylum in 1828 ( 6 stat .

381 ) .

congress , however , also used charters to establish entities of national significance , such as the transcontinental union - pacific railroad in 1862 ( 12 stat .

489 ) .

in the 20 th century , congress began chartering a large number of corporations for diverse purposes .

in part , congress's resort to the corporate device was a response to a host of national crises , such as the two world wars ( which required the production of an enormous number of goods ) and the great depression ( which revealed the limited power the federal government had over the national economy ) .

corporations , it was thought , were by nature better suited than typical government agencies to handle policy areas that required commercial - type activities ( for example , selling electrical power , as the tennessee valley authority does ) .

while each congressionally chartered corporation is unique insofar as it is fashioned for a very particular purpose , these entities still may be sorted into rough types .

an elementary division is between those chartered as nonprofit corporations versus those that are not .

table 1 provides a further — but not exhaustive — typology of congressionally chartered corporations .

congressionally chartered corporations have raised diverse issues for congress , including ( 1 ) title 36 corporations' membership practices ; ( 2 ) prohibitions on title 36 corporations engaging in "political activities" ; ( 3 ) confusion over which corporations are governmental and which are private ; and ( 4 ) federal management of these corporations .

the membership practices of some title 36 corporations periodically have been a subject of concern .

in 2011 , congress revised the membership criteria of the blue star mothers of america , inc. ( 36 u.s.c .

305 ) by enacting a statute ( p.l .

112-65 ; 125 stat .

767 ) .

the change , which the organization had advocated , liberalized the membership requirements so as to enable the organization to admit a larger number of members .

similarly , congress amended the charter of the military order of the purple heart of the united states of america , incorporated , in 2007 to make its membership requirements less stringent ( p.l .

110-207 ; 122 stat .

719 ) .

some individuals had complained that the organization's criteria for membership were too narrow .

in 2005 , the congressionally chartered american gold star mothers ( agsm ) refused to admit to membership a non - u.s. citizen .

some individuals and members of the media called upon congress to intervene and rectify this situation .

ultimately , the group used its own authorities to address the issue .

approximately 100 title 36 corporations exist , thus congress again may find itself having to consider legislation to contend with the membership issues of such organizations .

more than half of the title 36 corporations' charters include prohibitions against various "political activities. .

for example , the charter of the united states submarine veterans of world war ii , states the following: "political activities .

the corporation or a director or officer as such may not contribute to , support , or otherwise participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation" ( 36 u.s.c .

220707 ( b ) ) .

other title 36 corporations' charters forbid them from promoting the candidacy of an individual seeking office ( eg , the american legion ) , or contributing to , supporting , or assisting a political party or candidate ( eg , amvets ) .

congressionally chartered organizations that are subject to political activities restrictions occasionally have asked congress to remove these restrictions from their charters .

for example , on may 21 , 2008 , representative james p. moran introduced h.r .

6118 ( 110 th congress ) , which would have removed the political activities prohibition from the charter of gold star wives .

representative moran stated that this prohibition against attempting to influence legislation hurt the organizations "advocacy on behalf of military families. .

he also said that the prohibition was "punitive , not practically enforceable , and potentially an unconstitutional infringement upon the [first amendment] freedom to petition the government. .

the bill was referred to the subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law , which took no action on it .

having political activities restrictions in congressional charters raises at least three issues: ( 1 ) should any or all title 36 corporations be forbidden from engaging in political activities ? .

 ( 2 ) if some or all of them should be so restricted , which activities ought to be defined as political ? .

 ( 3 ) should title 36 corporations only have the same restrictions on their political activities as purely private sector not - for - profit corporations ? .

congress is free to draft corporate charters to include whatever elements it deems appropriate .

so , for example , the charter of the securities investor protection corporation ( 15 u.s.c .

78 ( ccc ) et seq. ) .

looks very different from that of the american national red cross ( 36 u.s.c .

3001 et seq. ) .

the power to craft corporations ad hoc , however , has produced confusion when corporations are established quasi governmental entities ( i.e .

entities that have both governmental and private sector attributes ) .

this distinction is not without consequence ; governmental entities operate under different legal authorities and restrictions than do private sector corporations .

for example , federal agencies typically must follow many or all of the federal government's general management laws .

thus , confusion arose over the national veterans' business development corporation ( nvbdc ; 15 u.s.c .

657 ( c ) ) .

the department of justice declared it to be a government corporation in march 2004 .

some members of congress disagreed .

the 2004 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 , division k , section 146 ) attempted to dispel the confusion by stating that the nvbdc was "a private entity" that "is not an agency , instrumentality , authority , entity , or establishment of the united states government. .

in some instances , federal courts have been asked to intervene and make a determination of a corporation's status .

the management of government corporations has been made difficult by a few factors .

first , no single federal department or office is charged with overseeing the activities of all congressionally chartered corporations .

second , many of these corporations were established independently of any department and have few , if any , federal appointees on their boards or in their executive ranks .

this separation of corporations from departments may make the federal management of corporations more difficult .

third , the government corporation control act ( 31 u.s.c .

9101-9110 ) provides many tools for managing chartered corporations' activities .

however , congress has excepted many corporations from some or all of the act's provisions .

finally , there is the matter of perpetual succession .

in centuries past , states and municipalities often limited the duration of a charter ; a corporation would expire unless the sovereign renewed its charter .

this practice has fallen by the wayside ; usually , congress charters entities to have "perpetual succession. .

this means that a corporation may continue to operate , whether it is effective or not , until a law is enacted to abolish it — which seldom occurs .

long - lived chartered entities have been accused of taking business from the private sector , moving into areas of business or activities outside the bounds of their charters , and developing networks of influence to protect themselves from abolition .

