the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) provides a comprehensive federal scheme for the regulation of private - sector employee benefit plans .

one of the primary goals in enacting erisa was to "protect ... the interests of participants and ... beneficiaries" of employee benefit plans , and assure that participants receive promised benefits from their employers .

to this end , erisa "provid[es] for appropriate remedies , sanctions , and ready access to the federal courts. .

an integral part of erisa's enforcement scheme is erisa section 502 ( a ) , which allows private parties as well as government entities to bring various civil actions to enforce provisions of erisa .

in general , erisa regulates two types of pension plans , defined benefit plans and defined contribution plans .

a defined benefit plan is a plan under which an employee is promised a specified future benefit , traditionally an annuity beginning at retirement .

in a defined benefit plan , the employer bears the investment risk and is responsible for any shortfalls .

by contrast , a defined contribution plan provides each participant with an individual account that accrues benefits based on amounts contributed to the account by both the employer and the employee .

the employee bears the investment risk , and thus the value of the account at the time of retirement is unknown .

erisa subjects both defined benefit and defined contribution plans to a number of requirements , including requirements for fiduciary responsibility .

in larue , the plaintiff , a participant in a 401 ( k ) plan administered by his former employer , requested that plan administrators change an investment in his individual account .

the plan administrators failed to make this change , and the individual's account allegedly suffered losses of approximately $150,000 .

larue brought an action against his former employer and the 401 ( k ) plan , claiming the plan administrator breached his fiduciary duty by neglecting to properly follow the investment instructions .

larue brought a claim in district court under erisa section 502 ( a ) ( 3 ) , which permits a participant to bring a civil action to enjoin any act or practice which violates erisa or the terms of the plan , or obtain "appropriate equitable relief" for these violations .

the participant argued that because the defendants failed to invest the money as he directed , his account was depleted and he was entitled to receive "make - whole" or "other equitable relief" under section 502 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

the district court dismissed the participant's claims , holding that because the defendant did not possess any of the funds belonging to the participant , the relief the participant sought was monetary damages , and this remedy was not available to the plaintiff as "equitable relief" under section 502 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

larue appealed the decision , arguing to the fourth circuit court of appeals that he should be able to recoup losses under both 502 ( a ) ( 3 ) and 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) of erisa .

the court affirmed the district court's decision with regard to section 502 ( a ) ( 3 ) , finding that the make - whole relief the participant sought could not be characterized as "equitable" relief .

with regard to section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) , the court found that because the argument regarding section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) was raised for the first time on appeal , the argument was waived .

however , the court did discuss the merits of the section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) claim .

relying on the russell case , the fourth circuit held that larue's claim failed because section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) provides remedies only for an entire plan , not for an individual's account .

the court focused on the idea that the loss was personal to the defendant and was suffered by him alone .

while the court acknowledged that the participant's plan account was indeed part of the "entire plan," the court found no basis to interpret the statute in this manner , and claimed that such an interpretation could undermine congress's intent to limit the scope of relief under erisa .

given that the plaintiff sought to recover losses only for himself , the participant could not sue under section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

the supreme court rejected the fourth circuit's decision with respect to section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) , finding that "although â§502 ( a ) ( 2 ) does not provide a remedy for individual injuries distinct from plan injuries , that provision does authorize recovery for fiduciary breaches that impair the value of plan assets in a participant's individual account. .

the department of labor , writing an amicus brief in larue , had argued for this result .

in explaining the holding , justice stevens , writing for the majority , distinguished larue from the russell case in two ways .

first , the court explained that the type of fiduciary misconduct occurring in larue violated "principal statutory duties" imposed by erisa that "relate to the proper plan management , administration , and investment of fund assets. .

conversely , in russell , the fiduciary's breach ( i.e .

 , a delay in processing a benefit claim ) fell outside of these principal duties .

second , the court found that in russell , the emphasis placed on protecting the "entire plan" from fiduciary breach under section 409 applies to defined benefit plans , which were the norm at the time of the case .

however , as the supreme court noted in larue , defined contribution plans are more popular today , and the "entire plan" language in russell does not apply to these plans .

the court explained that for defined benefit plans , fiduciary misconduct would not affect an individual entitlement to a benefit unless the misconduct detrimentally affected the entire plan .

by contrast , "for defined contribution plans ... fiduciary misconduct need not threaten the solvency of the entire plan to reduce benefits below the amount that participants would otherwise receive. .

the court went on to note that "whether a fiduciary breach diminishes plan assets payable to all participants and beneficiaries , or only to persons tied to particular individual accounts , it creates the kinds of harms that concerned the draftsmen of â§409. .

although all of the justices agreed on the outcome of the larue case , they disagreed as to the reasoning behind it .

chief justice roberts , joined by justice kennedy , wrote a concurring opinion suggesting that it is "at least arguable" that a claim such as the one made in larue should be evaluated not as a breach of fiduciary duty claim , but as a claim for benefits brought under section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of erisa .

justice roberts pointed to the fact that allowing a section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) action to be brought as a claim under section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) could allow plaintiffs to circumvent certain protections that exist for plan administrators under section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) .

for example , as justice roberts pointed out , most courts recognize that before a plaintiff can bring a claim for benefits under section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) , that a plaintiff has to exhaust the administrative remedies available under the plan before filing suit .

the extra protections for a plan and its administrators , justice roberts explains , encourage employers and others to offer benefits to employees .

justice thomas , writing a separate concurrence joined by justice scalia , found the majority's reliance on "trends in the pension market" and the "concerns of erisa's drafters" to be misplaced .

justice thomas concluded that the participant had a legitimate claim based on the "unambiguous text" of sections 409 and 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

justice thomas articulated that losses to the participant's individual 401 ( k ) account were losses to the plan , because assets in the participant's account were plan assets .

a defined contribution plan , the justice points out , is not a "collection of unrelated accounts. .

these plans are "essentially the sum of [their] parts" and that losses to an individual account must be losses to the plan under erisa .

as has been pointed out , the larue case affirmed that individuals participating in defined contribution plans may bring a claim in the event that a plan fiduciary's inappropriate actions create losses to an individual's account .

while some commentators praised the larue decision for offering protection to individuals in 401 ( k ) plans , others have suggested that the case will likely lead to an increase in litigation of claims by 401 ( k ) participants who have suffered individual account losses .

one question arising from the larue decision is the implications of justice roberts's concurrence .

courts may be faced with the issue of whether the availability of relief under section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) affects a participant's ability to bring a claim under section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

another question is whether , under section 502 ( a ) ( 2 ) , a participant is required to exhaust administrative remedies provided by a plan before filing suit .

this question was raised in a footnote in the majority opinion , but was not answered by the court .

