following the end of the second world war , the allied powers established the international tracing service ( its ) in 1947 "for the purpose of tracing missing persons and collecting , classifying , preserving and rendering accessible to governments and interested individuals the documents relating to germans and non - germans who were interned in national - socialist concentration camps or to non - germans who were displaced as a result of the second world war. .

since its inception , its has assembled archives of some 50 million holocaust - and post - war - era documents in bad arolsen , germany relating to approximately 17.5 million civilian victims of germany's national socialist ( nazi ) regime .

experts estimate that roughly one quarter of the materials relate to jews persecuted by the regime .

after the 1954 repeal of the occupation statute in germany , an international commission of nine member states ( belgium , the federal republic of germany , france , israel , italy , luxembourg , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and the united states ) charged the its with continuing its mission as a missing persons tracing service and caretaker of the archives in bad arolsen under the neutral auspices of the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) .

in the so - called bonn accords of 1955 , the international commission established the oversight and administrative structure under which its continues to function today: a swiss delegate of the icrc , accountable both to the icrc and the eleven - member international commission , oversees its's day - to - day operations and reports to the commission at its annual meetings ; germany has provided and continues to provide its's operating budget .

its officials traditionally administered the service based on an understanding that its was established to act primarily as a tracing service for victims of nazi war crimes .

to this end , access to information in the bad arolsen archives had been limited almost exclusively to civilian victims of such crimes and their descendants .

although they were not granted direct access to the archives , victims and their descendants have had the right to request information pertaining to their individual cases .

before november 2007 , materials in the archives were not available for historical research .

its claims to have provided approximately 11 million written responses to individual requests for information since its inception .

however , before 2006 , the tracing service was often criticized by survivors , their families , and others who alleged that the service left hundreds of thousands of requests unanswered and that it often provided inadequate or incomplete information to survivors and their descendants .

criticism of its heightened in 2000 and 2001 as the service struggled to handle a dramatic increase in requests from people seeking documentation for compensation from funds made available by the german government to survivors of nazi slave and forced labor camps .

much of the criticism focused on perceived mismanagement and neglect on the part of its's long - time former director charles - claude biedermann .

biedermann's detractors contend that his resistance represented the primary obstacle to improving the tracing service's responsiveness and providing greater access to archived materials .

when , under strong public and international commission pressure , the icrc agreed to replace biedermann in 2006 , its had a recorded backlog of 425,000 requests for information .

icrc officials acknowledge that this represented an unacceptable breach of the organization's mission .

beginning in the late 1990s , the u.s .

holocaust memorial museum ( holocaust museum ) , holocaust survivor organizations , and others began to pressure international commission members to open the its archives to historical research .

according to the state department , the united states and several other commission member states advocated opening the archives as early as 1998 .

however , then - its director biedermann and a number of member states reportedly blocked passage of the proposal , arguing that the release of such sensitive personal information represented a violation of individual privacy rights .

in may 2006 , after more than five years of debate , and in response to increasing public and political pressure , the international commission of the its unanimously agreed to amend the 1955 bonn accords to open the its archives to researchers and make digital copies of archived materials available to designated institutions in commission member states .

to address continuing concerns regarding individual privacy rights , the commission agreed that access to digital files would be guided by the respective privacy laws of those states .

in november 2007 , france and greece became the final two commission member states to ratify the may 2006 agreement to open the archives , paving the way both for the digitization and transfer of archived materials , and for historians and members of the public to visit the archives .

observers and officials from its , the state department , and the u.s .

holocaust memorial museum highlight several priorities and concerns relating to the future of the archives , including ensuring prompt digitization and transfer of the files to research institutions in commission member states ; designing and implementing a classification system to allow for more efficient searches of archived and digitized documents ; continuing to reduce the backlog of requests for information from the archives , and training and hiring staff to better assist researchers in navigating the archives ; and , in the long term , contemplating reform of what many consider a cumbersome administrative and oversight structure .

according to holocaust survivors , their advocates and administration and its officials , congressional action was instrumental in drawing international attention to the archives' closure , and to opening them to historical research .

after the may 2006 agreement to open the archives , both the house and senate passed resolutions urging international commission member states to expedite approval of the agreement .

several members have also expressed an interest in ensuring the timely digitization and transfer of its collections , and in exploring the possibility that opening the archives could reveal documentation to substantiate additional claims on world - war ii era insurance policies .

on march 28 , 2007 , representative ileana ros - lehtinen introduced h.r .

1746 requiring the disclosure of holocaust - era policies by insurers and establishing a federal cause of action for claims arising out of a covered policy .

similar bills were introduced in the 107 th , 108 th , and 109 th congresses .

although h.r .

1746 would have no direct effect on the bad arolsen archives , some assert that improved access to the archives may reveal documentation relating to unpaid holocaust - era insurance policies .

on the other hand , while the evidence is by no means conclusive , its officials and some historians indicate it is unlikely that the archives contain definitive evidence of such policies .

