the randolph - sheppard act , originally signed into law by franklin d. roosevelt in 1936 , requires that blind individuals receive priority for the operation of vending facilities on federal property .

the 1974 amendments to the act changed the term "vending stand" to "vending facility" and defined the term as meaning "automatic vending machines , cafeterias , snack bars , cart services , shelters , counters , and such other appropriate auxiliary equipment as the secretary [of education] may by regulation prescribe as being necessary for the sale of the articles or services described in section 107a ( a ) ( 5 ) of this title and which may be operated by blind licensees...." the regulations promulgated by the department of education define "cafeteria" as "a food dispensing facility capable of providing a broad variety of prepared foods and beverages ( including hot meals ) primarily through the use of a line where the customer serves himself from displayed selections .

a cafeteria may be fully automated or some limited waiter or waitress service may be available and provided within a cafeteria and table or booth seating facilities are always provided. .

the act does not apply to "income from vending machines within retail sales outlets under the control of exchange or ships' stores systems[,] ... income from vending machines operated by the veterans canteen service[,] ... or income from vending machines not in direct competition with a blind vending facility at individual locations" on the federal property .

the javits - wagner - o'day and randolph - sheppard modernization act of 2008 was introduced by senator enzi on june 11 , 2008 .

this legislation would , among other things , address several issues raised by the judicial decisions previously discussed .

the bill would establish the committee for the advancement of individuals with disabilities that would jointly administer both the randolph - sheppard program and the abilityone program ( which implements the jwod act ) .

the bill also would require state licensing agencies to grant licenses for the operation of a vending facility to individuals with disabilities other than blindness starting three years after the bill's enactment .

additionally , with respect to military troop dining facilities , the bill would grant equal priority in the contract process to a state licensing agency bidding for a contract under the randolph - sheppard act , a small business concern eligible to participate in a program or contract under section 8 ( a ) of the small business act , a hubzone entity , an alaska native corporation , and other socially disadvantaged groups as defined by the department of defense .

for military troop dining facility contract proposals from the abilityone program , the bill would prohibit new proposals and require that proposals be removed from the procurement list five years after the bill becomes law .

finally , the bill would specify that the term "cafeteria" in the randolph - sheppard act , when used in reference to a military troop dining facility , would refer only to "services pertaining to a full food service military dining facility. .

this definition would not include "mess attendant , dining facility attendant , dining support" or other activities that supported the operation of the cafeteria .

the bill was referred to the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions on june 11 , 2008 .

no similar legislation has been introduced in the house .

