the vh - 71 program is intended to provide 23 new presidential helicopters to replace the current fleet of 19 aging presidential helicopters .

as part of its proposed fy2010 department of defense ( dod ) budget , the administration proposed terminating the vh - 71 program in response to substantial cost growth and schedule delays in the program .

as a successor to the vh - 71 program , the administration proposed beginning a new presidential helicopter program in fy2010 called the vxx presidential helicopter program .

on may 15 , 2009 , ashton carter , the dod acquisition executive , issued an internal dod memorandum directing that the vh - 71 program be cancelled .

the navy announced the same day that it had issued a stop - work order on the vh - 71 program .

on june 1 , 2009 , the navy announced that it would terminate the main contract for the program , called the system development and design ( sdd ) contract .

the administration's proposed termination of the vh - 71 program is one of the higher - profile program cancellations or reductions in the proposed fy2010 dod budget , and has become an item of discussion in the debate on fy2010 defense funding .

the issue for congress is whether to approve the administration's proposal to terminate the vh - 71 program and initiate a successor vxx program , or pursue another course , such as continuing the vh - 71 program in some restructured form .

congress's decision on the issue could affect dod funding requirements , the schedule for replacing the 19 older helicopters , and the helicopter industrial base .

the navy's proposed fy2010 budget requested $85.2 million for the vh - 71 program , all of which is in pe0604273n of the rdt&en account .

of this total , $55.2 million is for increment i , for use in terminating the program ; none is for increment ii ; and $30 million is for initial studies on the proposed successor vxx program .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-288 of october 7 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 of october 28 , 2009 , approves the administration's fy2010 funding request for the vh - 71 program ( page 1003 ) .

the conference report states: vh – 71 presidential helicopter program in april 2009 , the administration proposed in budget documents , including a document called ''terminations , reductions , and savings , fiscal year 2010,'' to terminate the presidential helicopter replacement ( vh – 71 ) program and initiate a new presidential helicopter replacement program .

the secretary of defense announced on april 6 , 2009 , the cancellation of the vh – 71 program , after that program experienced a history of excessive and uncontrolled cost growth and persistent slips in its delivery schedule .

on may 15 , 2009 , the under secretary of defense for acquisitions , technology , and logistics issued an acquisition decision memorandum implementing the secretary's decision and the department of the navy issued a stop - work order on the program .

subsequently , on june 1 , 2009 , the secretary of the navy canceled the system development and design contract for the program .

while the conferees agree that cancellation of the program was warranted under the circumstances , they are disappointed that: ( 1 ) the nation has invested more than $3.0 billion in this program and has little to show for that investment ; ( 2 ) the navy invested considerable time and talent in trying to implement the acquisition program without success ; and ( 3 ) the ''requirements'' system failed to do its fair share of trading requirements or adding resources when the acquisition program ran into immovable obstacles .

during this process , the navy and its acquisition system failed to receive adequate support , resources , and authority from the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and the white house military office ( whmo ) to execute a successful acquisition program .

the conferees understand that despite the many warnings and expert advice from the government accountability office , navy acquisition officials were directed by osd and whmo to execute a schedule - driven program and were unable to adhere to prudent acquisition practices .

the conferees note that a june 5 , 2009 , congressional research service report cites navy estimates that a new acquisition program would probably cost between $10.0 billion and $17.0 billion .

therefore , given that level of possible investment , the conferees strongly encourage the department of defense and the executive branch to consider a complete range of alternatives for meeting requirements .

the conferees believe that such consideration must include evaluating both single - and multi - platform solutions to meet the complete transportation requirements of the president , and [in] evaluating costs , consider the investment already made in the vh – 71 program for possible use for some portion of the mission within a multi - platform solution .

the conferees also believe that a program to replace the presidential helicopter presents a particularly valuable opportunity for the department of defense to demonstrate the right way to develop and procure major weapon systems .

accordingly , the conferees expect that , in implementing such a program , the department will fully comply with the letter and the spirit of the recently enacted weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 ( public law 111 – 23 ) .

 ( pages 676-677 ) .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 , recommends approving the administration's request for $85.2 million in fy2010 rdt&e funding for the vh - 71 program ( page 167 ) .

the committee's report states: the budget request contained $85.2 million for cancellation costs of the vh – 71 presidential helicopter recapitalization program recently terminated by the secretary of defense .

the committee understands that the secretary of defense announced on april 6 , 2009 the cancellation of the vh – 71 program based on excessive cost growth and schedule delays .

the committee is disappointed that the navy has invested $3.3 billion in this program to date .

the committee is also disappointed that the navy's acquisition system was not provided adequate support , resources , and authority by the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and the white house military office ( whmo ) to execute a successful acquisition program .

the committee understands that despite the many warnings and expert advice from the government accountability office , navy acquisition officials were directed by osd and whmo to execute a schedule - driven program and were unable to adequately synchronize and adhere to prudent acquisition practices .

the committee supports a new acquisition plan which may incorporate more than a one platform solution to the needs of the president .

the committee notes that a june 5 , 2009 congressional research service ( crs ) report cites navy estimates that a new acquisition program would cost $10.0 to $17.0 billion .

therefore , the committee strongly suggests that the department of defense consider continuing procurement of the current ''increment 1'' helicopter for use as the normal transport for the president , and study other alternatives for presidential transport in other situations .

the committee notes that this approach will leverage on the investment already made by the taxpayer in developing a helicopter that would meet all normal requirements of the president .

 ( pages 182-183 ) .

division d ( section 4001 ) of the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( s. 1390 ) as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

111-35 of july 2 , 2009 ) contains the detailed line - item funding tables that in past years have been included in the committee's report on the defense authorization bill .

section 4001 recommends approving the administration's request for $85.2 million in fy2010 rdt&e funding for the vh - 71 program ( page 677 of the printed bill ) .

in lieu of a conference report , the house appropriations committee on december 15 , 2009 , released an explanatory statement on a final version of h.r .

3326 .

this version was passed by the house on december 16 , 2009 , and by the senate on december 19 , 2009 , and signed into law on december 19 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-118 .

the explanatory statement states that it "is an explanation of the effects of division a [of h.r .

3326 ] , which makes appropriations for the department of defense for fiscal year 2010 .

as provided in section 8124 of the consolidated bill , this explanatory statement shall have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and the implementation of this as if it were a joint explanatory statement of a committee of the conference. .

the explanatory statement provided $130.0 million for vhxx executive helo development , an increase of $44.8 million from the administration's request .

this includes a $100.0 million increase for technology capture and a decrease of $55.2 million for "termination costs funded ahead of estimate. .

the explanatory statement also included this text: presidential helicopter the house report directed the secretary of defense to report on the use of certain funds for the vh - 71 presidential helicopter .

the senate report contained no similar language .

the recommendation· does not retain the house language .

 ( page 282 ) .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-230 of july 24 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 , recommends $485.2 million — an increase of $400 million over the request — "to operationalize and incorporate the five [increment i pilot production] vh - 71 presidential helicopters into the current fleet.... " ( page 12 ; see also page 257. ) .

the report states: vh – 71 presidential helicopter the committee has included $400,000,000 above the president's request to make the five increment i vh – 71 presidential helicopters operational .

although the navy would not respond to the committee regarding costs to operationalize the previously purchased five aircraft , the future year's defense plan for fiscal year 2009 proposed $328,000,000 for fiscal year 2010 and $140,000,000 in fiscal year 2011 to complete testing and outfitting to make the aircraft operational .

the navy has invested over $3,200,000,000 in the vh – 71 presidential helicopter program .

on april 6 , 2009 , the secretary of defense announced the cancellation of the program .

to date , the navy has provided no plan for the disposition of the five aircraft that were intended to provide interim service in the presidential helicopter fleet due to the age of the current fleet .

if these aircraft are not made operational , the previously appropriated funds will have been wasted .

the committee directs the secretary of defense to submit a report on progress toward making the five increment i vh – 71 presidential helicopters operational .

the report shall be submitted to the congressional defense committees no later than 30 days after the enactment of this act .

 ( page 261 ) .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

111-74 of september 10 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 , recommends $30 million — a reduction of $55.2 million from the request , with the reduction being for "termination costs funded ahead of estimate. .

 ( page 183 ) .

section 10012 of h.r .

2346 as passed by the house would rescind , among other things , $30.51 million in fy2009 rdt&en funding and $5 million in fy2008 rdt&en funding , but the house appropriation committee's report on h.r .

2346 ( h.rept .

111-105 of may 12 , 2009 , page 32 ) states that these rescissions are for fuel and for a classified program , respectively , rather than for the vh - 71 program .

section 308 of h.r .

2346 as passed by the senate would rescind , among other things , $270.26 million in fy2009 funding for the research , development , test and evaluation , navy ( rdt&en ) appropriation account .

this provision is also present in s. 1054 as reported by the senate appropriations committee .

the committee's report on s. 1054 ( s.rept .

111-20 of may 14 , 2009 , page 55 ) states that the $270.26 million includes a rescission of $47 million in fy2009 funding for the vh - 71 program .

section 309 of h.r .

2346 / p.l .

111-32 of june 24 , 2009 , rescinds $217.06 million in fy2009 and fy2010 rdt&en funding .

the conference report on h.r .

2346 ( h.rept .

111-151 of june 12 , 2009 ) states that this sum includes $47 million in fy2009 rdt&e funding for the vh - 71 program ( page 106 ) .

this appendix presents excerpts from a may 19 , 2009 , hearing on fy2010 navy aviation programs before the seapower and expeditionary forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee .

chairman's opening statement in his opening remarks for the hearing , the chairman of the subcommittee , representative gene taylor , stated the following: briefly i would like to address the vh 71 program .

the navy invested over $3.2 billion dollars , received nine test and pilot - production aircraft , yet was unable to successfully execute this program that ultimately was cancelled by secretary gates .

i would like to understand what the plan is for the current aircraft assets that have already been delivered , what the plan is going forward , and how the mistakes of the original program will be prevented from happening in the next program ? .

question - and - answer portion during the question - and - answer portion of the hearing , the following exchanges took place regarding the vh - 71 program: courtney: in mr. taylor's opening statement , he sort of walked through a number of issues that he was asking for some responses from the witnesses .

i think the last item was on the presidential helicopter .

you've referenced the fact , obviously , that secretary gates , on friday , announced the cancellation of the program .

and i was just following on his comments .

i don't know which witness would be appropriate to respond .

but what do you sort of see as the next steps in the way forward ? .

obviously , we need a new helicopter .

trautman ( ? .

 ) : congressman courtney , let me start and i'll turn it over to anyone else .

you're correct .

secretary gates did announce — recommend cancellation .

and his basis to that was the original $6 billion program which was headed towards $13 billion , six years overdue ; does not meet the requirements of the white house .

and ( inaudible ) in fact was the long way to meet that requirement .

so this has been an extremely challenging requirement in this program , complicated and exacerbated by us trying to bring this program to meet a need earlier , when we hadn't really defined what we needed to do .

there were mistakes that were made .

we drove significant developmental efforts forward at time when we weren't certain what those impacts would be .

and we grossly underestimated the cost and schedule required to deliver this .

as a result of that , undersecretary defense carter directed the cancellation of the program to mr. stackley ( ph ) .

we are taking those initiatives now to cancel that program , and bring it to a resolution .

the path forward is within 30 days , we will come forward with a high level plan of what we will — how will we anticipate going forward in the future .

that's not all the details that go with every facet of the program to understand , but it is a high level , if you will , plan of action , how we're going to go forward to meet the direction ; also to have a program developed so we can do the presidential replacement helicopter program .

so in this case , i believe , what we need to do now is we need to meet the requirements .

we need to understand what those requirements are going to be .

understand the impacts of those requirements .

begin with requirements , take them through to the impacts of that , and do the due rigor we needed to do — we need to do an executable program , sir .

and i'll turn it over for other comments .

architzel: well , then let add then , sir .

two things come to my mind .

first is: are the legacy vh - 3s and vh - 60s preserved and remain safe for carrying our president ? .

and the answer to that is "yes. .

and this budget includes requested dollars to make that a reality .

the second is: these airplanes are going to need to be replaced .

the vh - 3 is 40 years old by 2017 even with the service life extension programs that we are assessing now .

they are near the end of their life .

i am very anxious to get back into the requirements generation process .

work with the white house military office to decide what requirements they will lay out , and then help move those requirements to the joint requirements oversight council into the acquisition community so that we can each start on a new replacement for the vh - 3 and the vh - 60 .

courtney: i realize you said 30 days from now , you'll come out with a new position or a new plan .

and i don't want to get ahead of that .

but one argument that's been out there — "the new york times" had a column about it the other day — about — that we shouldn't cancel because there's so much sunk cost already into the vh - 71 .

i guess — i was wondering — i was thinking that through .

the navy is not going to just sort of walk away from the research and the development and the investment that's already taken place .

i mean , there's some ways to recoup some of what's already been paid for .

i mean , is that a safe assumption to make so that the taxpayers won't feel like it was just completely thrown away ? .

trautman ( ? .

 ) : congressman courtney , if i could , let me begin — i know you want my colleagues to comment .

but , first off , what i mentioned to you was a high level comeback , if you will , or a plan to go forward .

but we have to — simultaneous with that , we have another course of action we have to follow .

following the cancellation program , we have to bring about what we do with this program , and how we bring it to closure .

so the first thing that was done was this , for example , this stop work due , which allows us to — the contracting officer to issue actions , that then would result in us being able to — as i said , bring the thing to closure .

that involves understanding all that we have invested , and where we are , and be able to close out the books ; be able to make sure we understand where we are in funding , be it '09 or '10 funding , et cetera , and what we need to do to follow through that once the contracting officer takes actions on the termination .

so understanding what we want to do in the future , obviously , we will take advantage of anything we can from a technology standpoint that would go into future helicopter programs or other programs of similar nature .

again , as we start back in this program , we have to understand the requirements — that to begin with requirements — understand what they mean and what we have to meet those missions that are set in front of us .

that was fundamental to it .

now , to your point: the investments that were made — understanding the technology investments that were ongoing — certainly , we'll take advantage of that going forward .

thank you , mr. chairman .

taylor: chair thanks the gentleman .

chair now recognizes the gentleman from maryland , mr. bartlett .

bartlett: thank you very much .

you know , you would think from the discussion we've been having that we hadn't spent $3.2 billion and a number of years building the 71 .

and the original requirements document for the vh - 71 program , the navy gave a litany of reasons why the legacy fleet was in urgent need of replacement — so urgent that we were working around some of the usual procedures to get a plane more quickly so the president could have it .

they — the planes , navy said , was overweight .

they lack all weather capability .

they have extremely limited range , speed and payload .

and i quote from the document , "the legacy aircraft is no longer capable of implementing upgrades for mission requirements. .

and now , we're told that the current fleet is ok .

it can , indeed , be upgraded and the cost of doing so will likely — might be enormous .

we already spent $3.2 billion to produce the nine increment one helicopters .

they neither exceed their performance requirement .

they're always intended to fly the president .

why isn't it reasonable that congress would expect the navy to field these aircraft to meet the highly urgent need we have been briefed on for years ? .

but instead , congressmen are given a list of reasons why flying the 35-year - old legacy fleet for another decade is preferable to fielding a modern v8-71 [sic: vh - 71] helicopters we have already paid to produce .

for instance , we're told that increment one only has a five year service life , even though the committee knows that it was designed for a minimum of 30 years that the navy has not even performed a basic airframe fatigue testing to make a sound determination .

we need real answers as we consider the budget request .

frankly , congress has been ignored for too long on this critical program .

and i'm concerned that in the stop - work order , we're now being ignored .

the navy said that we needed a new aircraft to fly the president .

we bought that .

we asked the navy to build that aircraft and now , without coming back to congress for consultation , the navy has issued a stop work order .

this very limits our options because there will be costs involved with a stop work order .

if we decide that we really ought to continue building these planes then there's additional cost involved in making the line hot again .

first , what is the estimated cost of extending and maintaining the current legacy fleet , if the vh - 71 is terminated ? .

how much will it cost to provide service life extension for the current fleet ? .

what kind of new improvements will be made and at what cost ? .

we were previously told that we really couldn't make the necessary improvements , which is why we needed a plane so urgently that we were bypassing some of the usual procurement procedures .

and second , are you telling this committee the increment 1 helicopters did not in fact provide a better overall capability than the current vh - 3 ? .

general trautman , you have flown the vh - 71 , would you not agree that on its own it represents a more capable , modern and safer aircraft ? .

trautman: yes , sir , let me start — i've flown the vh - 3 and the vh - 71 increment 1 aircraft recently and there's no doubt that the vh - 71 increment three — increment 1 aircraft is a better aircraft then the vh - 3 .

the challenge has been , sir , that the vh - 71 increment 1 aircraft does not meet the requirements that were passed to us by the white house military office and the requirements... bartlett: general,... ( crosstalk ) bartlett: ...if you would let me comment for just a moment... trautman: yes , sir .

bartlett: ...we know that .

we know that the increment 1 was designed to provide what we were told was essential transportation for the president , while increment 2 was being developed .

we know that increment 1 is deficient in — a little deficient in payload capability , in speed and in how far it can go , in range , but the essential reason we were told for moving away from the current fleet was to have better communication capabilities we understand the vh - 71 provides , the increment 1 .

if the gentleman's got just a moment , i'd like to go through some numbers that i think are absolutely compelling that we ought to continue .

we've now invested $3.2 billion .

if we now shut down , it's going to cost about half a billion in the industry to shut down .

it's going to cost about a tenth of a billion in the navy to shut down and for another $1.3 billion , we could make ready five of the nine planes so that the president could use them .

and i am told by the manufacturer that for roughly $100 million each , which comes well under the original figure of $6.8 billion , that they will enter into a firm , fixed price contract to deliver another 14 , which would mean we would have a total fleet then of 19 planes .

you — the additional cost to provide nineteen planes is small compared to the investment we've already made .

why isn't it in the taxpayers' and the president's best interest to go ahead and provide these extra planes ? .

we'll have essentially nothing if we simply terminate and shut down .

taylor: if the general would answer the question , please .

trautman: congressman bartlett , if i could , the — part of what your discussion is on the increment 1 .

as i mentioned before , this vh - 71 is an extremely challenging requirement .

there are significant developmental efforts that were grossly underestimated .

on top of that , we went to a two increment approach in an effort to deliver near - term as well as long - term solutions .

sir , we are not delivering on the capability with increment 1 .

the program does not meet the requirements , and that was what the recommendation for cancellation was for .

bartlett: but , sir , if i might interrupt for just a moment .

it was going to be sufficiently superior to the present fleet , that it was deemed desirable to spend the money to produce it and use it for five years while we produced increment 2 .

why isn't that analysis still valid ? .

trautman: sir , the second estimate — you're referring to numbers .

in terms of operational use and , quite frankly , the vh - 71 increment 1 , the additional weight was the — that has to do with the aircraft itself would be a different aircraft than the one you're talking to , when you're talking 30 years aircraft life .

that's another factor in the increment 1 , in terms of its not being able to make more than approximately , estimates now , 1,500 hour life .

but the overarching consideration was not making the requirements needed for the helicopter and the decision to cancel increment 1 and 2 from secretary gates , sir .

bartlett: thank you .

mr. chairman , i think that the original five year life was not what the plane was expected could do .

it was just that , well , they only needed it for five years until they had increment 2 , but nobody doubts that this plane is built as well as other helicopters and it should have the usual 30 , 35 , 40 year life , should it not ? .

trautman: our understanding is that systems command would have to inspect the airplane and go through a rigorous service life extension program seeking hot spots and areas of interest , similar to the discussion we had previously [at this hearing] about the f / a - 18a through d [strike fighters] .

that work has not been done yet .

