nato held a summit in bucharest , romania , april 2-4 , 2008 .

the allies face an enduring challenge in their effort to stabilize afghanistan , and clarified elements of the mission there .

the allies decided to begin negotiations to admit croatia and albania , but a dispute over the formal name of the former yugoslav republic of macedonia ( fyrom ) with greece was not resolved , and macedonia's possible accession was postponed .

a last - minute initiative by president bush to persuade the allies to admit georgia and ukraine to the membership action plan ( map ) failed .

a principal theme of the summit was to be the clarification of nato's mission. , but no definable progress was made .

the allies will not begin drafting a new "strategic concept," the guideline for nato's operation , until next year .

the alliance's role and the sharing of the burden for such objectives as defense against terrorism and proliferation of wmd , stabilization of countries and regions important to allied security , and peacekeeping are issues likely to be more fully debated in the drafting of a strategic concept .

nato has found difficulty in drawing the line between missions that directly threaten their security , and ones that require a less robust intervention , or that can be left to other international organizations .

some allies also wish to discuss the strategic ramifications of enlargement in that coming debate .

a second theme of the summit was discussion of the means by which nato might counter emerging threats that often escape a purely military response .

in spring 2007 , a cyber attack against estonia's government and banking system seriously disrupted them for a period of time .

the estonian government states that it traced the attacks to russian governmental sources .

in bucharest , the allies agreed to greater sharing of information about cyber threats and began to discuss ways to counter them .

for the last several years , russia has intermittently disrupted the flow of oil or natural gas to ukraine , georgia , lithuania , and other countries , a step widely viewed in the alliance as an effort at political intimidation .

the summit did not result in major steps forward on this issue , but allied officials did travel to kazakhstan after the summit ended , reportedly to discuss ways in which nato might protect that country's energy infrastructure in a crisis .

most nato governments continue to wish to address energy security through conservation , development of alternative fuels , and strengthening the supply - demand relationship with countries such as russia .

the allies are not at the point where either a cyber attack or disruption of energy supplies would be considered an article v crisis , leading to a call for mutual defense .

the third principal issue at bucharest was the candidacies of albania , croatia , and macedonia for entry into the alliance , and the request by georgia and ukraine to be placed in nato's membership action plan , a significant step on the road to formal candidacy .

none of the three candidate states has sufficiently large and capable military forces to contribute significantly to allied operations .

each is in the process of developing specialized "niche" capabilities in order to contribute to allied security .

in that sense , their membership would not represent a major strategic event .

however , given the continuing instability in southeastern europe , fueled by serbia's aggressive opposition to kosovo's independence , the three candidates might contribute to regional stability .

the allies extended invitations to croatia and albania .

under its membership action plan ( map ) , croatia has made improvements in governance and in modernization of its military .

less progress has been made in persuading a strong majority of the croatian population to desire nato membership , a cause for concern in the event that nato should undertake a new and controversial mission .

almost 60% of the croatian population now supports nato membership , a figure that has been rising in recent months .

croatia has recognized kosovo .

zagreb could be an important channel for discussions to bring serbia back into the fold of western - oriented european states .

albania is a small and impoverished country ; its military resources are modest .

osce reports on its recent elections detail a number of irregularities that call into question its adherence to international standards .

the internal political atmosphere remains tense because of inter - party rivalries .

the albanian government is in the process of professionalizing and downsizing its military .

while albania has passed anti - corruption legislation , there remain doubts in the minds of some officials from allied governments about implementation .

at the same time , albania has pursued a moderate policy in the wake of kosovo's declaration of independence .

albania has recognized kosovo , and has renounced any effort to merge the two countries , once a point of concern in europe because of the overwhelmingly ethnic albanian population in kosovo .

nato is in the process of preparing protocols for the two governments ; the protocols will be sent to member governments , and are the instrument that must be approved for croatia and albania to join the alliance .

the protocols may be completed by the end of july .

at that point , each member government will follow its constitutional processes to amend the nato treaty and admit new states .

all member states must approve a government's application to join for that government to be admitted .

the process normally requires approximately one year to complete .

a dispute with greece over macedonia's name could not be resolved between the two countries , and athens blocked macedonia's application to begin accession negotiations .

greece contends that macedonia's name represents an irredentist claim against greek territory , which has a northeastern province named 'macedonia. .

macedonian officials counter that they should have the right to name their own country , that they have amended the macedonian constitution to renounce all territorial claims on greece .

the allies urged the two governments to resolve the dispute , and gave nato foreign ministers the authority to issue an invitation to macedonia to begin accession talks should a resolution occur .

to complicate possible progress , the macedonian government fell after the summit and some time may pass before it can be reconstituted .

a contentious discussion at bucharest occurred over whether to admit georgia and ukraine to the map .

u.s. state department officials have contended that only germany opposed the map for the two governments because berlin was concerned about a negative reaction in moscow to putting two neighboring countries on the road to membership .

however , interviews of representatives of allied governments indicate a more complicated discussion , and broader opposition .

nato makes decisions on the basis of consensus , and a vote is sometimes not taken on an issue that cannot be fully resolved .

that was the case in this instance .

according to crs interviews , in addition to germany , representatives of france and at least two other governments indicated that they wish the map process to go more slowly ; they opposed georgia's and ukraine's entry into the map at this time .

several other governments also opposed the map for georgia and ukraine but would not have blocked consensus had it been within reach , which it was not .

while some governments indicated a desire not to antagonize russia , they said that larger issues were also considered .

a majority of ukraine's population opposes nato membership ; some allies believe that kiev must persuade its population of the value of membership before the map process can begin .

some allies also believe that georgia must first stage its parliamentary elections in may and achieve acceptable international standards , and that it must make progress on resolving its two "frozen" conflicts within its territory .

some allies also raised another subject , not directly related to the two countries' qualifications .

these allies believe that progress must be made to ensure greater energy security in countries vulnerable to a russian cut - off of their energy resources .

representatives of several allied governments criticized the administration's handling of the map issue .

they noted that several allies had clearly indicated before the summit their opposition to georgia and ukraine joining the map , and that president bush's campaign in georgia and ukraine , and then at the summit , to persuade them to change their minds ignored their concerns .

they also noted that their opposition to the map for the two countries went well beyond concern over russia's possible reaction to a favorable decision .

the allies agreed in the communiquã© upon the unusual formulation , "we agreed today that these countries [georgia and ukraine] will become members of nato. .

the allies apparently wished to signal their confidence in the ability of the two countries' governments to make the necessary reforms to qualify for membership .

the statement was also an obvious message to moscow that it may not determine which governments enter nato .

the allies did not provide a time frame for eventual membership .

nato carried out a bombing campaign against serbian forces in 1999 in a successful attempt to stop serb "ethnic cleansing" of the majority albanian population in kosovo , then a serbian province .

under u.n. security council resolution 1244 ( 1999 ) , the united nations established a protectorate mission ( unmik ) in kosovo .

in 2006-2007 , u.n. envoy martti ahtisaari developed a plan for kosovo's "supervised independence" and serbian minority rights under eu leadership .

russia would not accept the ahtisaari plan , and threatened to veto it in the security council .

after long preparation , the european union and the united states together decided to implement the ahtisaari plan .

kosovo declared itself sovereign and independent on february 17 , 2008 .

the united states and a majority of eu countries quickly followed with a recognition of kosovo's independence , which serbia and russia continue to oppose .

the united states contributes approximately 1,600 troops ( in a force of 16,000 ) to nato's kfor , charged with maintaining a peaceful environment in kosovo .

a long - term objective of the alliance is to persuade serbia that its future lies in the euro - atlantic community , and that it must give up what nato secretary general jaap de hoop scheffer calls "a sullen nationalism. .

the allies acknowledged "the value that a stronger and more capable european defense brings , providing capabilities to address the common challenges both nato and the eu face. .

this acknowledgment may assist in preparing the way for france's return to nato's integrated military structure , which it left in 1966 .

beginning july 2008 france will become president of the eu , and will likely make an effort to build up the union's defense institutions and capabilities .

some governments had wished to begin drafting a new strategic concept to clarify nato's mission .

the bush administration contended that because there will be a new administration in washington in january 2010 , debate over a new strategic concept should wait until early next year .

