since 1988 , congress has passed several laws concerning television reception via satellite: the 1988 satellite home viewer act ( shva , p.l .

100-667 ) , amendments to the act in 1994 , the satellite home viewer improvement act of 1999 ( shvia , p.l .

106-113 ) , and the most recent law , the satellite home viewer extension and reauthorization act ( shvera ) .

shvera was passed as division j of title ix of the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

4818 , p.l .

108-447 ) in december 2004 .

a number of changes were made to provisions affecting consumers who receive analog "distant network signals" and "local - into - local" network signals .

three factors are important in understanding the eligibility criteria for these different signals: signal strength , distant and local signals , and unserved households .

under shvia , subscribers receiving distant network signals could also subscribe to local - into - local when it became available .

in 2004 , congress again deliberated satellite tv legislation , ultimately passing shvera .

sections 103 and 204 of shvera differentiated three groups of subscribers: grandfathered , other , and future subscribers .

in areas where local - into - local service was available , some had to choose between distant network signals or local - into - local .

each subscriber's situation was unique , complicating efforts to understand how the new provisions affected a particular household .

to summarize , if local - into - local is offered in a particular area: subscribers who were receiving distant network signals at the time shvera was enacted ( december 8 , 2004 ) , because they were grandfathered in , could continue to receive distant network signals , but could not receive local - into - local at the same time .

they had to choose one or the other .

subscribers who are receiving distant network signals because they cannot get a grade b signal may continue to receive distant network signals if their satellite tv provider was not offering local - into - local on january 1 , 2005 .

if local - into - local becomes available after january 1 , 2005 , they will have to choose between distant network signals and local - into - local .

subscribers to satellite television after the date of enactment of shvera ( december 8 , 2004 ) may receive distant network signals if they are eligible for them and local - into - local is not offered .

if local - into - local later becomes available , they must subscribe to local - into - local .

as noted above in the section " unserved households ," echostar communications , also known as the dish network , was charged with violating the satellite home viewer act in 1998 .

echostar chose to defend its actions , and the company's distant network signals have been unaffected during the eight years the issue has been litigated .

in may 2006 , an atlanta appeals court ordered a permanent injunction on echostar's carriage of all distant signals , including those provided to eligible consumers who cannot receive a grade b signal .

in order to avoid a circumstance in which customers would lose access to distant signals they were eligible to receive , negotiations were undertaken between echostar and the four major broadcast networks ( abc , cbs , nbc , and fox ) to set the terms under which echostar could continue to carry those signals for eligible customers .

a negotiated settlement was reached with three networks , but not with fox .

echostar claims that fox chose not to negotiate a settlement because it is part of a vertically integrated company that is a partial owner of directv , which would stand to gain customers at the expense of echostar if echostar's eligible customers could no longer receive distant fox signals .

fox , on the other hand , counters that it was involved in this litigation for five years before its parent company took operational control of directv , and having won the case in court , had no responsibility to negotiate a settlement that differed from the court's decision .

on october 20 , 2006 , a florida district court upheld the injunction and voided the proposed settlement reached by abc , cbs , nbc , and echostar .

the court set december 1 , 2006 , as the effective date of signal cutoff .

seven pieces of legislation were introduced that would have lessened the impact of the injunction ( s. 4067 and h.r .

6402 , s. 4068 and h.r .

6340 , s. 4074 , s. 4080 and h.r .

6384 ) , but none were passed before the december deadline .

