money laundering is commonly understood as the process of cleansing the taint from the proceeds of cr ime .

in federal criminal law , however , it is more .

in the principal federal criminal money laundering statutes , 18 u.s.c .

§§ 1956 and 1957 , and to varying degrees in several other federal criminal statutes , money laundering involves the flow of resources to and from several hundred other federal , state , and foreign crimes .

section 1956 outlaws four kinds of laundering — promotional , concealment , structuring , and tax evasion — committed or attempted under one or more of three jurisdictional conditions ( i.e. , laundering involving certain financial transactions , laundering involving international transfers , and stings ) .

more precisely , section 1956 ( a ) ( 1 ) outlaws financial transactions involving the proceeds of other certain crimes — predicate offenses referred to as "specified unlawful activities" ( sometimes known as sua ) — committed or attempted ( 1 ) with the intent to promote further predicate offenses ; ( 2 ) with the intent to evade taxation ; ( 3 ) knowing the transaction is designed to conceal laundering of the proceeds ; or ( 4 ) knowing the transaction is designed to avoid anti - laundering reporting requirements .

section 1956 ( a ) ( 2 ) outlaws the international transportation or transmission ( or attempted transportation or transmission ) of funds ( 1 ) with the intent to promote a predicate offense ; ( 2 ) knowing that the purpose is to conceal laundering of the funds and knowing that the funds are the proceeds of a predicate offense ; or ( 3 ) knowing that the purpose is to avoid reporting requirements and knowing that the funds are the proceeds of a predicate offense .

section 1956 ( a ) ( 3 ) covers undercover investigations ( "stings" ) .

it outlaws financial transactions ( or attempted transactions ) that the defendant believes involve the proceeds of a predicate offense and that are intended to ( 1 ) promote a predicate offense , ( 2 ) conceal the source or ownership of the proceeds , or ( 3 ) avoid reporting requirements .

the majority of section 1956's crimes are related in one way or another to the commission or purported commission of at least one of a list of predicate offenses ( "specified unlawful activities" ) .

and so it is the financial transaction promotional offense .

the proscribed transaction must involve the proceeds of a predicate offense and be designed to promote a predicate offense .

the predicate offenses come in three varieties: state crimes , foreign crimes , and federal crimes .

the list of state crimes is relatively short and consists of any state crime that is a rico predicate offense , that is , "any act or threat involving murder , kidnapping , gambling , arson , robbery , bribery , extortion , dealing in obscene matter , or dealing in a controlled substance or listed chemical ( as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances act ) , which is chargeable under state law and punishable by imprisonment for more than one year. .

the list of foreign crimes recognized as section 1956 predicate offenses is more extensive than the list of state crimes , and covers among other things extraditable offenses , although crimes under the laws of other countries qualify as predicate offenses only if the financial transaction occurs in this country in whole or in part .

the list of federal predicate offenses is considerably longer if for no other reason than that the some qualifying offenses are specifically named and others qualify by cross - reference to the voluminous rico predicate offense list .

the crimes listed by name as predicates include offenses such as interstate kidnapping , theft of funds from federally supported programs , and bank robbery .

rico predicates also name bribery , mail fraud , and wire fraud as predicates .

moreover , the rico predicate offense list encompasses by cross - reference the federal crimes of terrorism cataloged in 18 u.s.c .

§ 2333b ( g ) ( 5 ) ( b ) .

each of the 10 criminal proscriptions found in section 1956 outlaws both the completed offense and the attempt to commit it .

section 1956 ( h ) outlaws conspiracy to violate any of these proscriptions. .

consequences : prison terms , fines , restitution , confiscation , and civil penalties may follow as a consequence of conviction of a money laundering offense .

any violation of section 1956 is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

defendants sentenced to a term of imprisonment may also be subject to a term of supervised release of up to three years to be served upon their release from prison .

violators of any provisions of section 1956 are subject to a civil penalty of no more than the greater of $10,000 or the value of the property involved in the offense .

section 1956 provides a vehicle for civil or criminal confiscation in two very distinct ways .

first , the "proceeds" of any section 1956 predicate offense ( and any property traceable to such proceeds ) are subject to confiscation without the necessity of any actual violation of section 1956 .

second , property "involved" in a section 1956 money laundering offense ( or property traceable to such involved property ) may be confiscated .

unless there is some element of promotion , concealment , or evasion , section 1956 does not make simply spending or depositing tainted money a separate crime .

section 1957 does .

it outlaws otherwise innocent transactions contaminated by the origin of the property involved in the transaction .

using most of the same definitions as section 1956 , the elements of section 1957 cover anyone who: 1 .

a. in the united states , b. in the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the united states , or c. outside the united states if the defendant is an american , 2. knowingly 3 .

a. engages or b. attempts to engage in 4. a monetary transaction 5 .

a. in or affecting u.s. interstate or foreign commerce , or b. committed by a u.s. national outside the united states .

6. in criminally derived property that a. is of a greater value than $10,000 and b. is derived from specified unlawful activity .

section 1957 also proscribes attempts to violate its provisions .

section 1956 ( h ) outlaws conspiracy to violate section 1957 .

violation of section 1957 and conspiracy to violate section 1957 are each punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years .

violation of section 1957 and conspiracy to violate section 1957 are each punishable by a fine of not more than the greater of $250,000 ( $500,000 for an organization ) or twice the amount involved in the transaction .

violators of section 1957 are also subject to a civil penalty of no more than the greater of $10,000 or the value of the property involved in the offense .

any property involved in a violation of section 1957 or traceable to property involved in a violation of section 1957 is subject to confiscation under either civil or criminal procedures , and the applicable law is essentially the same as in the case of section 1956 .

sections 1956 and 1957 punish transactions involving promoting , concealing , spending , and depositing tainted funds .

the travel act punishes interstate or foreign travel ( or use of the facilities of interstate or foreign commerce ) conducted with the intent to ( 1 ) distribute the proceeds of a more modest list of predicate offenses ( "unlawful activity" ) , or ( 2 ) to promote or carry on such offenses when there is an overt act in furtherance of that intent , or ( 3 ) to commit some violent act in their furtherance .

the first two variants bear some resemblance to the concealment and promotion offenses of section 1956 and somewhat more remotely to the deposit / spending proscriptions of section 1957 .

attempting to violate the travel act is not a federal offense .

it is a crime to conspire to do so , however , or to aid and abet another to do so .

consequences : the money laundering - like distribution and facilitation offenses of the travel act are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years .

offenders are subject to a fine of the greater of not more than $250,000 ( $500,000 for organizations ) or twice the gain or loss associated with the offense .

if imprisoned , offenders may also be subject to a term of supervised release of up to three years to be served upon their release from prison .

property associated with a violation of section 1952 is not subject to confiscation solely by virtue of that fact , although the property may be confiscated by operation of the laws governing section 1952 predicate offenses or by operation of rico or the section 1956 money laundering provisions .

section 5322 penalizes willful violation of several monetary transaction reporting requirements found primarily in subtitle 53-ii of title 31 of the united states code .

the section's coverage extends to violations of: - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5313 – financial institution reports of cash transactions involving $10,000 or more ( 31 c.f.r .

§103.22 ) ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5314 – reports by persons in the u.s. of foreign financial agency transactions ( 31 c.f.r .

§103.24 ) ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5316 – reports by any person taking $10,000 in cash out of the u.s. or bringing it in ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5318 – suspicious transaction reports by financial institutions ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5318a – special measures record keeping and reports by financial institutions relating to foreign counter - money laundering concerns ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5325 – reports by financial institutions issuing cashier's checks in amounts of $3000 or more ( 31 c.f.r .

§103.29 ) ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5326 – cash transaction reports by financial institutions and / or various trades or businesses pursuant to treasury department geographical orders ( 31 c.f.r .

§103.26 ) ; - 31 u.s.c .

§ 5331 – reports of trades and businesses other than financial institutions of cash transactions involving $10,000 or more ( 31 c.f.r .

§103.30 ) ; - 12 u.s.c .

§ 1829b – record keeping requirements of federally insured depository institutions ; and - 12 u.s.c .

§ 1953 – record keeping by uninsured banks or similar institutions .

simple violations of section 5322 are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years , a fine of not more than $250,000 , or both .

violations committed during the commission of another federal crime or as part of a pattern of illegal activity involving more than $100,000 over the course of a year are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years ; a fine of not more than $500,000 ( not more than $1 million for a special measures violation or a violation involving a breach of due diligence with respect to private banking for foreign customers or foreign shell banks ) ; or both .

structuring is organizing financial transactions or reports relating to financial transactions so as to evade reporting requirements , for example , by dividing a $12,000 bank deposit into three separate $4,000 deposits in order to evade the $10,000 reporting requirement .

section 5324 condemns three categories of structuring: one is devoted to transactions involving banks , credit unions , car dealerships , jewelers , casinos , and the other similar entities classified as financial institutions ; another to cash transactions of $10,000 or more involving nonfinancial institutions ; and a third to bringing $10,000 or more in cash into the country or taking it out of the country .

violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years ( not more than 10 years if committed in conjunction with another federal offense or if committed as part of a pattern of activity involving $100,000 or more ) and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) , with the fine maximum doubled if the offense is committed in conjunction with another federal crime or as part of a pattern of activity involving $100,000 .

the government may confiscate property involved in a structuring violation .

after the supreme court held in united states v. bajakajian that the excessive fines clause of the eighth amendment precluded confiscation of $300,000 of unreported , but otherwise untainted , cash , congress enacted the bulk cash smuggling provisions of 31 u.s.c .

§ 5332 .

the section outlaws carrying or attempting to transport more than $10,000 in unreported , "concealed" cash across a u.s. border with the intent to evade 31 u.s.c .

§ 5316 reporting requirements .

the section has been used to prosecute those who attempted to bring unreported cash into the united states , as well as those who attempted to smuggle cash out of the country .

the fact that the money was neither derived from criminal activity nor intended for criminal purposes may be relevant for eighth amendment purposes , but it is no defense to the underlying offense .

the proscribed methods of concealment seem to envelope any method short of public display .

the offense carries a prison term of not more than five years , but also calls for confiscation of the cash and related property in lieu of a fine .

the section was apparently enacted to overcome the consequences of bajakajian .

section 1960 outlaws conducting or owning an unlicensed money transmitting business .

"money transmitting" is defined broadly by way of a nonexclusive list of examples , such as checks and wire transfers , and includes virtual currency such as bitcoin .

the term "business" restricts the offense to an enterprise conducted for profit and one engaged in more than a single qualifying transmission .

the section recognizes three categories of transmitting business .

one consists of any transmission business operating in a state that requires it to be licensed and criminalizes the failure to do so .

the second category consists of any transmitting business operating in a manner that fails to comply with department of the treasury regulations governing such enterprises .

the third category consists of any licensed business that transmits money known to be derived from , or intended to finance , criminal activity even if the transmitter is duly licensed .

section 1960 offenses are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years and / or a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

property "involved in" violation of the section is subject to civil and criminal forfeiture .

as noted earlier , all rico predicate offenses are by definition money laundering predicate offenses under sections 1956 and 1957 .

the crimes that suggest the possibility of a rico offense also suggest the possibility of money laundering .

in some money laundering cases , although there is no separate rico violation , prosecution is possible by virtue of the rico shared predicate offense list .

in a number of other cases , either money laundering is one of several predicate offenses of a larger rico enterprise or the rico enterprise is devoted primarily to money laundering .

rico makes it a federal crime for any person to: 1. conduct or participate , directly or indirectly , in the conduct of 2. the affairs of an enterprise 3. engaged in or the activities of which affect , interstate or foreign commerce 4 .

a. through the collection of an unlawful debt , or b. through a pattern of racketeering activity ( predicate offenses ) .

section 1962 ( d ) outlaws conspiracy to violate any of section 1962's substantive prohibitions ; in the case of conspiracy to violate section 1962 ( c ) , it outlaws any agreement of two or more to conduct the affairs of an enterprise through a pattern of rico predicate offenses .

the rico conspiracy offense has no overt act requirement ; the crime is complete upon the agreement to commit a rico violation .

rico violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years ( not more than life imprisonment if any of the applicable predicate offenses carries a life sentence ) .

offenders also face fines of up to $250,000 ( up to $500,000 for organizations ) as well as the confiscation of any property associated with the offense .

