since the mid - 1980s , many decision makers and others have demonstrated serious interest in deploying ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) systems capable of defending the united states from ballistic missile attack .

events over the past two decades contributed to strengthen these views .

the collapse of the soviet union in the early 1990s heightened concerns about the possibility of an accidental or unauthorized launch of ballistic missiles from the remnants of that nation .

the persian gulf war in 1991 , with iraq's use of scud missiles , proved to many that the growing threat posed by ballistic missiles had to be addressed .

the proliferation of ballistic missile technologies , including sales from nations such as china , russia , and north korea to nations such as iran , syria , and pakistan became more worrisome to many .

finally , many also argue that some u.s. adversaries , such as north korea and iran , are developing longer - range missiles that might reach the united states , or threaten u.s. military forces deployed abroad , as well as u.s. friends and allies .

but interest in missile defense stretches back much further than the 1980s .

in fact , efforts to counter ballistic missiles have been underway since the dawn of the missile age at the close of world war ii .

numerous programs were begun , and only a very few saw completion to deployment .

technical obstacles have proven to be tenacious , and systems integration challenges have been more the norm , rather than the exception .

since 1985 , the united states has spent more than $120 billion on a range of bmd efforts .

in 2004 , the united states deployed a small - scale national - level missile defense , which is still being tested but considered by most military leaders to be operationally effective .

this short report provides a brief overview of the history of the bmd efforts undertaken to defend the united states .

it begins with a brief summary of the provisions of the 1972 abm treaty , which shaped most of the history of the u.s. bmd effort , and includes a short review of u.s. programs leading to the current program .

negotiations with the soviet union on the anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty began in november 1969 .

early on the united states proposed that the treaty limit russia to one deployment site around moscow ( which it was building ) and permit the united states to deploy four sites around icbm fields , which was the u.s. program at the time ( construction had begun on a site near grand forks , nd ) .

the soviets rejected this proposal , insisting any agreement include equal limits on each nation .

they had the same reaction when the united states proposed that the treaty permit either nation to deploy one site at its capital or two sites at icbm fields .

eventually , the nixon administration agreed to accept parity in abm deployments ; each nation could deploy two sites , one around its capital and one around an icbm field .

this permitted the continued construction of each nation's existing abm site .

signed in may 1972 , the anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty prohibited the deployment of abm systems for the defense of the nations' entire territory .

it permitted each side to deploy limited abm systems at two locations , one centered on the nation's capital and one at a location around icbm silo launchers .

when it became clear that neither nation would complete a second site , the two sides agreed in a 1974 protocol that each would have only one abm site , located either at the nation's capital or around an icbm deployment area .

each abm site could contain no more than 100 abm launchers and 100 abm interceptor missiles .

the treaty also specified that in the future any radars that provided early warning of strategic ballistic missile attack had to be located on the periphery of the national territory and oriented outward .

the treaty banned the development , testing , and deployment of sea - based , air - based , space - based , or mobile land - based abm systems and abm system components ( these included interceptor missiles , launchers , and radars or other sensors that can substitute for radars ) .

the treaty placed no restrictions on the development , testing , or deployment of defenses against shorter range missiles .

although the united states withdrew from the abm treaty in 2002 , the treaty profoundly shaped u.s. bmd efforts up to that point .

u.s. efforts to develop effective defenses against shorter range ballistic missile threats to u.s. forces deployed overseas grew out of the army's formal requirement for a theater abm system in 1949 and produced a succession of systems , including the development and maturity of the patriot air defense system from the 1960s to the present .

as patriot developed further in the 1980s , some argued for its potential also as a theater missile defense ( tmd ) capability .

although the pentagon , army , and the sdi organization initially were not supportive of the effort at first , congress increasingly argued successfully for patriot's development of an anti - tactical missile ( atm ) defense .

by the time of the 1991 persian gulf war , the patriot atm had experienced a remarkably successful test record .

acquisition of patriot missiles for desert storm was accelerated after iraq invaded kuwait .

on the battlefield , however , patriot's success , or lack of itâ in desert storm , remains a subject of controversy despite most public perceptions of unequivocal success .

nonetheless , congress and the department of defense determined subsequently that the patriot concept to defend against shorter range ballistic missile threats to u.s. forces overseas warranted further support .

the patriot system had been upgraded several times by the time of the recent war against iraq .

on the battlefield , patriot was considered more successful than in 1991 , but with mixed results .

congress and the pentagon continue to support development of other highly effective tmd systems , especially a maritime capability built around existing naval systems and infrastructure that have been deployed or in development for decades .

in terms of program and testing success , most observers agree that the u.s. effort to develop and deploy effective bmd against short - range missiles has been more successful relative to the u.s. effort to develop and deploy effective bmd against long - range or strategic ballistic missiles .

