alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles face significant barriers to wider acceptance as passenger and work vehicles .

alternative fuel vehicles include vehicles powered by nonpetroleum fuels such as natural gas , electricity , or alcohol fuels .

advanced technology vehicles include hybrid vehicles , which combine a gasoline engine with an electric motor system to boost efficiency .

often , these vehicles are more expensive than their conventional counterparts .

further , fueling the vehicles is often inconvenient because the number of refueling stations for alternative vehicles is negligible compared with the number of gasoline stations nationwide ; in some regions , the infrastructure is nonexistent .

however , many of these vehicles perform more efficiently and are better for the environment than conventional vehicles .

there has been significant interest in promoting these vehicles as a response to environmental and energy security concerns .

the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-486 , ยง1913 ) established individual and business tax incentives for the purchase of alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles and for the installation of alternative fuel infrastructure .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) expands these existing tax incentives and creates new ones .

incentives existing prior to p.l .

109-58 include the electric vehicle tax credit ; the clean fuel vehicle tax deduction ; and tax deduction for the installation of alternative fuel infrastructure .

the energy policy act of 2005 expanded and extended the existing tax incentives for nonconventional vehicles .

these new incentives are similar to those proposed in the clean efficient automobiles resulting from advanced car technologies act ( clear act , s. 971 ) and the volume enhancing hardware incentives for consumer lowered expenses technology act ( vehicle technology act , h.r .

626 ) , as well as legislation discussed in the 108 th congress .

among other provisions , sections 1341 and 1342 of the energy policy act of 2005 contain several tax incentives for alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles .

for example , the act replaces the existing clean - fuel vehicle tax deduction with a new tax credit for hybrid vehicles ; creates a tax credit for the purchase of lean - burn passenger vehicles ; creates a new tax credit for the purchase of fuel - cell vehicles ; replaces the existing clean - fuel vehicle tax deduction with an alternative fuel vehicle tax credit ; and replaces the existing deduction for the installation of refueling infrastructure with a tax credit .

each of these credits is discussed below ; table 4 summarizes each one .

under the energy policy act of 2005 , the existing clean - fuel vehicle deduction for hybrid electric vehicles is replaced with a tax credit after 2005 .

the amount of the credit is based on several factors .

for passenger vehicles , these factors are the fuel economy increase and the expected lifetime fuel savings when compared with a conventional vehicle of comparable weight .

to qualify for the credit , a hybrid vehicle must meet certain emissions standards and technical specifications .

for heavy - duty vehicles ( more than 8,500 pounds ) , the credit is based on the fuel economy relative to a comparable vehicle , as well as the incremental cost of the hybrid vehicle above the cost of the conventional vehicle .

the range of potential credits for each vehicle weight are shown in table 1 .

the hybrid vehicle credit is scheduled to expire at the end of 2009 .

the american council for an energy - efficient economy estimates that 2006 tax credits for hybrid passenger vehicles will range from $0 ( honda insight ) to $3,150 ( toyota prius ) .

however , the irs has not yet announced the value of the credits for 2006 .

the energy policy act of 2005 established a tax credit for the purchase of passenger vehicles with "lean - burn" engines .

for the most part , diesel - powered vehicles that meet certain emissions and fuel economy standards would qualify for the tax credit , which is structured like the hybrid tax credit and ranges from $400 to $3,400 , based on fuel economy and fuel savings .

the credit is scheduled to expire at the end of 2010 .

however , no lean - burn passenger vehicles are available that meet the emission standard .

consequently , no vehicles on the market qualify for the credit , although many observers expect automakers to look for ways to reduce the emissions of such vehicles in future years so that the vehicles can qualify .

the energy policy act of 2005 provides a tax credit for the purchase of fuel - cell vehicles .

the credit increases with gross vehicle weight , as shown in table 1 .

passenger vehicles that achieve at least 50% better fuel economy than a comparable conventional vehicle also qualify for an additional tax credit of between $1,000 and $4,000 , depending on overall fuel economy .

the credit expires at the end of calendar year 2014 .

however , because of technical and cost concerns , no fuel - cell vehicles are commercially available , and the development of a mass - market fuel - cell vehicle in the near future seems unlikely .

the energy policy act of 2005 replaces the existing clean - fuel vehicle tax deduction with a credit for the purchase of a new alternative fuel vehicle ( afv ) .

the new credit is equal to a percentage of the incremental cost of the afv , subject to certain maximum dollar amounts .

the incremental cost is the difference between the higher cost of the afv and its conventional counterpart .

under the act , the applicable percentage is 50% of the incremental cost plus an additional 30% if the vehicle meets certain emissions requirements .

the maximum credit is based on the weight of the vehicle , as shown in table 3 .

the credit expires at the end of 2010 .

to qualify for the credit , the vehicle is required to be a "dedicated" afv , meaning that it must not be capable of operating on conventional fuel .

this provision is a response to criticisms of previous afv policies that included "dual - fuel" vehicles .

in many cases , dual - fuel vehicles operate solely on gasoline .

because some alternative fuels must be blended with a small amount of gasoline ( eg , ethanol , methanol ) , vehicles using these fuels qualify for a prorated tax credit .

the energy policy act of 2005 replaces the existing deduction for the installation of alternative fuel infrastructure with a tax credit .

the credit is equal to 30% of the purchase or installation cost of the refueling property , subject to a maximum dollar amount .

for retail property , the maximum credit is $30,000 .

for residential property , the maximum is $1,000 .

the credit expires after 2014 for hydrogen infrastructure ; the credit for all other fuels expires after 2009 .

