between the late 1970s and the mid - 1980s , savings and loan institutions ( thrifts ) faced a constellation of developments that would challenge their financial viability .

the developments included ( 1 ) high and volatile interest rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s , which increased the thrifts' interest rate risk ; ( 2 ) the phase out and elimination of the federal reserve's regulation q ( a regulation that had placed limits on the interest rates that banks and thrifts could pay ) , which encouraged the emergence of new instruments such as money market funds that hurt thrift industry profitability ; ( 3 ) state and federal deregulation of depository institutions , which enabled thrifts to get involved in new but potentially riskier markets ; and ( 4 ) reductions in regulatory capital requirements , which allowed thrifts to use alternative accounting procedures that increased their reported levels of capital .

collectively , the developments had negative impact on the thrift industry: by 1986 , 441 thrifts with $113 billion in assets were found to be insolvent .

to help remedy the thrift industry's problems and restore the public's flagging confidence , congress passed the financial institutions reform , recovery , and enforcement act of 1989 ( firrea , p.l .

101-73 ) .

enacted in august 1989 , firrea's principal thrust was the creation of a program to close and clean up insolvent thrifts who collectively held billions of dollars in deposits insured at the time by the federal savings and loan insurance corporation ( fslic ) .

the vehicle created by firrea to conduct the cleanup was the resolution trust corporation ( rtc ) .

principal funding for the rtc came from an off - budget entity , the resolution funding corporation ( refcorp ) , a firrea - created public - private partnership , which was apart from but was operated by the federal home loan bank ( fhlb ) system , a federal entity that supplies credit reserves to thrift institutions ( similar to what the federal reserve does for commercial banks ) .

refcorp issued about $30 billion in noncallable , zero coupon , 30 and 40 year u.s. treasury bonds to fund the rtc , the interest payments on those bonds were largely funded by a firrea - directed annual payment of $300 million from the member banks of the fhlb and taxpayer dollars .

in addition to the $30 billion from refcorp , the rtc received $18.8 billion from the u.s. treasury , and $1.2 billion from federal home loan member banks , giving it a total of about $50 billion in initial funding .

subsequent legislation increased rtc's funding , which would eventually total about $105.1 billion .

as directed by firrea , the board of directors of the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) also assumed the role of the rtc's board .

firrea also established an rtc oversight board whose mandate was to oversee the development of rtc policy .

the oversight board also oversaw the rtc's budget , and monitored its use of taxpayer funds .

the board , however , was not to be involved in detailed rtc operational issues , such as matters pertaining to individual transactions .

as specified by firrea , the oversight board had five members , three of whom were federal officials: the secretary of the treasury ( who served as the board's chairman ) , the chairman of the federal reserve board , and the secretary of housing and urban development .

the two remaining members were nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate .

in 1991 , motivated by a number of issues , including the rtc's need for interim funding and concerns that its dual board structure was cumbersome and inefficient ( for example , the oversight board had to approve policies recommended by the rtc / fdic board ) , congress passed the rtc refinancing , restructuring , and improvement act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-233 ) .

among other things , the law replaced the oversight board with what has been described as a more limited and less intrusive thrift depositor protection oversight board ( tdpo ) , which included the secretary of the treasury and the chairman of the federal reserve board but not the secretary of housing and urban development .

the law also removed the fdic's board from it role as the rtc's board ; and it replaced the fdic as the rtc's manager with the rtc's chief executive officer ( also was also a member of the tdpo ) .

the process of closing or resolving individual thrifts involved one of three alternatives: ( 1 ) some thrifts were sold to a healthy acquirer , which involved the rtc paying another institution to buy the insolvent thrift , with most of its assets intact ; ( 2 ) some thrifts were to be shut down with their depositors being paid off and with the rtc retaining all of its assets for later sale ; and ( 3 ) some thrifts were shut down with their deposits being transferred to another institution .

because deposits are liabilities ( they represent claims on the institution by depositors ) , the rtc was required to pay the institution receiving the deposits .

but because the expected value to the new firms of the customers who owned the deposits often exceeded the face value of the deposits , the rtc frequently paid less than face value for the depository accounts .

the assets that the rtc controlled for thrifts in conservatorship or for thrifts in the later receivership phase took a variety of forms , including cash , mortgages , loans , securities ( including some below - investment grade securities known as junk bonds ) , land , commercial properties , and houses .

firrea required the rtc to utilize the services of private - sector companies in managing and disposing of assets whenever possible .

initially , the agency faced significant criticism that it was not resolving failed thrifts at a rate that kept pace with the growing number of thrifts in conservatorship .

the rtc responded to the criticism with a concerted effort to resolve troubled thrifts at a faster rate .

that effort , however , added greatly to the agency's collection of assets , especially problem assets .

soon , concerns over the pitfalls of dumping assets with often little regard for the low values they fetched were superseded by concerns , including some from members of congress , that a faster approach to asset disposal was needed if the agency was going to complete its mission .

in mid - 1990 , the agency began conducting bulk sales of packaged assets , a contrast to its initial approach of selling assets one by one .

although the bulk sale strategy was criticized for fostering a lack of competition among bidders ( including the provision of "sweetheart deals" to some large investors ) , possibly lowering asset sale prices due to discounts and thus undermining some real estate markets , the criticism was overshadowed by the agency's need to rid itself of assets .

in some of its auctions of non - performing loans , the rtc packaged assets by product , geographic location and collateral type , some packages being as small as a few thousand dollars , others in the tens of millions , with average packages running between $3 million and $4 million .

other bulk packages were less diversified and very asset - specific , consisting of single - property types such as hotels or motels .

equity partnerships .

at times , however , the bulk asset sales faced market pricing that was considerably less than the agency desired .

to help address such shortcomings , the agency pioneered "equity partnerships" to help liquidate some of the packages of its real estate and financial assets .

while the strategy employed a number of different structures , all of the equity partnerships involved a private sector partner acquiring a partial interest in a pool of assets , controlling the management and sale of the assets in the pool , and making distributions to the rtc based on the rtc's retained equity interest .

commercial mortgages and securitization .

the rtc is widely regarded as a pioneer in the securitization of complex securitized instruments backed by commercial and multi - family loans , commercial mortgage - backed securities ( cmbs ) , which constituted a significant share of the agency's assets .

initially , the cmbs were reportedly difficult to sell due in part to the fact that the huge losses that had occurred in the value of commercial mortgages was a major factor in the thrifts' troubles .

eventually , however , sales of the cmbs reportedly became quite healthy , and the innovative approach to asset disposal would later earn the rtc praise .

the rtc completion act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-204 ) terminated the rtc as of december 31 , 1995 .

all of its remaining assets , liabilities , and duties were transferred to the fdic .

in the end , the rtc orchestrated the closing of 747 thrifts , more than 25% of the industry .

it was also responsible for selling more than $450 billion of their real estate and disposing of 95% of their overall assets with a recovery rate of more than 85% .

estimates of the direct and indirect cost of the entire rtc thrift resolution process have ranged from $100 billion to as high as $500 billion , with the most widely and recently reported estimate in the area of $150 billion ( the majority being taxpayer financed ) , an amount said to be below original estimates .

