the u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement ( ptpa ) follows current u.s. free trade agreement ( fta ) practice in containing two types of formal dispute settlement: ( 1 ) state - state , applicable to disputes between the parties to the ptpa , and ( 2 ) investor - state , applicable to claims by an investor of one party against the other party for breach of ptpa investment obligations .

investor - state dispute settlement has been a key element of u.s. bilateral investment treaties , and with the inclusion of investment obligations in most u.s. ftas , it has become a feature of these agreements as well .

the dispute settlement provisions of the ptpa need to be considered in tandem with other ptpa obligations to understand the extent to which measures adopted or maintained by a ptpa party may be the subject of dispute settlement under the agreement .

exceptions to ptpa obligations are also an element in assessing the scope of obligations undertaken by each party .

for example , general exceptions contained in world trade organization ( wto ) agreements — namely , article xx of the general agreement on tariffs and trade 1994 ( gatt 1994 ) and article xiv of the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) — are incorporated into the ptpa for purposes of obligations involving trade in goods and services .

the ptpa also contains an "essential security" exception , which , if invoked by a state party in an investor - state arbitration or a general dispute settlement proceeding , will be found to apply .

the united states - peru trade promotion agreement implementation act , which approves the ptpa and provides legislative authorities needed to carry it out , was signed into law december 14 , 2007 ( p.l .

110-138 ) .

the agreement entered into force on february 1 , 2009 .

a protocol of amendment , signed june 24 and june 25 , 2007 , which revises the ptpa to incorporate certain provisions involving labor , the environment , intellectual property , government procurement , port security , and investment , entered into force on the same day .

the additional language stems from a bipartisan agreement on trade policy between congress and the administration finalized on may 10 , 2007 ( often referred to as the may 10 agreement ) , setting out various provisions to be added to completed or substantially completed ftas pending at the time .

aimed at , among other things , expanding and further integrating labor and environmental obligations into the fta structure , the may 10 agreement provides that labor and environmental obligations in an fta are to be subject to the same general dispute settlement provisions , enforcement mechanisms , and remedies for non - compliance as the agreement's commercial obligations .

the same approach to labor and environmental disputes is found in u.s. free trade agreements with colombia , korea , and panama , each of which continue to await approval by congress .

to date , no disputes have been initiated under the ptpa state - state dispute settlement mechanism .

in general , resort to panels under fta state - state dispute settlement has been uncommon and thus there has been relatively little experience with the operation of this mechanism over a range of agreements and issues .

this may be the case because of fta consultative arrangements that facilitate the informal resolution of disputes or questions over the scope of an agreement or its application in a particular instance before resort to more structured dispute settlement procedures is considered necessary .

in addition , wto dispute settlement is generally available where a dispute arises under both a wto agreement and an fta .

on july 19 , 2011 , however , the office of trade and labor affairs ( otla ) of the u.s. department of labor accepted for review a petition by a peruvian union representing tax agency workers filed under chapter seventeen of the ptpa , the agreement's labor chapter , alleging that peru had violated the ptpa by failing to effectively recognize collective bargaining rights as required under article 17.2.1 of the agreement .

article 17.5 of the ptpa permits individuals , firms , and other associations of a ptpa party to file a submission with a ptpa party on matters related to the labor chapter and directs parties to review such submissions in accordance with domestic procedures .

the aim of the otla review , which is expected to be completed within 180 days , is "to gather information so that otla can better understand the allegations therein and publicly report on the u.s. government's views regarding whether the government of peru's actions were consistent with the obligations set forth in the labor chapter of the ptpa. .

the united states may request consultations with peru under chapter seventeen and , if the parties fail to resolve the matter within 60 days of any such request , the united states may request further consultations under the ptpa dispute settlement chapter .

the review could possibly lead to further state - state dispute settlement proceedings if efforts to settle the dispute through consultations are unsuccessful .

to establish a violation of an obligation under article 17.2.1 , the united states must demonstrate that peru has failed to adopt or maintain a law , regulation or practice in a manner that affects trade or investment between the parties .

ptpa requirements and procedures for disputes arising under the ptpa labor chapter are discussed in greater detail later in this report .

in addition , a notice of intent to initiate an arbitration under the ptpa investor - state dispute settlement provisions was submitted by the u.s. firm renco group , inc. , in late december 2010 .

the firm , which alleges that peru violated investment agreements and ptpa investment obligations with regard to its treatment of a metallurgical smeltering and refining operation run by a renco affiliate in peru , reportedly filed its arbitral claim in april 2011 .

as a rule , investor - state cases under ftas have been more frequent than state - state cases , with claims under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) being the most common .

nafta investor - state cases have been brought against each of the three agreement parties ; in addition , five cases have been filed by u.s. investors under the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) : one against the dominican republic , two against el salvador , and two against guatemala .

to date , no investor - state claims have been filed under other u.s. ftas .

state - state or general dispute settlement is set out in chapter twenty - one of the ptpa , which applies to disputes involving the interpretation or application of the agreement or wherever a party considers ( 1 ) that an actual or proposed measure of the other party is or would be inconsistent with the ptpa , ( 2 ) that the other party has violated the ptpa , or ( 3 ) that one or more of enumerated ptpa benefits owed it by the other party — for example , a tariff reduction — is being nullified or impaired by a measure of the other party that not inconsistent with the agreement .

like bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) and the investment chapters of other u.s. free trade agreements , chapter ten , the ptpa investment chapter , sets out rights and obligations aimed at facilitating investment by nationals of the united states and peru in each other's territory .

as in other u.s. investment agreements , key elements of chapter ten are its coverage of all forms of investment and obligations placed on the parties to accord foreign investors national , most - favored - nation , and minimum standards of treatment ; to compensate investors adequately for expropriation of their property ; to permit the free transfer of investment - related funds into and out of the host party's territory ; and to refrain from imposing certain performance requirements , for example , requirements that an investment achieve a given level of domestic content or export a given level of goods or services .

chapter ten obligations are also subject to various exceptions , exemptions and qualifications , as well as annexes pertaining to specific investment issues , such as the situations that will give rise to a direct or indirect expropriation .

in addition , the ptpa incorporates language reflecting a trade negotiating objective set out in the trade act of 2002 , namely that negotiators , in seeking to reduce foreign investment barriers , also ensure that "foreign investors in the united state are not accorded greater substantive rights with respect to investment protections than united states investors in the united states," an issue raised by various critics of ftas that was also addressed in the may 10 agreement discussed earlier .

to this end , the ptpa states in its preamble that the parties are resolved to "agree that foreign investors are not hereby accorded greater substantive rights with respect to investment protections than domestic investors under domestic law where , as in the united states , protections of investor rights under domestic law equal or exceed those set forth in this agreement. .

another long - standing and fundamental element of bits and fta investment chapters that is contained in the ptpa is its provision for investor - state dispute settlement , permitting u.s. investors in peru and , likewise , peruvian investors in the united states , to file arbitral claims against peru and the united states , respectively , for violations of chapter ten obligations .

claims against the parties may involve federal or central government measures , as well as measures of state and local governments to the extent they are subject to chapter ten requirements .

under the ptpa , if an investor does not believe that an investment dispute with a ptpa party can be settled through consultation and negotiation , the investor may seek to resolve the dispute through arbitration .

an arbitral proceeding may be initiated by an "investor of a party" on the ground that other state party has breached a ptpa investment obligation , an investment authorization , or an investment agreement , and the investor has incurred loss or damage from the breach .

the investor may also submit a claim on behalf of an enterprise of the other ptpa party that the investor owns or controls , where the enterprise is alleged to have been injured by the breach .

investor - state dispute settlement may also be invoked in certain cases involving investors and investments in financial services institutions in the united states and peru .

chapter ten contains a statute of limitations , prohibiting a claim from being brought if more than three years have elapsed from the date that the claimant "first acquired , or should have first acquired , knowledge of the alleged breach" and knowledge that the claimant or enterprise "has incurred loss or damage. .

the united states and peru give their consent in the ptpa to the submission of chapter ten investor claims in accordance with the agreement .

the claimant must consent to arbitration in writing .

chapter ten does not require that an investor , or an investor and an enterprise , exhaust local judicial or administrative remedies before a claim may be filed .

the investor may submit a claim under various arbitral mechanisms , including the convention on the settlement of investment disputes ( icsid convention ) and icsid rules of procedure , the icsid additional facility rules , the united nations commission on international trade law ( uncitral ) arbitration rules , or , if the disputants agree , any other arbitration institution or rules .

both the united states and peru are parties to the icsid convention and thus investors may avail themselves of the convention and its procedural rules .

once an investor claim is filed , a three - member arbitral tribunal will be established .

one arbitrator is to be appointed by each disputing party , and the third , the presiding arbitrator , is to be appointed by agreement .

if the tribunal has not been constituted within 75 days after the claim is filed , the secretary - general of icsid , if requested , will appoint the outstanding arbitrator or arbitrators .

chapter ten contains rules for the conduct of the arbitration , including various provisions aimed at transparency and efficiency of the arbitral proceedings .

tribunals may accept and consider amicus submissions from persons or entities that are not disputing parties .

tribunals are required to rule expeditiously on any preliminary objections by the defending party that the claim submitted is legally not a claim for which a chapter ten award can be made or that the dispute is not within the competence of the tribunal .

as a result , defending parties may obtain an early ruling on a jurisdictional issue , and thus , possible dismissal of the case , and need not necessarily wait for a combined tribunal ruling on panel jurisdiction and the merits of the case .

multiple claims with certain common elements may be consolidated .

subject to provisions aimed at preventing disclosure of protected information , documents submitted by the parties and tribunal orders , awards and decisions are to be made available to the public .

the tribunal must also conduct public hearings .

when a claim involves an alleged breach of a ptpa obligation , the tribunal is to decide the issues in accordance with the ptpa and applicable rules of international law .

if the u.s. - peru free trade commission has issued an interpretation of a ptpa provision , as it is authorized to do under article 20.1.3 ( c ) of the ptpa , the decision is binding on the tribunal and any tribunal decision or award must be consistent with the commission decision .

a tribunal may only make monetary awards to the claimant and thus may not direct a party to withdraw or modify a disputed measure .

an award may consist of monetary damages , restitution of property , or both .

if restitution is awarded , the party is to pay monetary damages and applicable interest in lieu of restitution .

the tribunal may also award costs and attorney's fees .

it may not award punitive damages .

an arbitral award has no binding force except between the disputing parties and with respect to the case at hand .

a prevailing investor may not seek enforcement of the final award until 90 or 120 days after it is issued ( depending on the arbitral rules used ) , a period allowing for possible proceedings to revise or annul the award .

if the defending party does not ultimately abide by a final award , the party of the claimant may request that a panel be established under the ptpa state - state dispute settlement chapter and ask that it determine that the defending party's failure to comply with the award is inconsistent with ptpa obligations and recommend that the party comply .

regardless of whether a compliance panel is sought , however , the prevailing investor may seek judicial enforcement of the award under any of three multilateral conventions providing for the recognition and enforcement of international arbitral awards to which the united states and peru are parties: the icsid convention , the new york convention on the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards , and the inter - american convention on international commercial arbitration .

