medicaid is a state - administered program that is jointly financed by states and the federal government .

the federal and state shares of program costs vary for each state based on a formula that takes into consideration each state's per capita income compared with the national per capita income .

the formula is designed so that states with per capita income that is relatively lower than other states will pay a lower state share of medicaid program costs .

nonetheless , many states have found raising their state share of medicaid program costs to be challenging , particularly during economic downturns .

intergovernmental transfers ( igts ) are one of the methods used by some states to finance the non - federal share of medicaid costs .

certain igts are specifically allowed for funding the state share of program costs .

for example , units of government , such as counties , are able to contribute to the state's share of medicaid .

at least three states currently require counties to fund some part of the state share .

congress specifically protects the ability of states to use funds derived from state or local taxes and transferred or certified by units of government within a state .

some states have instituted programs where all or portions of the medicaid state share is paid by hospitals or nursing homes that are public providers , however , not units of government ; or are units of government , but the state share is returned to the provider sometimes through inflated medicaid payment rates .

the purpose of such financing arrangements is generally to draw additional federal funds for which a state share may not otherwise be available .

while the funds often help to pay for medicaid or other health care services , those arrangements effectively raise the federal share of medicaid program spending .

these "intergovernmental transfers" are often repaid through medicaid disproportionate share hospital payments or through inflated medicaid payment rates for which federal matching amounts are claimed .

alternately , states can make medicaid payments to the providers , and the providers transfer a portion or all of those payments back to the state through what is claimed as an igt .

either way , the net impact is to effectively raise the federal matching rate in the state to levels beyond those specified in law .

in may of 2007 , the department of health and human services issued a regulation tightening the administrative procedures and clarifying the vague definitions that allow these types of financing mechanisms to operate .

the regulation tightens the definitions of governmental entities and cpes for the purpose of medicaid financing , and establishes a ceiling on payment rates for governmental providers equal to the cost of providing medicaid services .

existing rules that establish ceilings on medicaid payments to privately owned and operated facilities would not be affected by this rule .

states , public and governmental providers , and advocacy organizations have expressed opposition to the rule .

all agree that the rule would significantly reduce medicaid payments in certain states , and concerns are raised about whether those states would be able to fill the funding gap and , if not , what the implications would be for medicaid beneficiaries and providers .

aside from the concerns about the impact of the considerable loss of federal funds on medicaid providers and beneficiaries , the rule has been viewed by some as cms overstepping its authority to limit intergovernmental transfers , when congress explicitly allows such transfers .

governors' concerns were expressed in a letter from the national governor's association to house and senate leadership dated february 25 , 2008 .

the letter calls on congress to take immediate action to delay implementation of the rules , fearing that their implementation would inappropriately shift costs to states at a time when some states are facing particularly difficult fiscal situations .

the governors point out that the new rules reflect a departure from past practices and are based on new and unsupported interpretations of medicaid law .

finally , the letter reminds members of the congress that some of the rule changes were considered and rejected when the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ) was deliberated .

on march 11 , 2008 , a lawsuit was filed in the united states district court for the district of columbia by a coalition of provider groups led by the national association of public hospitals and health systems , the american hospital association , and the association of american medical colleges .

 .

the lawsuit asked the court to reject the rule on three grounds: that cms has overstepped its authority in limiting intergovernmental transfers , that congress has barred the agency from imposing a cost limit on medicaid payments to governmental providers , and that cms improperly issued the rule .

from nahp's website: the litigants make three major claims: ( 1 ) the rule defines "units of government" more narrowly than permitted under law and severely restricts options for states to finance the non - federal share of their medicaid program expenditures .

the cms definition usurps states' ability to determine the governmental status of entities within states , severely limiting the type of governmental entities that can make intergovernmental transfers to fund the non - federal share of the program ; ( 2 ) cms does not have the authority to limit medicaid payments to public providers to cost while continuing to allow private providers to be paid under a different methodology .

congress rejected cost - based reimbursement and payment limits in the early 1980s in favor of granting states flexibility to tailor medicaid reimbursement to their unique needs .

a cost limit imposed solely on governmental hospitals is counter to clear congressional intent and is arbitrary and capricious in violation of the administrative procedure act .

it also upends decades of medicaid payment policies established by cms and relied on by states .

 ( 3 ) the moratorium signed by the president on may 25 , 2007 effectively prevented cms from issuing a final rule the same day .

indeed , a ruling in this case , filed on may 23 , 2008 , found the latter claim compelling .

u.s. district court judge james robertson has prohibited the implementation of the final rule .

the rule was vacated and the matter returned to the agency .

in response to the ruling , a spokesman for cms suggested that the judge's finding is technical in nature only and that the substance of the rule will ultimately be upheld .

congress has taken action as well .

in may of 2007 , congress enacted a one - year moratorium on the implementation of the rule .

that moratorium was extended until april 1 , 2009 , as part of h.r .

2642 , the supplemental appropriations act of 2008 ( the war supplemental ) , signed by the president on june 30 , 2008 .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) includes a sense of the congress that the secretary of hhs should not promulgate a final rule on cost limits on public providers ( nor on two other rules regarding graduate medical education and rehabilitative services ) .

the congressional budget office and the joint committee on taxation estimate that this sense of the congress , in combination with new and extended moratoria on other medicaid rules ( affecting case management services , school - based services , provider taxes , and outpatient hospital services ) , would increase federal spending by $105 million in fy2009 .

separate cost estimates for the provisions affecting each individual regulation were not provided .

