georgia joined nato's partnership for peace ( pfp ) program in 1994 .

at the nato summit in prague in november 2002 , georgia declared that it aspired to eventual nato membership and sought to intensify ties with nato through an individual partnership action plan ( ipap ) to increase the interoperability and capability of its military forces .

after georgia's "rose revolution" of late 2003 brought a new reformist government to power , georgia placed top priority on integration with western institutions , including nato and the european union ( eu ) .

during the presidential election campaign in late 2003 , candidate mikheil saakashvili ran on a platform that included a pledge to work toward nato membership .

georgia began sending troops to assist nato forces in kosovo in 1999 , began hosting multinational pfp military training exercises in 2001 , and pledged to send troops to assist the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

in late 2004 , georgia concluded an ipap with nato , which allowed the alliance to provide more assistance on domestic reforms , including defense institutional and policy reforms and political reforms .

after extensive public debate , the georgian government approved a national security concept in late 2005 that committed the country to carry out the reforms outlined by the ipap .

during the first two - year period of the ipap covering 2005-2006 , nato viewed georgia generally as adequately satisfying reform priorities and time - lines .

under nato guidelines , georgia's preparations for alliance membership include its progress in democratizing , developing a market economy with social welfare guarantees , and creating a professional military that contributes to euro - atlantic security .

other criteria include the resolution of internal separatist conflicts and international disputes .

the latter may include weighing geo - strategic concerns , including good - neighborly relations with russia .

although some alliance members initially may have been more confident than others that georgia had made adequate progress , the members came to a consensus in september 2006 to offer georgia an "intensified dialogue" of stepped - up consultations to assist the country in furthering its aspirations for alliance membership .

most georgians have appeared to support nato membership .

according to a plebiscite held at the same time as the january 2008 presidential election , 77% of georgian citizens who voted answered affirmatively that georgia should join nato .

the majority of opposition parties also supports georgia's eventual accession to nato .

among those opposing further georgian moves toward alliance membership , irina sarishvili ( who ran as a losing candidate in the january 2008 presidential election ) attempted to gain signatures before the august conflict for a voter referendum on proclaiming georgia a neutral country .

she warned that russia would retaliate against georgian membership in nato by never permitting georgia to peacefully regain authority over abkhazia and south ossetia .

more recently , labor party leader shalva natelashvili has called for georgia to proclaim itself a non - aligned state .

some georgians oppose joining nato because they allege that the alliance will condition membership on georgia accepting the independence of the separatist regions .

there are contending views within georgia about whether the august conflict hurt or improved georgia's progress toward nato membership .

after the signing of the u.s. - georgia charter in january 2009 ( see below ) , georgian military analyst irakli sesiashvili claimed that "georgia's prospects for joining nato have significantly improved thanks to the signing of this charter.... after the usa commits to ensuring our country's security and tries to settle relations with russia at the political level , it [georgia] will very quickly meet the relevant standards... .

in such a situation , europe will simply not be able to say no to georgia joining nato. .

on february 3 , 2009 , defense minister sikharulidze appeared to reflect optimism about georgia's nato prospects when he stated that georgia "will continue the course of complete integration into nato. .

perhaps reflecting less optimism , president saakashvili on february 18 appeared to voice frustration with the slow process of accession to nato membership when he reportedly stated that "eu membership is more important to us than integration into nato. .

georgian military analyst giorgi tavdgiridze has raised concerns that georgia's goal of having interoperable forces with nato forces has become more difficult since the russia - georgia conflict , because some european countries are reluctant to supply nato - caliber weapons to georgia for fear of offending russia .

a polish think - tank has argued that despite the hopes of some georgians that nato would mediate during the russia - georgia conflict , russia was opposed to any nato involvement in the region .

instead , nato strongly condemned russia's actions , which may have convinced moscow to end hostilities short of deposing saakashvili , according to the think - tank .

it also asserts that "the conflict ... is the principal , though not the only , cause of the significant slowdown in the process of georgia's and ukraine's integration with nato," so that membership is likely set back for years .

the conflict heightened doubts among many nato members about how georgia's degraded armed forces could contribute to alliance security , about the trustworthiness of the georgian leadership , given questions about how the conflict escalated , and about providing alliance security guarantees to a country with unresolved territorial disputes .

the former bush administration was supportive of georgia's nato aspirations .

during saakashvili's july 2006 u.s. visit , president bush stated that "i believe that nato would benefit with georgia being a member of nato , and i think georgia would benefit .

and there's a way forward through the map. .

the united states urged offering a map to georgia at the september 2006 nato foreign ministerial meeting , but agreed to nato opening an "intensified dialogue" with georgia .

the united states also urged the alliance to invite georgia to participate in a map at the nato summit in bucharest in april 2008 , but agreed to a pledge for eventual nato membership for georgia .

at the december 2008 nato foreign ministerial meeting , the united states reportedly agreed with a british proposal to not push for a map for georgia , and instead to formulate annual national programs for ukraine and georgia to assist them in the "significant work left to do" in meeting the requirements for nato membership .

the united states took the position that the two countries might work toward alliance membership without formally undertaking maps but still carrying out the requirements of maps .

however , some other members reportedly disagreed with this stance , and the final communique reflected a compromise that the annual national programs are undertaken "without prejudice to further decisions which must be taken about map. .

at a meeting of the nato - georgia commission in february 2009 , u.s. defense secretary gates stressed that the united states has "a continuing security relationship with georgia .

we're involved in training .

we are involved in military reform in georgia .

so this is an ongoing relationship and it is a relationship that we are pursuing , both bilaterally and within the framework of our nato allies .

he appeared to endorse exploring improved nato ties with russia , but urged a cautious approach , averring that the obama administration "has not yet looked comprehensively at its policies with respect to russia , and so i think our position on that [on resuming nato - russia council meetings] , on [when] that ought to happen , is not yet settled. .

at the nato foreign ministers' meeting in early march 2009 , secretary of state clinton stressed that the renewal of dialogue in the nato - russia council did not spell any less commitment by nato for eventual alliance membership for georgian and ukraine .

in associated meetings of the nato - georgia and nato - ukraine commissions , she "reiterated ... the united states' firm commitment to each of those nations moving toward nato membership and our equally strong commitment to work with them along with nato to make clear that they should not be the subject of russian intimidation or aggression .

but i think ... there are benefits to reenergizing the nato - russia council... .

i don't think you punish russia by stopping conversations with them about ... the failure to comply with the requirements set forth by the osce and others concerning their actions in georgia. .

ongoing u.s. support for georgia's sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity was reflected in the u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership , signed in january 2009 , which states that "our two countries share a vital interest in a strong , independent , sovereign , unified , and democratic georgia. .

the accord is similar to a u.s. - ukraine charter signed in december 2008 and a u.s. - baltic charter signed in 1998 with estonia , latvia , and lithuania .

in the latter case , the charter was viewed as a means to help advance the states toward nato membership .

in the security realm , the u.s. - georgia charter states that "the united states and georgia intend to expand the scope of their ongoing defense and security cooperation programs to defeat [threats to global peace and stability] and to promote peace and stability. .

such cooperation also aims "to strengthen georgia's candidacy for nato membership. .

the two sides will work within the nato - georgia commission "to increase interoperability and coordination of capabilities between nato and georgia , including via enhanced training and equipment for georgian forces. .

before the signing , georgian foreign minister grigol vashadze hailed the accord as a "stepping stone which will bring georgia to euro - atlantic structures , to membership within nato , and to [the] family of western and civilized nations. .

deputy assistant secretary bryza stressed that the charter does not provide security guarantees to georgia .

he also stated that u.s. - georgian defense cooperation programs were still being developed .

according to some observers , the charter aimed to reaffirm the united states' high strategic interest in georgia's fate , after it had appeared that the united states ( and the west ) in recent months had acquiesced to increased russian dominance in the south caucasus .

while these goals have received support from most policymakers , some observers have called for a re - evaluation of some aspects of u.s. support for georgia .

these critics have argued that many u.s. policymakers have been captivated by saakashvili's charismatic personality and pledges to democratize and have tended to overlook his bellicosity .

they also have suggested that the united states should not have unquestionably backed georgia's territorial integrity , but should rather have encouraged reconciliation and the consideration of options short of the reintegration of the regions into georgia .

many in congress have supported georgia's nato aspirations .

the nato freedom consolidation act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-17 ; signed into law on april 9 , 2007 ) endorses nato enlargement and urges nato to extend a map for georgia .

the act also designates georgia as eligible to receive security assistance under the program established by the nato participation act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-447 ) .

following the civil disorder in georgia in late 2007 , the senate approved s.res .

391 ( lugar ) , which stressed georgia's nato aspirations and called on the president to urge georgia to hold a free and fair presidential election .

on february 14 , 2008 , the senate also approved s.res .

439 ( lugar ) to urge nato to enter into a map with georgia and ukraine .

similar legislation , h.res .

997 ( wexler ) , was approved by the house on april 1 , 2008 .

further indicating congressional support , a group of six members led by senator joseph lieberman sent a letter on february 19 , 2008 , to then - secretary of state condoleezza rice urging her to support a map for georgia and ukraine "as one of the top foreign policy priorities of the administration. .

on may 7 , 2008 , the house approved h.res .

1166 ( wexler ) , which endorsed nato's pledge at its april meeting of eventual membership for georgia and called for nato to offer a map to georgia by the end of the year .

