americans spend more than $1 trillion on food each year , nearly half of it in restaurants , schools , and other places outsid e the home .

federal laws give food manufacturers , distributors , and retailers the basic responsibility for assuring that foods are wholesome , safe , and handled under sanitary conditions .

a number of federal agencies , cooperating with state , local , and international entities , play a major role in regulating food quality and safety under these laws .

the combined efforts of the food industry and the regulatory agencies often are credited with making the u.s. food supply among the safest in the world .

nonetheless , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) reports that each year an estimated one in six americans — a total of 48 million people — becomes sick from contaminated food foodborne illnesses caused by contamination from any one of a number of microbial pathogens .

of these , an estimated 128,000 cases require hospitalization and 3,000 cases result in death .

in addition , experts have cited numerous other hazards to health , including the use of unapproved veterinary drugs , pesticides , and other dangerous substances in food commodities , of particular concern at a time when a growing share of the u.s. food supply is from overseas sources .

these concerns , combined with the ongoing recurrence of major food safety - related incidents , have heightened public and media scrutiny of the u.s. food safety system and magnified congressional interest in the issue .

numerous federal , state , and local agencies share responsibilities for regulating the safety of the u.s. food supply .

federal responsibility for food safety rests primarily with the food and drug administration ( fda ) , which is part of the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) , which is part of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

fda is responsible for ensuring that all domestic and imported food products — except for most meats and poultry — are safe , nutritious , wholesome , and accurately labeled .

fda also has oversight of all seafood , fish , and shellfish products .

usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) regulates most meat and poultry and some egg and fish products .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has identified as many as 15 federal agencies , including fda and fsis , as collectively administering at least 30 laws related to food safety .

appendix a and appendix b provide a brief comparative look at each of these agencies and their responsibilities .

state and local food safety authorities collaborate with federal agencies for inspection and other food safety functions , and they regulate retail food establishments .

this organizational complexity , and trends in u.s. food markets — for example , increasing imports as a share of u.s. food consumption and increasing consumption of fresh , often unprocessed , foods — pose ongoing challenges to ensuring food safety .

the text box below provides a comparison of fda and usda and other federal agencies' responsibilities for food safety and related food quality and other requirements .

the division of food safety responsibility between fda and usda is rooted in the early history of u.s. food regulation .

congress created separate statutory frameworks when it enacted , in 1906 , both the pure food and drugs act and the meat inspection act .

the former addressed the widespread marketing of intentionally adulterated foods , and its implementation was assigned to usda's bureau of chemistry .

the latter law addressed unsafe and unsanitary conditions in meat packing plants , and implementation was assigned to the usda's bureau of animal industry .

this bifurcated system has been perpetuated and split further into additional food safety activities under additional agencies ( for example , the environmental protection agency , the national marine fisheries service , and others ) by a succession of statutes and executive directives .

the separation of the two major food safety agencies was further reinforced when , in 1940 , the president moved responsibilities for safe foods and drugs , other than meat and poultry , from usda to the progenitor of hhs , the federal security agency .

meat inspection remained in usda .

there has been discussion over time regarding whether this dispersal of food safety responsibilities has been problematic , or whether a reorganization would divert time and attention from other fundamental problems in the system .

figure 1 shows this history by providing a timeline of selected important dates for food safety in the united states .

over the years , gao has published a series of reports highlighting how food safety oversight in the united states is fragmented and recommending broad restructuring of the nation's food safety system .

these gao reports document examples where a number of federal agencies are responsible for some aspect of food safety or product quality , resulting in split agency jurisdiction for some foods .

limited coordination and sharing of information results in often overlapping and / or duplication of efforts .

similar observations are noted in a series of food safety studies by the national research council ( nrc ) and institute of medicine ( iom ) .

the nrc / iom studies further recommend that the core federal food safety responsibilities should reside within a single entity / agency ; have a unified administrative structure , clear mandate , and dedicated budget ; and maintain full responsibility for oversight of the entire u.s. food supply .

historically , federal funding and staffing levels between fda and fsis have been disproportionate to their respective responsibilities for addressing food safety activities .

although fsis is responsible for roughly 10% - 20% of the u.s. food supply , it has received about 60% of the two agencies' combined food safety budget .

although fda has been responsible for 80% - 90% of the u.s. food supply , a few years ago it received about 40% of the combined budget for federal food safety activities ( table 1 ) .

staffing levels also have varied considerably among the two agencies: fsis staff numbered around 9,400 ftes in fy2010 , while fda staff working on food - related activities numbers about 3,400 ftes .

in recent years , however , the balance of overall funding for food safety between fda and usda has started to shift .

congressional appropriators have increased funding for fda food activities , which more than doubled from $435.5 million in fy2005 to $987.3 million in fy2016 ( table 1 ) .

funding for fsis remained mostly unchanged to slightly lower overall .

the food safety modernization act ( fsma ) also provided for additional limited funding through certain types of industry - paid user fees .

fsma — comprehensive food safety legislation enacted in the 111 th congress — authorized additional appropriations and staff for fda's future food safety activities .

fsma was the largest expansion of fda's food safety authorities since the 1930s .

among its many provisions , fsma authorized increased frequency of inspections at food facilities , tightened record - keeping requirements , extended oversight to certain farms , and mandated product recalls .

it required food processing , manufacturing , shipping , and other facilities to conduct food safety plans of the most likely safety hazards and design and implement risk - based controls .

it also mandated improvements to the nation's foodborne illness surveillance systems and increased scrutiny of food imports , among other provisions .

fsma did not directly address meat and poultry products under usda's jurisdiction .

although congress authorized appropriations when it enacted fsma , it did not provide the funding needed for fda to perform these activities , and fda funding for fsma implementation and other food safety activities has been lower than what agency officials have said is needed to fully implement the law .

previously , fda reported that an additional $400 million to $450 million per year above the fy2012 base is needed to fully implement fsma .

the enacted fy2016 agriculture appropriation provided for a $104.5 million increase in budget authority for fda's food safety activities , including fsma implementation .

for additional information , see crs report r44309 , fy2016 appropriations: selected federal food safety agencies .

funding levels specific to food safety responsibilities at other federal and state agencies are not readily available .

although fda staff working on food - related activities has increased , actual staffing levels remain below that mandated in fsma .

among its many provisions , fsma mandated an increase in the number of food safety inspectors within fda and expanded the agency's authority to increase inspection of domestic and foreign food facilities .

fsma states a "goal of not fewer than ... 5,000 staff members in fiscal year 2014. .

instead , fda reports actual staffing levels at 3,700 ftes in fy2015 ( table 1 ) .

fsis staff number about 8,900 ftes , a reduction from that in previous years .

the discrepancy between the number of fda and fsis inspectors is , in part , attributable to differences in how each agency fulfills its respective inspection mandate .

whereas fda inspection involves primarily review and sampling , fsis personnel inspect all meat and poultry animals at slaughter on a continuous basis , requiring that at least one federal inspector is on the line during all hours the plant is operating .

processing inspection does not require an fsis inspector to remain constantly on the production line or to inspect every item .

instead , inspectors are on site daily to monitor the plant's adherence to the standards for sanitary conditions , ingredient levels , and packaging and to conduct statistical sampling and testing of products .

because all plants are visited daily , processing inspection is also considered to be continuous .

in the senate , food safety issues are under the jurisdiction of the committees on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry ; homeland security and governmental affairs ; and health , education , labor , and pensions .

in the house , various food safety activities fall under the jurisdiction of the committees on agriculture ; energy and commerce ; oversight and government reform ; and science , space , and technology .

agriculture subcommittees of the house and senate appropriations committees set funding and provide oversight of the major agencies that carry out food safety policies .

in general , the house and senate agriculture committees maintain jurisdiction over usda's meat and poultry inspection programs and also other food - safety - related programs administered by other usda agencies ( see text box below ) .

one exception involves certain nutrition programs , such as the national school lunch program and certain other institutional food service programs administered by usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) , where the committees of jurisdiction are the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry and the house committee on education and the workforce .

fda - regulated foods and other products generally fall under the jurisdiction of the house committee on energy and commerce and the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

under fsma , the separate authorities between fda and usda for various foods were explicitly maintained in the enacted law .

however , identifying committees of jurisdiction for specific laws , programs , and federal agencies is not straightforward and further complicated by split jurisdiction between fda and usda in the case of some foods due to documented fragmentation , overlap , and duplication among the agencies responsible for administering the laws and programs governing certain foods .

appendix a .

major federal food safety agencies and selected laws appendix b .

selected comparison of fsis and fda responsibilitie .

