following the 2000 census , texas was apportioned two additional congressional seats .

subsequently , the state legislature was unable to enact a redistricting map , resulting in litigation and , ultimately , imposition of a court - ordered congressional redistricting plan .

the 2002 election was held under the court - ordered plan , resulting in a democratic majority in the texas congressional delegation .

in october 2003 , after the republican party gained control of the texas state house of representatives , and thus , both houses of the legislature , it enacted a new congressional redistricting map with the goal "to increase [republican] representation in the congressional delegation. .

the league of united latin american citizens ( lulac ) and others challenged the new plan in court , alleging various statutory and constitutional violations .

the district court entered judgment against lulac on all claims , and they appealed to the u.s. supreme court .

as the court had just issued its decision in vieth v. jubelirer , it vacated the district court decision and remanded in light of its holding in vieth .

on remand , the district court again ruled against lulac , finding that the scope of its consideration was limited to questions of political gerrymandering .

in their appeal to the supreme court , appellants argued that the new redistricting plan should be invalidated as an unconstitutional partisan gerrymander .

league of united latin american citizens ( lulac ) v. perry was a consolidation of four appeals before the u.s. supreme court .

in this ruling , the supreme court's nine justices filed six different opinions , each with subparts .

many issues were raised by the appellants in this case , but the decision primarily addressed two topics: ( 1 ) the constitutionality of partisan gerrymandering and ( 2 ) whether the texas redistricting plan violated section 2 of the voting rights act .

after rejecting the statewide challenge to texas's redistricting as an unconstitutional partisan gerrymander , and holding that congressional district 23 violates section 2 of the voting rights act , the supreme court in lulac remanded the case for further proceedings .

in accordance with the supreme court's ruling , on june 29 , 2006 , a federal district court in texas ordered parties in the case to submit remedial proposals , including supporting maps and briefs .

the court heard oral argument on august 3 and adopted a new plan on august 4 redrawing texas congressional districts 15 , 21 , 23 , 25 , and 28 .

the court ordered that special elections in the redrawn districts for the 110 th congress be held in conjunction with the november 7 , 2006 , general election .

as a result of the court's ruling , commentators have observed other states may dispense with the tradition of redrawing congressional districts only once per decade following the decennial census , and instead , redistrict following a change in political control of the state government .

it has also been noted , however , that there does not appear to be any urgency on the part of state legislatures to do so .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

3025 , the "fairness and independence in redistricting act of 2009," ( representative tanner ) and s. 1332 , the "fairness and independence in redistricting act of 2009," ( senator johnson ) are pending .

these bills would , among other things , prohibit states from carrying out more than one congressional redistricting after a decennial census and apportionment , unless a court required the state to conduct subsequent redistricting to comply with the constitution or to enforce the voting rights act ; require states to conduct redistricting through the use of independent commissions ; and impose standards of compactness , contiguity , and geographical continuity .

