located in the department of justice ( doj ) , atf is the lead law enforcement agency charged with administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms and explosives .

atf also investigates arson cases with a federal nexus and violations of laws related to the manufacture , importation and distribution of alcohol and tobacco .

in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , congress provided atf with its regular appropriation of $1.054 billion for fy2009 , a 4.2% increase over the fy2008 enacted level , and 2.6% increase over the administration's request .

of the fy2009 appropriation , doj budget documents indicated that the administration plans to allocate $759 million ( 72% ) toward firearms compliance and investigations .

under the tiahrt amendment , for fy2003-fy2007 , atf has not disclosed trace data or multiple handgun sales reports to any person or entity , unless the request for such data was part of a criminal investigation within their jurisdiction .

as a result , firearms trace data were no longer available for municipalities and other third parties to build cases against gun manufacturers and dealers in civil lawsuits .

while arguably the tiahrt amendment never prevented atf from releasing statistics on the u.s. firearms industry or aggregate statistics on illegal firearms trafficking , for fy2008 , congress modified the language of the limitation to state explicitly that it does not prevent the disclosure of statistical information concerning total production , importation , and exportation of firearms ; sharing or exchange of such information among and between federal , state , local , or foreign law enforcement agencies , federal , state , or local prosecutors , and federal national security , intelligence , or counterterrorism officials ; or publishing of annual statistical reports on products regulated by atf , including total production , importation , and exportation by each licensed importer and licensed manufacturer , or statistical aggregate data regarding firearms traffickers and trafficking channels , or firearms misuse , felons , and trafficking investigations .

the fy2008 tiahrt language , however , continues to prohibit the release of firearm trace data for the purposes of suing gun manufacturers and dealers .

moreover , the limitation includes the phrase , "in fiscal year 2008 and thereafter," which make the limitation permanent law according to the government accountability office .

for fy2009 , similar language was included in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

to enforce federal firearms laws , atf conducts firearm traces for federal , state , tribal , county , and municipal law enforcement agencies .

gun dealers must also report multiple handgun sales to atf .

firearm trace data and multiple handgun sales reports , along with other investigative data , can be strong indicators of illegal firearms trafficking .

for several reasons , however , there are methodological and operational limits on the use of such data and reports , in addition to the statutory limitations , as discussed below .

mayors and other municipal leaders have sought to curb gun violence in their communities by filing civil lawsuits against gun manufacturers and dealers based on three arguments: ( 1 ) the firearms they sold were defective , ( 2 ) the gun industry had engaged in improper marketing techniques , and ( 3 ) the proliferation of firearms in certain urban areas constituted a public nuisance .

many lawsuits against the gun industry were dismissed , while others were not .

in some of these cases , analyses of atf firearms trace and investigative data by nongovernmental parties were submitted as evidence showing liability on the part of gun manufacturers and / or dealers .

congress passed the protection of lawful commerce in arms act ( p.l .

109-92 ) to limit the tort liability of gun manufacturers and dealers by prohibiting civil actions or proceedings or administrative proceedings against any gun manufacturer or dealer , or trade association for damages resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a firearm or ammunition .

exceptions were provided under certain circumstances .

the city of new york has pursued a public nuisance civil suit against multiple gun manufacturers based in part on atf trace and investigative data that were acquired under a strict confidentiality order entered by a federal judge before the disclosure limits were enacted .

for fy2003-fy2009 , a rider on the atf appropriations language has prohibited that agency from disclosing data on illegal gun trafficking based on firearm traces and ffl transfer records , as well as multiple handgun sale reports , for any purpose other than supporting a "bona fide" criminal investigation .

this rider is known as the "tiahrt" amendment , for its sponsor in full committee markup of the fy2004 commerce - justice - state appropriations bill , representative todd tiahrt .

proponents of the tiahrt amendment contend that the business records of ffls should be confidential , and that access to these records is only authorized under federal law for the purposes of conducting atf trace requests in order to solve crimes .

they argue further that it was never intended that firearm trace data be used to support civil , public nuisance lawsuits against firearms manufacturers and dealers .

opponents of the amendment counter that every tool is needed to "crackdown" on irresponsible ffls by analyzing firearm trace data on a regional and national basis , so that federal , state , and local law enforcement authorities can be informed of the source and market areas for "crime guns. .

a coalition of 210 city mayors led by new york city mayor michael bloomberg favors the repeal of this amendment , but the fraternal order of police reportedly favors retaining it , as does atf .

in the 109 th congress , house judiciary committee ordered reported h.r .

5005 , a bill that included a provision ( section 9 ) that would have codified the tiahrt amendment ; however , that bill saw no further action .

in addition , senator robert menendez and representative steven r. rothman introduced identical bills ( s. 2460 / h.r .

5033 ) to repeal the fy2006 appropriation rider .

senator charles schumer introduced a similar bill ( s. 2629 ) , which he has reintroduced in the 110 th congress ( s. 77 ) .

in the 110 th congress , senator richard shelby amended the fy2008 commerce - justice - science ( cjs ) appropriations bill ( s. 1745 ; s.rept .

110-124 ) with a modified rider in full committee markup .

a similar rider was included in the house - reported and passed cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

3093 ) .

the senate passed h.r .

3093 , amended with the language of s. 1745 .

while conference negotiations on h.r .

3093 broke down for reasons unrelated to gun control , the fy2008 cjs appropriations and the tiahrt language were enacted as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

although the tiahrt language was modified to authorize the release of aggregate firearms trace data on illegal gun trafficking , it still prohibits the use of those data for the purposes of suing gun manufacturers and dealers .

without any public debate , similar language was included in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

