historically , congress has mandated programs to help u.s. exporters compete with subsidies provided by other countries , to assist with financing for exports where credit is a constraint , or to promote u.s. agricultural exports .

some in congress have criticized programs that assist with exports as corporate welfare ; others suggest that private entities could and should themselves finance export activities .

the 2008 farm bill extends funding authority for credit guarantees and export market development through fy2012 .

the enacted farm law repeals legislative authority for the major export subsidy program , but extends authority for a smaller program that subsidizes dairy product exports .

funded by using the borrowing authority of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) , the farm bill agricultural export programs are administered by the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

ccc export credit guarantees assure payments for commercial financing of the sale of u.s. agricultural exports .

if a foreign buyer defaults on the debt financing incurred , the ccc assumes the debt .

in the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) congress authorized $5.5 billion ( in export value , not cost to the treasury ) for such guarantees , plus an additional $1 billion to be made available to countries that are emerging markets .

four ccc export credit guarantee programs were authorized in the 2002 farm bill .

gsm - 102 guaranteed short - term ( up to 3 years ) financing of u.s. farm products ; gsm - 103 guaranteed longer - term ( 3-10 years ) financing .

the supplier credit guarantee program ( scgp ) guaranteed very short - term ( up to 1 year ) financing of exports .

the facilities financing guarantee program ( ffgp ) guaranteed financing of goods and services exported from the united states to improve or establish agriculture - related facilities in emerging markets .

in 2006 , fas suspended operation of the gsm - 103 program .

the suspension was in response to a wto dispute panel decision in a case brought by brazil against u.s. cotton policy .

the panel ruled that gsm programs were prohibited export subsidies because they did not recover their operating costs .

also fas suspended the scgp in fy2006 , largely because of a high rate of defaulted obligations and evidence of fraud .

in its farm bill proposals , the administration requested that congress formally repeal legislative authorities for gsm - 103 and the scgp .

the administration also requested that congress lift the statutory 1% cap on loan origination fees for gsm - 102,which the wto cited as a subsidy element in the operation of the export credit guarantee programs .

the 2008 farm bill repeals authority for the scgp , the gsm - 103 intermediate credit guarantee , and the 1% cap on loan origination fees for the gsm - 102 program .

the new farm bill caps the credit subsidy for the program at $40 million annually .

the amount of gsm - 102 credit that ccc must make available each year is set at not less than $5.5 billion , but the $40 million credit subsidy cap , according to the manager's statement accompanying the bill , is expected to finance $4 billion annually in export credit guarantees .

the 2008 farm bill extends authority for the ffgp to fy2012 .

it also provides that the secretary of agriculture may waive requirements that u.s. goods be used in the construction of a facility under this program , if such goods are not available or their use is not practicable .

the new law also permits the secretary to provide a guarantee for this program for the term of the depreciation schedule for the facility , not to exceed 20 years .

the 2002 farm bill authorized four programs to promote u.s. agricultural products in overseas markets , including the market access program ( map ) , the foreign market development program ( fmdp ) , the emerging markets program ( emp ) , and the technical assistance for specialty crops program ( tasc ) .

authorization of ccc funds for the market development programs expired with the 2002 farm bill in 2007 .

during the farm bill debate both the administration and producers of fruits and vegetables advocated increased funding for export market development programs , targeted to specialty crops ( fruits and vegetables ) .

the 2002 farm bill authorized direct export subsidies of agricultural products through the export enhancement program ( eep ) and the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) .

both programs subsidized agricultural exports when u.s. domestic prices were higher than world or international prices .

eep , which mainly subsidized exports of wheat and wheat flour ( around 80% of eep subsidies ) , has been little used as u.s. and world prices have moved closer together .

the last year of significant eep subsidies was 1995 ; there were no eep subsidies during the five years of the 2002 farm bill .

deip provided subsidies for dairy product exports ; no deip subsidies have been provided since 2005 .

agricultural export subsidies are a major issue in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , where preliminary agreement has been reached to eliminate them by 2013 .

the 2008 farm bill repeals legislative authority for eep , but extends legislative authority for deip through december 31 , 2012 .

 ( the deip authorization is in title i , the commodities title of the 2008 farm bill. ) .

the 2008 farm bill requires the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to make a contribution on behalf of the united states to the global crop diversity trust of up to $60 million over five years .

u.s. contributions to the trust may not exceed one fourth of the total of funds contributed to the trust from all sources .

the global diversity trust is the funding mechanism for the international treaty on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture , which is an international agreement for the conservation , exploration , collection , characterization , evaluation and documentation of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture .

the trust , administered by the united nations food and agriculture organization , ( fao ) , assists in funding the operation of gene banks held by the countries that are party to the treaty .

the 2008 farm bill includes a provision that requires the secretary of agriculture , in cooperation with the secretary of labor , to develop standards that importers of agricultural products into the united states could choose to use to certify that those products were not produced with the use of abusive forms of child labor .

the consultative group would develop recommendations on practices that would enable companies to monitor and verify whether the food products they import are made with the use of child or forced labor .

