procurement of c - 17 airlift aircraft began in fy1988 , and a total of 223 have been procured through fy2010 .

the administration's proposed fy2011 defense budget proposed to end c - 17 procurement and did not request any funding for the procurement of additional c - 17s .

further , secretary of defense robert gates , in testimony to the defense subcommittee of the house appropriations committee , stated , "should congress add funds to continue this program , i will strongly recommend a presidential veto. .

the administration argues that enough c - 17s have now been procured to meet future operational needs .

supporters of procuring additional c - 17s in fy2011 believe additional c - 17s will be needed to meet future operational needs .

the issue of how much airlift capability will be needed in the future is currently being examined in a congressionally mandated study being done by the institute for defense analyses ( ida ) and in a separate department of defense ( dod ) study called the mobility capabilities and requirements study 2016 ( mcrs - 16 ) , which was due to be completed by the end of 2009 .

the primary issue for congress in fy2011 is whether to procure additional c - 17s .

an additional issue is whether to pass legislation relating to the airlift aircraft force structure .

congress's decisions on these issues could affect dod capabilities and funding requirements and the u.s. military aircraft industrial base .

the primary issue for congress in fy2011 is whether to procure additional c - 17s .

an additional issue is whether to pass additional legislation relating to the airlift aircraft force structure .

the administration argues that enough c - 17s have now been procured to meet future operational needs .

supporters of procuring additional c - 17s in fy2011 believe additional will be needed to meet future operational needs .

in considering whether to procure additional c - 17s in fy2011 , congress may consider a number of factors , including the total requirement for airlift capability and the cost - effectiveness of c - 5 modernization compared to procuring additional c - 17s .

additional factors to consider are constraints on total defense spending , the potential affect that procuring additional c - 17s may have on reducing funding for other defense programs , and the possibility that funding additional c - 17s will lead to the veto of the fy2011 defense authorization and / or appropriations bills .

observers are now awaiting the results of the two current studies on the total requirement for airlift capability — the congressionally mandated ida study and mcrs - 16 .

a september 29 , 2009 letter from secretary of defense robert gates to the chairmen of the house and senate armed services committee states: i am writing as a follow up to our discussion last week regarding the retirement of strategic airlift aircraft .

the department [of defense] fully supports the language in section 311 of the supplemental appropriations act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ) which requires a minimum of 292 strategic airlift aircraft as reflected in the department's 2005 mobility capability study .

since the release of mcs - 05 , congress has funded an additional 33 c - 17s the department did not request .

the addition of these c - 17 aircraft influenced our decision to upgrade only 52 of 111 c - 5s with the reliability enhancement and re - engining program ( rerp ) .

congress is now considering adding another 10 c - 17s in the fy2010 budget .

the department's current fleet of 324 aircraft ( 213 c - 17 / 111 c - 5 ) is in excess of strategic airlift needs , driving increased operating costs at the expense of other priorities .

each c - 5a costs over $13 million in annual operating expenses .

since we are over our current requirement by eight aircraft , as determined by the analysis conducted during the c - 5 rerp nunn - mccurdy recertification , it costs the department over $100 million a year in excess expenditures .

these costs will only grow if we receive additional c - 17s and / or delay the ability for the department to retire excess aircraft .

initial indications from mobility capability requirements study 2016 show the strategic balance will not fundamentally change .

this leads me to believe: 1 ) the department does not need additional c - 17s to meet strategic needs ; 2 ) the department needs to begin shedding excess strategic airlift inventory by retiring a portion of the c - 5a fleet now .

the department requests your support and authority to allow the proper management of the strategic airlift fleet to meet the nation's requirements .

thank you for your strong interest and continued support of the department .

gao reported in november 2009 that: additional funds provided by congress for c - 17 procurement more than offset the strategic airlift gaps associated with reduced c - 5 modernization plans .

however , there is a potential future gap in tactical airlift capabilities for transporting medium weight army equipment that cannot fit on c - 130 aircraft .

the c - 17 fleet , in its dual role of providing both strategic and tactical airlift , currently provides this capability and is anticipated to continue to do so for many years .

the jftl [joint future theater lift aircraft] is envisioned to eventually replace the c - 130h and perform this and other roles , but will not be available for 15 years or more under the current acquisition strategy .

while the various mobility studies acknowledge the c - 17s' significant dual role , they did not comprehensively evaluate an expanded future use of the c - 17 for the transport of medium weight equipment and how this could affect the force structure , the c - 17s' service life , and when to shut down the c - 17 production line .

for example , the studies do not quantify current and anticipated future use of the c - 17 for tactical airlift .

this is because dod officials do not consider the c - 17 to be a suitable substitute for the jftl.... a potential future capability gap exists in the deployment and redeployment of army medium weight weapon systems within a theater of combat .

the c - 17 is the only aircraft currently capable of transporting heavier equipment , such as combat configured armored strykers and mine resistant ambush protected vehicles , within a theater of operations as these are too large and bulky for c - 130s to carry .

however , the c - 17 cannot transport this equipment into austere , short , or unimproved landing areas .

dod's long - term plan is to use the jftl , the planned c - 130h replacement , to transport these vehicles in theater , including to such access - challenged locations .

however , it will not be available for at least 15 years as currently planned .

while the various mobility studies acknowledge the c - 17 can perform both strategic and tactical airlift missions , none of the three recently completed or ongoing studies comprehensively considered the c - 17 in the tactical force structure , even though about 20 percent of the tactical sorties flown by the c - 17 fleet in fiscal year 2007 were for missions where loads were too large for c - 130s .

as such , dod has not evaluated the impact the increasing tactical heavy lift mission will have on future tactical airlift requirements , the c - 17's service life , its availability to perform strategic airlift and other tactical airlift missions , and the impact it could have on c - 17 production shutdown plans .

dod officials do not believe that the c - 17 is a suitable substitute for the jftl mission .

a dod official stated that preliminary results of the mobility capabilities and requirements study 2016 show that in the worst case planning scenario there would be enough c - 17s to perform its primary role as a strategic airlifter , as well as some tactical missions through 2016 .

this is because the study analysis shows the peak demand for the c - 17 and the c - 130 occurs at different times and the c - 17 is aging as planned .

however , officials indicated that none of the current mobility studies analyzed the need for the c - 17 to perform additional tactical heavy lift missions for the 8-year period between 2016 and 2024 , when the jftl is expected to be fielded .

furthermore , because we were not granted access to the preliminary study information , we could not ascertain the extent to which the c - 17's heavy lift mission had been considered in dod's analysis through 2016 .

c - 17 production is scheduled to end in march 2011 .

as we previously reported a well - reasoned , near - term decision on the final c - 17 fleet size could help dod avoid substantial future costs from ending production prematurely and later restarting production .

for example , the air force has estimated that restoring the production line could cost $2 billion .

costs and challenges associated with such a course include hiring and training a workforce of nearly 3,100 people , reinstalling and restoring production tooling , and identifying suppliers and qualifying their parts and processes .

gao reported in november 2008 that: we previously reported on shortcomings in the institute for defense analysis' study plan that could make it difficult for decision makers to know how much strategic airlift is needed .

for example , the study plan did not provide details on assumptions and the measures of effectiveness , or metrics , the command officials would be using in their evaluation .

measures of effectiveness are considered to be especially important when evaluating alternatives , such as comparing the results of two analyses that measure different airlift force mixes .

we recommended in april 2008 that dod take action to ensure that the final study plan included sufficient details to address all the elements specified in the law and needed to inform decision makers on airlift issues .

dod concurred with our recommendation .

we also identified shortcomings in dod's 2005 mobility capabilities study approach that , if not addressed , could be repeated again in the current study .

unlike prior studies , the 2005 study did not recommend a specific airlift requirement expressed in million ton - miles per day — a common metric integral to prior capability studies that defines and quantifies airlift requirements as a basis for computing the size and optimal mix of airlift forces .

instead , dod officials stated that it expressed its airlift requirement in terms of specific numbers and types of aircraft needed to meet the national defense strategy to take into account real - world operating parameters that may cause aircraft payloads to vary significantly from standard planning factors .

later , in response to congressional direction , dod translated the requirements into a million ton - mile requirement .

we also found the study did not identify the operational impact of increased or decreased strategic airlift on achieving warfighting objectives that would be associated with different mixes of c - 5 and c - 17 aircraft .

as a result , we could not determine how the study concluded that the mix of c - 5s and c - 17s at that time was adequate for meeting mobility requirements and for supporting strategic airlift portfolio investment decisions .

in 2006 , we recommended that dod include mobility metrics , along with warfighting metrics to determine air superiority , when completing future mobility capabilities studies .

dod concurred with this recommendation .

although dod concurred with the recommendation , a transportation command official stated that a decision has not yet been made on what specific metrics will be used to determine the number and mix of strategic airlifters in the current mobility capabilities study .

at the time of this writing , the study plan had not been finalized and it is unclear whether a million ton - miles metric will be used , though it is being considered .

dod often uses the million ton - mile metric as an easy way to compare the capacity of different fleet mixes .

for example , according to a dod official , since c - 130s , c - 130js , c - 17s , c - 5as , c - 5bs , and c - 5ms all have different capabilities when it comes to payload and range , it is difficult to compare different mixes of them without using this metric .

the report also stated: the c - 5 and c - 17 provide complementary capabilities .

however , dod continues to struggle with identifying the specific quantities and determining the optimal mix of aircraft needed .

clarity is needed before committing additional billions of dollars to c - 5 modernization programs , establishing c - 5 retirement schedules , and / or acquiring additional c - 17 aircraft .

careful planning is also important to avoid the costs of shutting down the c - 17 line prematurely and later deciding to restart the production .

the new mobility studies , if done correctly , could bring clarity to strategic airlift capabilities needed to support the future force and changed threats , as well as inform future tactical airlift requirements because of the c - 17's dual role .

important metrics left out of the 2005 capabilities study — such as specific ton - mile mobility requirements and relative reliability rates — are considered critical factors in quantifying and analyzing cost - effective force mixes .

dod concurred with our prior recommendation to use mobility metrics to inform future mobility capabilities studies .

however , at this writing , it is unclear whether dod will use a million ton - mile metric in its current analysis to determine the cost - effective mix of aircraft and guide important investment decisions related to the expenditure of billions of dollars .

until comprehensive requirements — supported by appropriate , quantifiable metrics — and the full costs for alternate courses of action are identified , dod decision making on the future size and mix of strategic airlift is hampered , thus increasing the risk of incurring unnecessary costs and establishing a less than optimal mix of strategic and tactical airlift forces .

gao reported in november 2008 that: if the cost for c - 5 modernization continues to increase , air force officials may have to reconsider the mix within its airlift portfolio or request additional funding .

additional investments in c - 17 aircraft may become more attractive .

currently , a new c - 17 would cost about $276 million compared to $132 million to fully modernize a c - 5 .

each new c - 17 potentially adds 100 percent of its cargo capacity toward meeting the total airlift requirement .

because the c - 5s are already part of the operational force , each aircraft's current capacity is already counted toward the total requirement .

consequently , according to dod data , the c - 5 modernization programs only provide a marginal increase of 14 percent in capability over nonmodernized aircraft .

using dod's million ton - mile per day planning factors , we , working in collaboration with dod , calculated that dod would need to fully modernize 7 c - 5s to attain the equivalent capability achieved from acquiring 1 additional c - 17 and the costs would be over 3 times more ( see table 3 ) .

the analysis does not include the life - cycle costs of adding more c - 17s to dod's airlift portfolio .

however , previous dod analysis indicated that the life - cycle costs would be approximately the same if dod replaced 30 c - 5s with 30 c - 17s .

the air force has not fully identified the funding needed to modernize the c - 5 aircraft , and costs are likely to increase .

the current cost estimate is $9.1 billion to amp the entire fleet of 111 aircraft and rerp 52 aircraft .

however , we believe this is understated .

the current budget does not fully fund the revised rerp program and the caig's [the dod cost analysis improvement group's] cost estimate does not adequately address risk and uncertainty .

further , the cost estimate does not include the costs for a new modernization upgrade program slated to begin in fiscal year 2010 that would fix amp deficiencies and add new capabilities .

alternatively , some future modification costs may be avoided should the air force justify retirement of some older c - 5s .

the current budget does not sufficiently fund the revised rerp program .

according to the caig's analysis , the c - 5 rerp is underfunded by about $294 million across the future years defense plan for fiscal years 2009- 2013 .

approximately $250 million less is needed in fiscal years 2009 through 2011 , and $544 million more is needed in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 .

according to program officials , the air force is committed to fully funding the caig rerp cost estimate in the fiscal year 2010 president's budget yet to be submitted .

however , program officials could not identify sources for the additional funding needed in fiscal years 2012 and 2013... .

while our review of the caig's cost - estimating methodology found it generally well documented , comprehensive , and accurate , we found some weaknesses that impair the credibility and overall reliability of the c - 5 cost estimate .

specifically , the caig did not take risk or uncertainty into account for some major cost drivers , in particular the propulsion system and labor .

because cost estimates predict future program costs , uncertainty is always associated with them .

for example , there is always a chance that the actual cost will differ from the estimate because of a lack of knowledge about the future as well as errors resulting from historical data inconsistencies , assumptions , cost - estimating equations , and factors that are typically used to develop an estimate .

quantifying that risk and uncertainty is considered to be a cost estimating best practice because it captures the cumulative effect of risks and recognizes the potential for error .

in a memo documenting its independent cost estimate , the caig stated that the biggest risk to the cost estimate was the purchase agreement between lockheed martin and general electric for the propulsion system that is conditioned on specific annual procurement quantities .

the caig had estimated that the air force could save 18 percent by meeting the quantity and schedule identified in the revised rerp .

however , caig officials stated that if the budget is not sufficient to meet these agreed - to quantities , then anticipated price breaks would not occur , resulting in increased costs of the c - 5 rerp to the government .

despite this significant risk , the caig did not perform a risk / uncertainty analysis to determine the extent to which costs would increase should the buy quantity be cut .

caig officials stated that they believe propulsion system procurement risk has been mitigated because they have identified the quantities necessary to meet the conditions of the purchase agreement and the air force plans to fully fund to this estimate .

despite these assurances , however , we have found that dod often changes procurement quantities and there is a risk that quantities for the c - 5 rerp program may change .

for example , dod's selected acquisition report summary shows that of the 56 programs currently in production , 38 ( or 68 percent ) , have experienced a quantity change since their production decisions .

in addition , the caig did not quantify or address uncertainty with its $2.1 billion labor cost estimate associated with the installation of the rerp on c - 5 production aircraft .

the rerp program experienced a 29-month break in production between the last system development and demonstration unit and the first production unit .

as such , the caig had to estimate inefficiencies due to loss of learning and how it would affect the costs of future production .

the caig's assumptions differed from those used by the air force and lockheed martin , which caused the caig estimate to be about $200 million more than lockheed martin's estimate and about $400 million less than the air force's labor estimate .

as a result of the weaknesses discussed above , the air force's basis for making strategic airlift portfolio investment decisions is impaired , and the rerp program is at increased risk of experiencing cost overruns .

additional modernization efforts not yet budgeted will add to future c - 5 costs .

air force officials stated that a new c - 5 upgrade program is slated to begin in fiscal year 2010 .

the initial funding requirement is $65 million — $40 million in research , development , test , and evaluation funds and $25 million in procurement funds — to migrate all c - 5s toward a standard software configuration , based on changes made in the amp and rerp programs .

requirements previous waived on the amp may also be addressed in the initial block of this program .

additional funding will be requested in 2012 and beyond to provide additional capabilities .

according to a program official , the total requirements and funding needs for this modernization program have not been finalized .

however , at this time it is not expected to be as costly as the c - 5 amp or rerp .

the eventual costs for modernizing c - 5 aircraft hinge upon the decisions dod officials make about the number and mix of strategic airlifters dod needs in the future .

if additional c - 5 capability is needed , more c - 5 aircraft may need to receive the rerp modification and costs will increase .

on the other hand , if decision makers believe additional c - 17 capability is needed in lieu of the c - 5 , the air force may be able to reduce the number of aircraft that need the amp modification and additional modifications slated to begin in fiscal year 2010 .

lockheed , the maker of the c - 5 , found fault with the november 2008 gao report , stating in a seven - page point paper that: the gao report adequately addresses some elements surrounding past c - 5 modernization debate and c - 17 alternatives , yet falls fall short of presenting a balanced discussion that advances a better public understanding of the complex strategic airlift debate .

the gao report selectively applies facts that detract from the merits of c - 5 modernization while omitting current and relevant analysis that highlights the value of the program .

lockheed martin concurs with the dod's characterization that the gao report contains misleading information and illustrations... .

the gao report does not represent a balanced discussion , but instead presents a rather one - dimensional perspective which leans toward c - 17 advocacy while failing to acknowledge virtually any of the benefits of c - 5 modernization .

in its 2008 rerp recertification , the dod reviewed 14 different airlift options and concluded that no other alternative provided greater or equal military capability at less cost than c - 5 modernization .

rerp delivers significant operational capabilities , meets all requirements , and pays for itself .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-288 of october 7 , 2009 ) on the fy2010 defense authorization act ( h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 of october 28 , 2009 ) authorizes no funding for the procurement of additional c - 17s .

 ( page 948 ) section 137 of the act prohibits the secretary of the air force from proceeding with a decision to retire c - 5as in any number that would reduce the active inventory of c - 5s below 111 until certain conditions are met , and requires the secretary of the air force to submit a report to the congressional defense committees on the issue of c - 5 retirement .

section 138 requires the secretary of the air force , in coordination with the director of the air national guard , to submit to the congressional defense committees , at least 90 days before a c - 5 airlift aircraft is retired , a report on the proposed force structure and basing of c - 5 and c - 17 aircraft .

section 139 amends 10 usc 8062 ( g ) ( 1 ) to state that the secretary of the air force shall maintain a total inventory of not less than 316 c - 5s and c - 17s .

if the current force of 111 c - 5s were retained , this provision would support a c - 17 force of not less than 205 c - 7s — the number procured through fy2008 .

section 1052 requires a report on the force structure findings of the 2009 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) .

the house report on h.r .

2647 ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 — see discussion above ) stated that this report is to include , among other things , a discussion of description of the factors that informed decisions regarding strategic and tactical airlift force structure .

section 137 states: sec .

137 .

limitation on retirement of c – 5 aircraft .

 ( a ) limitation. — the secretary of the air force may not proceed with a decision to retire c – 5a aircraft from the active inventory of the air force in any number that would reduce the total number of such aircraft in the active inventory below 111 until — ( 1 ) the air force has modified a c – 5a aircraft to the configuration referred to as the reliability enhancement and reengining program ( rerp ) configuration , as planned under the c – 5 system development and demonstration program as of may 1 , 2003 ; and ( 2 ) the director of operational test and evaluation of the department of defense — ( a ) conducts an operational evaluation of that aircraft , as so modified ; and ( b ) provides to the secretary of defense and the congressional defense committees an operational assessment .

 ( b ) operational evaluation. — an operational evaluation for purposes of paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) of subsection ( a ) is an evaluation , conducted during operational testing and evaluation of the aircraft , as so modified , of the performance of the aircraft with respect to reliability , maintainability , and availability and with respect to critical operational issues .

 ( c ) operational assessment. — an operational assessment for purposes of paragraph ( 2 ) ( b ) of subsection ( a ) is an operational assessment of the program to modify c – 5a aircraft to the configuration referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) regarding both overall suitability and deficiencies of the program to improve performance of the c – 5a aircraft relative to requirements and specifications for reliability , maintainability , and availability of that aircraft as in effect on may 1 , 2003 .

 ( d ) additional limitations on retirement of aircraft. — the secretary of the air force may not retire c – 5 aircraft from the active inventory as of the date of the enactment of this act until the later of the following: ( 1 ) the date that is 90 days after the date on which the director of operational test and evaluation submits the report referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) .

 ( 2 ) the date that is 90 days after the date on which the secretary submits the report required under subsection ( e ) .

 ( 3 ) the date that is 30 days after the date on which the secretary certifies to the congressional defense committees that — ( a ) the retirement of such aircraft will not increase the operational risk of meeting the national defense strategy ; and ( b ) the retirement of such aircraft will not reduce the total strategic airlift force structure below 316 strategic airlift aircraft .

 ( e ) report on retirement of aircraft. — the secretary of the air force shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the following: ( 1 ) the rationale for the retirement of existing c – 5 aircraft and a cost - benefit analysis of alternative strategic airlift force structures , including the force structure that would result from the retirement of such aircraft .

 ( 2 ) an updated assessment to the assessment of the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics certified on february 14 , 2008 , concerning the costs and benefits of applying the reliability enhancement and re - engining program ( rerp ) modification to the entire the c – 5a aircraft fleet .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the implications for the air force , the air national guard , and the air force reserve of operating a mix of c – 5a aircraft and c – 5m aircraft .

 ( 4 ) an assessment of the costs and benefits of increasing the number of c – 5 aircraft in back - up aircraft inventory ( bai ) status as a hedge against future requirements of such aircraft .

 ( 5 ) an assessment of the costs , benefits , and implications of transferring c – 5 aircraft to united states flag carriers operating in the civil reserve air fleet ( craf ) program or to coalition partners in lieu of the retirement of such aircraft .

 ( 6 ) such other matters relating to the retirement of c – 5 aircraft as the secretary considers appropriate .

section 138 states: sec .

138 .

reports on strategic airlift aircraft .

at least 90 days before the date on which a c – 5 aircraft is retired , the secretary of the air force , in consultation with the director of the air national guard , shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the proposed force structure and basing of strategic airlift aircraft ( as defined in section 8062 ( g ) ( 2 ) of title 10 , united states code ) .

each report shall include the following: ( 1 ) a list of each aircraft in the inventory of strategic airlift aircraft , including for each such aircraft — ( a ) the type ; ( b ) the variant ; and ( c ) the military installation where such aircraft is based .

 ( 2 ) a list of each strategic airlift aircraft proposed for retirement , including for each such aircraft — ( a ) the type ; ( b ) the variant ; and ( c ) the military installation where such aircraft is based .

 ( 3 ) a list of each unit affected by a proposed retirement listed under paragraph ( 2 ) and how such unit is affected .

 ( 4 ) for each military installation listed under paragraph ( 2 ) ( c ) , changes , if any , to the mission of the installation as a result of a proposed retirement .

 ( 5 ) any anticipated reductions in manpower as a result of a proposed retirement listed under paragraph ( 2 ) .

section 139 states: sec .

139 .

strategic airlift force structure .

subsection ( g ) ( 1 ) of section 8062 of title 10 , united states code , is amended — ( 1 ) by striking ''2008'' and inserting ''2009'' ; and ( 2 ) by striking ''299'' and inserting ''316.' .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 , recommends no funding for the procurement of additional c - 17s in fy2010 , and instead recommends approving the administration's request for $88.5 million in procurement funding for other c - 17 program expenses .

 ( page 93 ) section 134 of h.r .

2647 would require the secretary of the air force , in coordination with the director of the air national guard , to submit to the congressional defense committees , at least 120 days before a c - 5 is retired , a report on the proposed force structure and basing of c - 5 and c - 17 aircraft .

the text of section 134 is as follows: sec .

134 .

reports on strategic airlift aircraft .

at least 120 days before the date on which a c - 5 aircraft is retired , the secretary of the air force , in coordination with the director of the air national guard , shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the proposed force structure and basing of strategic airlift aircraft ( as defined in section 8062 ( g ) ( 2 ) of title 10 , united states code ) .

each report shall include the following: ( 1 ) a list of each aircraft in the inventory of strategic airlift aircraft , including for each such aircraft — ( a ) the type ; ( b ) the variant ; and ( c ) the military installation where such aircraft is based .

 ( 2 ) a list of each strategic airlift aircraft proposed for retirement , including for each such aircraft — ( a ) the type ; ( b ) the variant ; and ( c ) the military installation where such aircraft is based .

 ( 3 ) a list of each unit affected by a proposed retirement listed under paragraph ( 2 ) and how such unit is affected .

 ( 4 ) for each military installation listed under paragraph ( 2 ) ( c ) , any changes to the mission of the installation as a result of a proposed retirement .

 ( 5 ) any anticipated reductions in manpower as a result of a proposed retirement listed under paragraph ( 2 ) .

 ( 6 ) any anticipated increases in manpower or military construction at a military installation as a result of an increase in force structure related to a proposed retirement listed under paragraph ( 2 ) .

section 135 of h.r .

2647 would amend 10 usc 8062 ( g ) ( 1 ) — the subsection of 10 usc 8062 that was created by section 132 of the fy2007 defense authorization act ( h.r .

5122 / p.l .

109-364 of october 17 , 2006 ) — to state that , effective october 1 , 2009 ( rather than october 1 , 2008 ) , the secretary of the air force shall maintain a total strategic airlift aircraft ( i.e. , c - 5 and c - 17 ) inventory of not less than 316 ( rather than 299 ) aircraft .

assuming the retention of the current force of 111 c - 5s , this provision would appear to support a c - 17 force of 205 c - 7s — the number procured through fy2008 .

the committee's report states: strategic airlift force structure the committee notes that the current mobility capabilities study 2005 ( mcs – 05 ) identified a range of 292 – 383 strategic airlift aircraft to meet global mobility requirements with moderate risk .

in testimony before the subcommittee on air and land forces and the subcommittee on seapower and expeditionary forces on february 25 , 2009 , the commander of the united states transportation command testified that a force structure of 205 c – 17s , 52 [fully modernized] c – 5ms , and 59 c – 5as modified with the avionics modernization program [amp] , a total of 316 strategic airlift aircraft , meets the requirement to transport 33.95 million ton - miles per day .

additionally , the committee notes that the previous commander of the united states transportation command and now current air force chief of staff , in his letter to the chairman of the senate committee on armed services on november 6 , 2007 , also identified 316 strategic airlift aircraft as the ''sweet spot'' to meet global mobility requirements .

the committee further notes that mcs – 05 did not consider the combined army and marine corps increase of 92,000 soldiers and marines , a potential increase in strategic airlift necessary to transport the army's future combat systems , or the prospect that future strategic mobility aircraft would be utilized to conduct intra - theater airlift missions to move outsized and oversized equipment as they are now being used in operation iraqi freedom , and believes that the results of mcrs – 16 should more accurately identify the inventory of strategic airlift aircraft necessary to meet future strategic airlift mobility requirements .

accordingly , the committee believes that the long - term strategic airlift force structure inventory required to meet global mobility requirements may be subject to future adjustment based on the results of the mobility capability requirement study 2016 ( mcrs – 16 ) scheduled for completion in december 2009 , and encourages a continued dialogue between the office of the secretary of defense , senior uniformed military officials , and the congressional defense committees .

the committee also recommends a provision elsewhere in this title [section 135] that would amend subsection ( g ) ( 1 ) of section 8062 , united states code , by striking ''299'' and inserting ''316.' .

 ( pages 101-102 ) section 1032 would require a report on the force structure findings of the 2009 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) .

the committee's report states: the committee expects that the analyses submitted will include details on all elements of the force structure discussed in the qdr report , and particularly the following:... ( 2 ) a description of the factors that informed decisions regarding strategic and tactical airlift force structure , including: the modeling , simulations , and analyses used to determine the number and type of airlift aircraft necessary to meet the national defense strategy ; the number and type of airlift aircraft necessary to meet the national defense strategy ; the changes made , and supporting rationale for the changes made , to the airlift force structure from that proposed in mobility capabilities study 2005 ( mcs – 05 ) , including numbers of airlift aircraft necessary to meet additional demands for increased army and marine corps personnel , airlift necessary to transport the army's future combat systems , and the use of airlift aircraft in intra - theater airlift missions ; the force sizing constructs used , including peak demand as measured in millions of ton - miles per day and force structure necessary to meet peak demand including the number of c – 17s , c – 5s , c – 130s , c – 27s , and civil reserve air fleet ; and the operational risks associated with the planned strategic and tactical airlift aircraft fleet , based on requirements of combatant commanders , and measures planned to address those risks ; ... ( pages 387-388 ) .

division d of the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( s. 1390 ) as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

111-35 of july 2 , 2009 ) presents the detailed line - item funding tables that in previous years have been included in the senate armed services committee's report on the defense authorization bill .

division d recommends no funding for the procurement of additional c - 17s in fy2010 , and instead recommends approving the administration's request for $88.5 million in procurement funding for other c - 17 program expenses .

 ( page 630 of the printed bill. ) .

section 121 of s. 1390 would prohibit the secretary of the air force from proceeding with a decision to retire c - 5as until certain conditions are met , and require the secretary of the air force to submit a report to the congressional defense committees on the issue of c - 5 retirement .

the text of section 121 is as follows: sec .

121 .

limitation on retirement of c - 5 aircraft .

 ( a ) limitation - the secretary of the air force may not proceed with a decision to retire c - 5a aircraft from the active inventory of the air force in any number that would reduce the total number of such aircraft in the active inventory below 111 until — ( 1 ) the air force has modified a c - 5a aircraft to the configuration referred to as the reliability enhancement and reengining program ( rerp ) configuration , as planned under the c - 5 system development and demonstration program as of may 1 , 2003 ; and ( 2 ) the director of operational test and evaluation of the department of defense — ( a ) conducts an operational evaluation of that aircraft , as so modified ; and ( b ) provides to the secretary of defense and the congressional defense committees an operational assessment .

 ( b ) operational evaluation - an operational evaluation for purposes of paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) of subsection ( a ) is an evaluation , conducted during operational testing and evaluation of the aircraft , as so modified , of the performance of the aircraft with respect to reliability , maintainability , and availability and with respect to critical operational issues .

 ( c ) operational assessment - an operational assessment for purposes of paragraph ( 2 ) ( b ) of subsection ( a ) is an operational assessment of the program to modify c - 5a aircraft to the configuration referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) regarding both overall suitability and deficiencies of the program to improve performance of the c - 5a aircraft relative to requirements and specifications for reliability , maintainability , and availability of that aircraft as in effect on may 1 , 2003 .

 ( d ) additional limitations on retirement of aircraft - the secretary of the air force may not retire c - 5 aircraft from the active inventory as of the date of this act until the later of the following: ( 1 ) the date that is 150 days after the date on which the director of operational test and evaluation submits the report referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) .

 ( 2 ) the date that is 120 days after the date on which the secretary submits the report required under subsection ( e ) .

 ( 3 ) the date that is 30 days after the date on which the secretary certifies to the congressional defense committees that — ( a ) the retirement of such aircraft will not increase the operational risk of meeting the national defense strategy ; and ( b ) the retirement of such aircraft will not reduce the total strategic airlift force structure below 324 strategic airlift aircraft .

 ( e ) report on retirement of aircraft - the secretary of the air force shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the following: ( 1 ) the rationale for the retirement of existing c - 5 aircraft and a cost / benefit analysis of alternative strategic airlift force structures , including the force structure that would result from the retirement of such aircraft .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of the costs and benefits of applying the reliability enhancement and re - engining program ( rerp ) modification to the entire the c - 5a aircraft fleet .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the implications for the air force , the air national guard , and the air force reserve of operating a mix of c - 5a aircraft and c - 5m aircraft .

 ( 4 ) an assessment of the costs and benefits of increasing the number of c - 5 aircraft in back - up aircraft inventory ( bai ) status as a hedge against future requirements of such aircraft .

 ( 5 ) an assessment of the costs , benefits , and implications of transferring c - 5 aircraft to united states flag carriers operating in the civil reserve air fleet ( craf ) program or to coalition partners in lieu of the retirement of such aircraft .

 ( 6 ) such other matters relating to the retirement of c - 5 aircraft as the secretary considers appropriate .

 ( f ) maintenance of aircraft upon retirement - the secretary of the air force shall maintain any c - 5 aircraft retired after the date of the enactment of this act in type 1000 storage until opportunities for the transfer of such aircraft as described in subsection ( e ) ( 5 ) have been fully exhausted .

in lieu of a conference report , the house appropriations committee on december 15 , 2009 , released an explanatory statement on a final version of h.r .

3326 .

this version was passed by the house on december 16 , 2009 , and by the senate on december 19 , 2009 , and signed into law on december 19 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-118 .

the explanatory statement states on page 1 that it "is an explanation of the effects of division a [of h.r .

3326 ] , which makes appropriations for the department of defense for fiscal year 2010 .

as provided in section 8124 of the consolidated bill , this explanatory statement shall have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and the implementation of this as if it were a joint explanatory statement of a committee of the conference. .

the explanatory statement includes $2,588.5 million for procurement of 10 c - 17s in fy2010 , an increase of $2,500.0 million over the administration request .

as congress decided to continue production , the administration request for $91.4 million in post - production support was not funded .

the explanatory statement provides for the rescission of $22.4 million from air force research and development funds for the c - 17 without further explanation .

the budget for modification of in - service c - 17s in the explanatory statement is reduced by $17.4 million , from the request of $469.7 million to $352.3 million .

this is the sum of a number of specific reductions shown in the following table: the text of h.r .

3326 includes the following provision: provided , that none of the funds provided in this act for modification of c - 17 aircraft may be obligated until all c - 17 contracts funded with prior year `aircraft procurement , air force' appropriated funds are definitized unless the secretary of the air force certifies in writing to the congressional defense committees that each such obligation is necessary to meet the needs of a warfighting requirement or prevents increased costs to the taxpayer and provides the reasons for failing to definitize the prior year contracts along with the prospective contract definitization schedule .

the explanatory statement also includes the following provision: c - 17 globemaster iii the recent actions of the air force to address and curtail the wide use of undefinitized contract actions ( uca ) are encouraging .

to further encourage a sense of urgency to reduce the number of ucas , bill language has been included that limits obligations for modifications until all c - 17 ucas funded with prior year "aircraft procurement , air force" funds are definitized or certifications of need are made by the secretary of the air force .

the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology and 'logistics ) ( usd ( at&l ) ) is directed to review contracting procedures within the air force and provide a report to the congressional defense committees not later than 90 days after enactment of this act detailing a strategy to reduce current and minimize further undefinitized contracts in the air force .

additionally , the usd ( at&l ) is directed to provide to the congressional defense committees a consolidated list of undefinitized contracts within the department of defense by november 15 and april 15 of each year .

the recommendation provides an additional $2,500,000,000 for the procurement of ten c - l 7 aircraft , associated spares , support equipment and training equipment as required .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-230 of july 24 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 , recommended $762.6 million in procurement funding for the c - 17 program , including $674.1 million for the procurement of three c - 17s .

 ( page 187 ) the report recommends a $152.6 million reduction in the amount of procurement funding requested for the modification of in - service c - 17s , mostly for "excess install[ation] funding" for certain pieces of equipment , and a $91.4 million reduction ( a 100% reduction ) in the amount of procurement funding requested for c - 17 post - production support for "program reduction. .

 ( pages 188 and 189 ) .

the paragraph in the bill that makes funding available for the procurement of air force aircraft states that the funds are made available , " provided , that no funds provided in this act for the procurement or modernization of c - 17 aircraft may be obligated until all c - 17 contracts funded with prior year `aircraft procurement , air force' appropriated funds are definitized. .

the report recommends approving the requests in the overseas contingency operations ( oco ) part of the budget for $132.3 million in procurement funding for the modification of in - service c - 17s and for $11 million in procurement funding for c - 17 post - production support .

 ( page 358 ) the committee's report states: c – 17 aircraft the c – 17 globemaster iii aircraft has been the supply and logistics workhorse of the ongoing overseas conflicts .

this platform has been responsible for the airlift of more cargo and personnel than any other platform .

in recognition of the platforms contributions to the nation's security , the committee provides an additional $674,100,000 for the procurement of three c – 17 aircraft .

the committee recognizes that this is well below the minimum sustaining rate required for the production line .

in an effort to avoid the extremely high costs associated with small production lots , the committee's intent is that these aircraft be absorbed into the fiscal year 2009 production run that was funded from the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 , to create a full production run funded over a two year period .

the committee intends that the pricing for these aircraft be consistent with the 2009 aircraft , using methods such as a fixed price option to the fiscal year 2009 production contract .

 ( page 191 ) the report also states: undefinitized contract actions the committee has become aware of the excessive use of undefinitized contract actions ( uca's ) by the air force .

based on information obtained by the committee , it is apparent that the air force has not provided the proper oversight of contracting activities within various programs .

specifically , the c – 17 aircraft program has billions of dollars in undefinitized contracts .

the defense federal acquisition regulations ( dfar ) very clearly stipulate in subpart 217.74 that uca's are to be used as the exception not as the rule for urgent needs .

it is common practice for the c – 17 program to place all of its funding on a uca and then immediately obligate up to 50 percent of the not - to - exceed price at the award which is a disincentive to definitize the contract .

further , the dfar requires that the contract must be definitized within 180 days after the issuance of initial undefinitized action unless it is extended by another 180 days after the contractor submits a qualifying proposal .

the c – 17 program has numerous contracts well in excess of these timelines with proposal times for fiscal year 2007 funds ranging from 373 to 975 days and on average 688 days to definitize .

this use of uca's places the taxpayer at a severe disadvantage when negotiating contracts since the contractor has little incentive to control costs while performing work under a uca .

even more concerning to the committee , is that this excessive use of uca's is not just isolated to procurement and modernization programs but has migrated to operation and maintenance programs .

based on information supplied by the air force , a deputy assistant secretary of the air force for contracting memorandum dated 28 november 2001 authorized the waiver of the limitations in the dfar for definitization schedule and obligations for ucas that support overseas operations .

with this memorandum as justification , the air force has placed the fiscal year 2009 c – 17 depot funding on a uca which is still not definitized in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year even though the air force has obligated 89.7 percent of the $1,118,679,167 not - to - exceed price .

this rationale for the use of a undefinitized contracts for routine activities is abusive .

the committee directs the secretary of the air force to address this situation within 30 days of enactment of this act to include the cancellation of the november 2001 memorandum .

the committee further directs the air force to provide a detailed report to the congressional defense committees of all undefinitized uca's in excess of $50,000,000 within 30 days of enactment of this act .

the report shall include the date the uca was initiated , the not - to - exceed price , the amount obligated on the uca , and the planned date for definitization .

while the committee understands the need at times for programs to use this type of contracting mechanism , it appears that the air force has grossly abused it with respect to volume , value , and time to definitize .

the committee insists that the air force finalize all existing undefinitized contract actions in an expedited manner and to minimize the use of uca's the future .

to encourage a sense of urgency , the committee has included a new proviso in the aircraft procurement , air force appropriating paragraph which specifies that for c – 17 procurement and modernization efforts funded with aircraft procurement , air force the obligation of fiscal year 2010 procurement funds is prohibited until the existing uca's are definitized .

the committee further directs the undersecretary of defense , acquisition , technology and logistics ( usd ( at&l ) ) to review contracting procedures within the air force and provide a report to the congressional defense committees within 90 days of enactment of this act detailing a strategy to reduce current and minimize future undefinitized contracts in the air force .

 ( pages 190-191 ) section 8041 of the bill as reported would rescind certain fy2009 appropriations for dod programs .

the committee's report states that the funds that would be rescinded include $70 million in fy2009 research and development funding for the c - 17 program .

 ( page 324 ) a july 28 , 2009 , statement of administration policy on h.r .

3326 as reported in the house states: c - 17 transport aircraft .

the administration strongly objects to the addition of $674 million in funding for three unrequested c - 17 airlift aircraft .

analyses by dod have shown that the 205 c - 17s in the force and on order , together with the existing fleet of c - 5 aircraft , are sufficient to meet the department's future airlift needs , even under the most stressing situations .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

111-74 of september 10 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3326 , recommends $2,588.5 million in procurement funding for the c - 17 program , including $2,500.0 million for the procurement of 10 c - 17s .

 ( page 133 ) the report recommends a $45.3 million reduction in the amount of procurement funding requested for the modification of in - service c - 17s for "funding requested ahead of need," and a $91.4 million reduction ( a 100% reduction ) in the amount of procurement funding requested for c - 17 post - production support for "funding requested ahead of need. .

 ( page 133 ) the report recommends approving the requests in the overseas contingency operations ( oco ) part of the budget for $120.7 million in procurement funding for the modification of in - service c - 17s and for $11 million in procurement funding for c - 17 post - production support .

 ( page 261 ) section 8040 of the bill as reported would rescind certain fy2008 and fy2009 appropriations for dod programs .

the committee's report states that the funds that would be rescinded include $22.4 million in fy2009 research and development funding for the c - 17 program .

 ( page 230 ) the report "directs that the national guard and reserve equipment program shall be executed by the heads of the guard and reserve components with priority consideration given to" several items , including large aircraft infrared countermeasures ( laircm ) systems for c - 17s .

 ( page 151 ) a september 25 , 2009 , statement of administration policy on h.r .

3326 as reported in the senate states: c - 17 transport aircraft .

the administration strongly objects to the addition of $2.5 billion in funding for 10 unrequested c - 17 airlift aircraft .

analyses by dod have shown that the 205 c - 17s in the force and on order , together with the fleet of c - 5 aircraft , are sufficient to meet the department's future airlift needs , even under the most stressing situations .

s.amdt .

2558 , proposed on september 29 , 2009 , would strike from h.r .

3326 funding for c - 17 procurement in excess of the amount requested by administration ( i.e. , it would strike the $2.5 billion in the bill for the procurement of 10 c - 17s ) and make that funding available instead for operation and maintenance in accordance with amounts requested by the administration , and for the operation and maintenance , army account for overseas contingency operations .

on september 30 , the senate considered s.amdt .

2558 .

a point of order was raised with respect to the amendment .

the senate , by a vote of 34 to 64 ( record vote number 303 ) , rejected a motion to waive the budget act with respect to the amendment , and the amendment was ruled out of order .

on october 6 , a new amendment — s.amdt .

2580 — was proposed to strike from h.r .

3326 funding for c - 17 procurement in excess of the amount requested by the administration .

this amendment was structured to avoid the point of order that was raised with respect to s.amdt .

2558 .

on october 6 , the senate rejected s.amdt .

2580 by a vote of 30 to 68 ( record vote number 312 ) .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-105 of may 12 , 2009 ) on the fy2009 supplemental appropriations bill ( h.r .

2346 ) , recommended $2.2452 billion for the procurement of eight additional c - 17s .

 ( page 21 ) the report stated: c – 17 globemaster iii the committee recommendation includes $2,245,200,000 for the procurement of eight c – 17 globemaster iii aircraft .

the c – 17 is the workhorse of the theater , flying fifty percent of all sorties for the united states transportation command over the last 24 months .

these missions range from airdrops for troops in forward locations to aeromedical evacuation of servicemembers from theater back to the united states .

while the aircraft is designed to fly 1,000 hours per year over 30 years , over the last ten years the c – 17 fleet has averaged 1,250 hours per aircraft with some aircraft flying in excess of 2,400 hours in a single year .

this heavy usage is reducing the expected service life of the aircraft .

the aircraft included in the recommendation will alleviate some of these issues by introducing new aircraft into the inventory .

further , the committee is concerned that a decision on the continuation of the c – 17 program was announced prior to the completion of the mobility capability and requirements study ( mcrs ) , which will address the needs of the department of defense in 2016 .

since the last mcrs in 2005 , several changes have occurred that would change previous requirements to include the growth of ground forces , the increased size and use of special operations forces , additional use of the c – 17 in an intra - theater role , and the stand up of a new combatant command — united states africa command .

it seems more prudent to continue the c – 17 program until the results of the study are announced later this year .

additionally , the air force is encouraged to work with congress and the reserve component to replace aging c – 5a aircraft with c – 17 aircraft .

while there are concerns that reserve component aircraft are not utilized at the same rate as aircraft assigned to air mobility command , the committee believes that the air force can develop plans to work with the reserve component to address some of these issues ( i.e .

active association with guard units ) .

 ( pages 24-25 ) .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

111-20 of may 14 , 2009 ) on the fy2009 supplemental appropriations bill ( s. 1054 ) , recommended no funding for the procurement of additional c - 17s , and instead recommended rejecting a request that the administration had made for $230.2 million in fy2009 supplemental funding to cover other c - 17 program expenses .

 ( page 43 ) .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-151 of june 12 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2346 ( p.l .

111-32 of june 24 , 2009 ) provided $2.172 billion for the procurement of eight additional c - 17s .

 ( page 93 ) section 311 of the act repealed section 132 of the fy2004 defense authorization act ( h.r .

1588 / p.l .

108-136 of november 24 , 2003 ) and permits the secretary of the air force to retire c - 5as 15 days after certifying to the congressional defense committees that retiring the aircraft will not significantly increase operational risk of not meeting the national defense strategy , and provided that such retirements may not reduce total strategic airlift force structure inventory below the 292 strategic airlift aircraft level identified in the mobility capability study 2005 ( mcs - 05 ) unless otherwise addressed in the fy2010 defense authorization act .

