after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the 9 / 11 commission report asserted: americans should not be exempt from carrying biometric passports or otherwise enabling their identities to be securely verified when they enter the united states ; nor should canadians or mexicans .

currently u.s. persons are exempt from carrying passports when returning from canada , mexico , and the caribbean .

the current system enables non - u.s. citizens to gain entry by showing minimal identification .

the 9 / 11 experience shows that terrorists study and exploit america's vulnerabilities .

following the commission's advice , congress initiated the western hemisphere travel initiative ( whti ) to fulfill a mandate by congress in the 9 / 11 commission implementation act of 2004 ( division b of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , p.l .

108-458 , section 7209 , signed december 17 , 2004 ) .

the measure requires the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , to develop and implement a plan as expeditiously as possible to require a passport or other document , or combination of documents , "deemed by the secretary of homeland security to be sufficient to denote identity and citizenship," for all travelers entering the united states .

on january 31 , 2008 , the department of homeland security again tightened travel regulations with border states by requiring that all u.s. and canadian citizens , 19 or older , present both a government - issued proof of identity ( such as a driver's license ) and proof of citizenship ( such as a birth certificate ) to cross a border by land or sea into the united states .

for americans and canadians under the age of 18 , only proof of citizenship ( such as a birth certificate ) is necessary .

for u.s. citizens , u.s. government - issued passports and passport cards also are acceptable .

canadians can also use a government - issued passport .

both americans and canadians can present a valid nexus , sentri , or fast card .

non - citizens can present a permanent residency card .

travelers from bermuda can enter the united states by presenting a passport issued by the government of bermuda or the united kingdom .

for mexican citizens , including mexican children , a passport and visa or border crossing card are required to enter the united states by land , sea , or air .

as of february 1 , 2008 , the state department increased passport fees by $3.00 .

the total cost of applying for a u.s. passport for those over 16 is $100—a $75 application fee and $25 execution fee .

the total cost for children under 16 is $85—a $60 application fee and $25 execution fee .

an additional $60 per application is required if expedited service is requested .

fees for a passport card are $20 for adults and $10 for children under 16 , with an additional $25 execution fee for each when applying in person .

execution fees are not charged for passport or card applications submitted by mail .

since january 23 , 2007 , all people , including children , traveling by air between the united states and canada , mexico , bermuda , and the caribbean have been required to present a passport or other valid travel document to enter the united states .

a passport is not required for u.s. citizens traveling to or from a u.s. territory , such as the u.s. virgin islands or puerto rico .

the 2007 change was poorly communicated to the american public , causing much confusion .

many americans did not differentiate air from land and sea travel in the western hemisphere , resulting in many applying for passports who did not need them immediately .

furthermore , the change in passport requirements coincided with passport demands for spring break and families' summer travel plans .

based on work done for the department of state by bearingpoint , a private contractor that greatly underestimated passport demand , the department was caught off guard in meeting the unprecedented numbers of passport applications throughout 2007 , causing months of delays in many cases .

because of the backlog of passports , the department of state hired large numbers of contractors .

according to state department officials , 60% of the 4,400 passport employees were from private contractor firms .

passport issuance in 2008 and 2009 , reportedly , has been back to the usual four - to - six - week time frame for receiving passports .

the department of state fully implemented the final phase of passport requirements for travelers entering the united states by land and sea on june 1 , 2009 .

land crossing requirements were originally to take effect by december 31 , 2007 , but were delayed by congress , especially because of concerns of some who represent states bordering with canada and mexico , as well as some with concerns about the effects on the tourism / cruise industry .

legislation changed the date for whti implementation at all ports of entry to either june 1 , 2009 , or when the secretary of homeland security and secretary of state have certified compliance with specified requirements ( section b of that act ) , whichever is later .

as of june 1 , 2009 , travelers must have passports for all air , land , and sea crossings .

u.s. or canadian children under the age of 16 , however , are allowed to present an original or copy of their birth certificate or other proof of citizenship .

groups of u.s. or canadian children under the age of 19 , when traveling in church , school , or social groups , or sports teams , and when entering under adult supervision , also can present birth certificates or other proof of citizenship , rather than a passport .

the passport confusion that arose in 2007 resulted in straining the department of state's ability to issue passports in a timely manner .

prior to 2007 , standard passport wait times had been four to six weeks , but this lengthened to three or four months that year from the time of application to receipt of the passport .

following are tips to assist americans with getting passports: for general information on how to apply or renew a passport and to download a passport application form , go to the state department's website: http: / / travel.state.gov / passport / passport_1738.html .

for checking the status of a passport application , go to http: / / travel.state.gov / passport / get / status / status_2567.html .

for information on passport post office locations , call 1-800-275-8777 or go to the u.s .

postal service website , http: / / www.usps.com / passport , to download a passport application form and to obtain passport costs .

the national passport information center's phone number is 1-877-487-2778 .

it is open from 6:00 a.m. to midnight ( est ) monday through friday , and from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. saturday and sunday .

for information on whti passport policy from the department of homeland security , go to http: / / www.dhs.gov / xtrvlsec / crossingborders / .

for information on implementation of passport policy at the border , see the u.s. customs and border protection , department of homeland security , website at http: / / www.cbp.gov .

both the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the department of state ( dos ) have distinct roles in passport policy .

dhs is responsible for determining passport policies and regulations , whereas the state department is responsible for implementing them .

some observers question whether having two departments involved is the most effective way to handle passport policy .

furthermore , some wonder if this dual - department approach to passport regulations and issuance may have contributed to the past - year's confusion and may create new confusion on passport changes in the future .

others believe that border security is of utmost importance to national security , and that having two agencies with passport responsibilities provides a dual layer of protection .

now that most americans will need passports if they have any possibility of crossing any u.s. border , the cost of passports has become a concern to some .

with the $3 increase in fees , bringing the total passport application cost for an adult to $100 and for children $85 , a typical family of four would have to pay $370 to simply cross the united states border after june 1 , 2009 .

some who follow passport issues are concerned that this expense would be burdensome for many american families .

the department of state says that the current costs reflect the cost of doing background checks and expensive technology involved in securing identities .

accessibility to passport offices is a concern of many americans in trying to get a passport .

while there are many passport offices on the east and west coasts , they are much fewer in number with more distance between in the middle of the country .

according to the department of state , passport services opened a tucson passport center in arizona in 2008 and a detroit passport agency in march 2009 .

businesses that are involved with cross - border trade or travel ( such as cruise lines ) involving the united states , canada , mexico , the caribbean , and bermuda are concerned that recent passport requirements will hinder their profits .

some members of congress sought to postpone passport requirements in order to delay businesses from being hurt and give them time to prepare .

senator leahy stated , "with concerns about a recession on the way , the timing for clamping down on billions of dollars in trade and travel could not be worse. .

on the other hand , the secretary of homeland security , michael chertoff , asserted , "it's time to grow up and recognize that if we're serious about this [terrorist] threat , we've got to take reasonable , measured , but nevertheless determined steps to getting better security. .

