campaign - related activity by entities commonly referred to as 527 groups or 527s has increased over the past several election cycles .

these groups are a subset of the political organizations that qualify for tax - exempt status under section 527 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

beginning in earnest in the late 1990s , 527 groups have funded broadcast communications that discuss the position of federal candidates on public policy issues , but carefully avoid expressly advocating for or against a candidate .

although these "issue advocacy" communications are widely viewed as intending to influence elections , some argue that they are not regulated — and cannot be constitutionally regulated — by the federal election campaign act ( feca ) due to an interpretation of the supreme court's campaign finance law jurisprudence only permitting regulation of communications expressly advocating for the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate .

it was also in the late 1990s that the internal revenue service ( irs ) issued several private rulings indicating that some issue advocacy activities qualify as "exempt function" activities under irc § 527 , thereby permitting these groups to qualify for § 527 status .

as a result , 527 groups have been able to utilize this "regulatory gap" between the irc and feca: while their issue advocacy and campaign activities are sufficient to qualify for § 527 tax - exempt treatment , arguably , they are not sufficiently election - related to trigger regulation under feca .

by the 2000 election cycle , as the campaign activity of 527s continued to grow , they were often referred to as "stealth pacs" because they were not reporting to the federal election commission ( fec ) , and only had contact with the irs if they had to file a tax return .

in response , congress amended irc § 527 in 2000 and 2002 to generally require that most § 527 political organizations report information to the irs , the fec , or a state .

section 527 political organizations that are not fec - regulated political committees are generally required to report to the irs their existence within 24 hours of formation and periodically disclose information on contributors who have given at least $200 during the year and expenditures made to persons who have received at least $500 during the year , in addition to annual information and tax return requirements .

there are exceptions for small organizations , state and local candidate political committees , and state and local political party committees , among others .

following enactment of the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) , which amended feca and eliminated the flow of unregulated money to political parties , the prominence of 527 groups continued to increase .

as unregulated political party soft money was no longer available , there was greater reliance on 527 groups to help candidates compete in increasingly expensive election campaigns .

in the 110 th congress , the 527 reform act of 2007 ( h.r .

420 and s. 463 ) would have amended feca to define "political committee" to include any committee , club , association , or group of persons that has given notice to the irs of its status as a § 527 political organization .

exceptions would have existed for organizations that are not required to give the irs such notification ( i.e. , small organizations , and state and local candidate and party committees ) ; are exclusively for paying certain office - related expenses or expenses of qualifying newsletter funds ; consist solely of state or local candidates or officeholders so long as the organization refers only to non - federal candidates or applicable state or local issues in all of its voter drive activities and does not refer to a federal candidate or a political party in any such activities ; or whose election or nomination activities relate exclusively to elections where no federal candidate is on the ballot , to non - federal elections or non - elected offices , or state or local ballot issues .

no exception would exist for an organization that spends more than $1,000 for either ( 1 ) public communications that promote , support , attack , or oppose a clearly identified federal candidate within one year of the general election in which that candidate is seeking office or ( 2 ) voter drive efforts unless the effort meets strict criteria ensuring the group and its efforts are involved in non - federal election activities .

in addition , the act would have established allocation and funding rules for certain expenses relating to federal and non - federal activities by political committees .

it expressly provided that no section of the act would affect fec regulations , the definition of political organization , or the determination as to whether a tax - exempt irc § 501 ( c ) organization is a political committee .

if an action is brought for declaratory or injunctive relief to challenge its constitutionality , the act would have provided for the action to be heard by a three - judge court convened by the u.s. district court for the district of columbia , with direct appeal to the u.s. supreme court ; would have provided for expedited judicial review ; and would have allowed any member of congress to bring or intervene in such a case .

if the 527 reform act had been enacted , it is likely that its constitutionality would have been challenged .

by requiring most 527s to register with the fec as "political committees," such groups would have been required to use only federally regulated hard money contributions to fund advertisements that promote or attack federal candidates , without regard to whether the communications expressly advocate election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate .

as some interpret supreme court precedent to limit regulation through the designation of "political committee" status to only those organizations engaging in express advocacy , it is likely that litigation would have occurred .

legislation regulating 527 organizations has not yet been introduced in the 111 th congress .

