a major issue in the upcoming farm bill debate is likely to be funding for conservation programs .

current authorization for mandatory funding for most of these programs , under the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 171 ) , expires at the end of fy2007 .

mandatory funding means that the amount authorized by congress is available unless limited to smaller amounts in the appropriations process ; if appropriators do not act , the amount that was authorized is provided to the program .

these mandatory funds are provided by the u.s. department of agriculture's commodity credit corporation , a financing institution for many agriculture programs , including commodity programs and export subsidies .

while most conservation programs currently are authorized using mandatory funding , discretionary funding is used for six conservation programs .

for discretionary programs , appropriators decide how much funding to provide each year in the annual agriculture appropriations bill , subject to any maximum limit set in law .

conservation program advocates prefer mandatory funding over discretionary funding .

they believe that it is generally easier to protect authorized mandatory funding levels from reductions during the appropriations process than to secure appropriations each year .

however , since fy2002 , congress has limited funding for some of the mandatory programs each year below authorized levels in annual appropriations acts .

advocates for these programs decry these limitations as significant changes from the intent of the farm bill , which compromise the programs' ability to provide the anticipated magnitude of benefits to producers and the environment .

others , including those interested in reducing agricultural expenditures or in spending the funds for other agricultural purposes , counter that , even with these reductions , overall funding has grown substantially .

congress provided mandatory funding for selected conservation programs for the first time in the 1996 farm bill ( p.l .

104 - 127 ) .

prior to 1996 , all conservation programs had been funded as discretionary programs .

conservation program advocates viewed mandatory funding as a much more desirable approach , and congress agreed , enacting provisions that moved some conservation programs from discretionary to mandatory funding .

some advocates viewed this change in funding as a major achievement in the 1996 farm bill .

amounts authorized for these programs at the time may seem modest when compared with today's levels .

programs funded with mandatory funding , and their authorized levels under the 1996 law , included the following: conservation reserve program ( a maximum of 36.4 million acres at any time through fy2002 , with no dollar amount specified ) ; wetland reserve program ( a maximum of 975,000 acres at any time through fy2002 , with no dollar amount specified ) ; environmental quality incentives program ( $130 million in fy1996 , and $200 million annually thereafter through fy2002 ) ; wildlife habitat incentives program ( a total of $50 million between fy1996 and fy2002 ) ; farmland protection program ( a total of $35 million with no time span specified ) ; and conservation farm option ( $7.5 million in fy1997 , increasing each year to a high of $62.5 million in fy2002 ) .

the 2002 farm bill greatly expanded mandatory funding for conservation , authorizing the annual funding levels shown in table 1 .

mandatory funding was provided both for expiring programs that were reauthorized and for new programs created in the legislation .

the increase in authorized funding levels was widely endorsed for many reasons .

conservation supporters had long been seeking higher funding levels , and this was another significant step in that effort .

an argument that proved particularly persuasive in this farm bill debate was documentation of large backlogs of interested and eligible producers who were unable to enroll because of a lack of funds .

demand to participate in some of the programs exceeded the available program dollars several times over , and some members reasoned that higher funding was warranted to satisfy this demand .

funding for fy2002 is not included in table 1 , as the fy2002 appropriations legislation was enacted on november 28 , 2001 , six months before the 2002 farm bill .

program funding decisions had to be based on prior legislation .

indeed , by the time this farm bill was enacted , the fy2003 appropriations process was well along .

however , the 2002 farm bill did authorize money in fy2002 for several mandatory programs .

in each year since fy2002 , annual agriculture appropriations acts have capped funding for some of the mandatory conservation programs below authorized levels .

the programs that are limited and the amounts of the limitations change from year to year .

one program , the wetland reserve program , has been capped in enrolled acres , which appropriators translate into savings based on average enrollment costs .

table 1 compares the authorized spending level for each of the programs with the amount that congress actually provided through the appropriations process .

it does not include any mandatory conservation programs enacted since the 2002 farm bill , including the conservation reserve program technical assistance account ( enacted in p.l .

108 - 498 ) , the healthy forest reserve ( enacted in p.l .

108 - 148 ) , and the emergency forestry conservation reserve program ( enacted in p.l .

109 - 148 ) .

many of the spending reductions originate in the administration's budget request .

since the farm bill states that the secretary "shall" spend the authorized amounts for each program each year , congress must act to limit spending to a lesser amount .

the mix of programs and amounts of reduction in the administration request have varied from year to year .

congress has concurred with the administration request some years for some programs .

starting in fy2003 , the requested reductions in mandatory funding below the authorized levels ( shown in the table ) , are as follows: in fy2003 , the request was submitted before the farm bill was enacted , and did not include any requests to reduce funding levels .

in fy2004 , the request was to limit the wetlands reserve program ( wrp ) to 200,000 acres ( $250 million ) , limit the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) to $850 million , limit the ground and surface water program ( gswp ) to $51 million , limit the wildlife habitat incentive program ( whip ) to $42 million , limit the farmland protection program ( fpp ) to $112 million , limit the conservation security program ( csp ) to $19 million , and eliminate funding for the watershed rehabilitation and agricultural management assistance ( ama ) programs .

in fy2005 , the request was to limit the wrp to 200,000 acres ( $295 million ) , eqip to $985 million , whip to $59 million , fpp to $120 million , and csp to $209 million , and eliminate funding for the watershed rehabilitation and ama programs .

in fy2006 , the request was to limit the wrp to 200,000 acres ( $321 million ) , eqip to $1.0 billion , whip to $60 million , fpp to $84 million , biomass research and development to $12 million , and csp to $274 million , and eliminate funding for the watershed rehabilitation and ama programs .

in fy2007 , the request is to limit eqip to $1.0 billion , gswp to $51 million , whip to $55 million , fpp to $50 million , biomass research and development to $12 million , and csp to $342 million , and eliminate funding for the watershed rehabilitation and ama programs .

while congress has reduced funding for some mandatory conservation programs , either in support of an administration request or on its own , the reductions did not exceed 10% of the total until fy2005 .

however , the gap between authorized levels and actual amounts continues to grow .

as a percentage , this gap has grown from 2.4% of the total authorized amount in fy2003 to 12.7% in fy2006 .

even with these changes , however , actual total funding has risen almost $720 million over the same four - year time period , which is an increase of almost 25% from the fy2003 authorization .

reductions have not been uniform among programs .

the largest mandatory program , the crp , has not been limited in any way by appropriators since the 2002 farm bill was enacted .

the second - largest program , eqip , has absorbed the largest reductions from authorized levels , totaling $396 million between fy2003 and fy2006 .

funding for a third program , the csp , has been amended four times since 2002 .

as initially enacted , it was the first true conservation entitlement program ; that is , any individual who met the eligibility requirements would be accepted into the program .

congress has capped csp and then repeatedly reduced the cap to fund other activities , usually disaster assistance .

more generally , the table shows that reductions have varied from year to year and program to program since 2002 .

at one extreme , the watershed rehabilitation program has received no mandatory funding in any year ( it is one of the five conservation programs authorized to receive discretionary appropriations as well , and those have been provided ) , and at the other extreme , the crp has not been limited in any way .

some of the programs have unusual characteristics that affect how they are treated for budget purposes , as noted in the table footnotes .

for example , the grasslands reserve and klamath river basin programs each have a total authorized level that is not subdivided by fiscal year in the authorizing legislation .

for those programs , the amount that was spent each year ( not the remaining lifetime authorization ) is included for purposes of calculating the percentage by which funding is reduced .

as a result of the many variations in how these programs are authorized ( some in acres and others in dollars , and some as a total amount and others by year ) , there are several alternative ways to calculate the annual and total reduction from the authorized level .

however , all of these calculations lead to the same general set of observations .

first , overall funding for the suite of mandatory agriculture conservation programs has been reduced each year .

second , the magnitude by which this suite of programs is being reduced has been growing each year .

third , these reductions may still be significant to current or potential beneficiaries of those program .

fourth , even with the reductions , overall funding for the group of mandatory programs has continued to rise .

finally , funding for the discretionary agricultural conservation programs varies more from year to year , with much larger percentage reductions than the mandatory programs in some years .

greater variation in funding for discretionary programs supports the view of conservation proponents that using the mandatory approach has been a more successful and predictable approach to conservation program funding in recent years .

 ( for more information on each of these programs , crs report rl32940 , agriculture conservation programs: a scorecard , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . ) .

when considering whether reductions in mandatory funding for conservation programs compromise the conservation effort , three points are relevant .

first , a measure of how conservation funding is viewed in relation to other agriculture funding was provided in the fy2006 reconciliation process , which required the agriculture committees to reduce total usda mandatory program funding by $3.0 billion over five years , including a reduction of $176 million in fy2006 .

conservation provided $934 million of those savings , with no reductions for fy2006 .

this amount is about 25% of the total reduction that was enacted , $3.7 billion over five years .

the savings came from lowering caps on spending for csp and eqip in future years ( which also required authorizing them beyond fy2007 ) , and eliminating unspent funds for the watershed rehabilitation program carried over from earlier years .

part of the debate was whether conservation is being asked to bear a disproportionate share of these reductions .

 ( for more information , see crs report rs22086 , agriculture and fy2006 budget reconciliation , by [author name scrubbed] . ) .

second , it appears highly likely that reductions to mandatory program spending at the current scale will continue .

reductions have been in every administration request and annual appropriations bill since fy2003 .

it is less certain , however , whether these reductions will continue to grow as a percentage of the total .

future change will depend on both congressional support for conservation specifically , and broader pressures that influence overall federal spending .

it is likely that the affected programs and the magnitude of the reductions will continue to vary from year to year , making it difficult to forecast the future based on the past .

third , supporters of conservation programs may look for ways to address the challenge of spending reductions in the next farm bill .

however , several broader forces may make it difficult to authorize higher funding levels or to protect current funding levels for these conservation programs .

one force may be broad efforts to control federal spending .

a second force may be competition among various agriculture constituencies for limited funds ; the fy2006 reconciliation process provided an indication of how congress will treat conservation when it must make decisions based on this competition .

a third force may be limits on the capacity of federal conservation agencies , at current staffing levels and with the current approaches , to plan and install all the conservation practices that additional funding would support , and it seems likely that increasing staff levels in federal agencies to provide more conservation will not be an option .

