the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states and the subsequent revelation of al qaeda cells in europe gave new momentum to european union ( eu ) initiatives to combat terrorism and improve police , judicial , and intelligence cooperation .

the eu is a unique partnership that defines and manages economic and political cooperation among its current 28 member states .

the eu is the latest stage in a process of european integration begun in the 1950s to promote peace and economic prosperity throughout the european continent .

as part of this drive toward further european integration , the eu has long sought to harmonize policies among its members in the area of "justice and home affairs" ( or jha ) .

efforts in the jha field are aimed at fostering common internal security measures while protecting the fundamental rights of eu citizens and promoting the free movement of persons within the eu .

jha encompasses countering terrorism and other cross - border crimes , police and judicial cooperation , and migration and asylum issues .

jha also includes border control policies and rules for the schengen area of free movement , which allows individuals to travel without passport checks among participating countries .

for many years , however , eu attempts to forge common jha policies were hampered by member state concerns that doing so could infringe on their national legal systems and national sovereignty .

insufficient resources and a lack of trust among member state law enforcement agencies also impeded progress in the jha area .

the 2001 terrorist attacks changed this status quo and served as a wake - up call for eu leaders and member state governments .

in the weeks after the attacks , european law enforcement efforts to track down terrorist suspects and freeze financial assets — often in close cooperation with u.s. authorities — produced numerous arrests , especially in belgium , france , germany , italy , spain , and the united kingdom .

germany and spain were identified as key logistical and planning bases for the attacks on the united states .

as a result , european leaders recognized that the eu's largely open borders and different legal systems enabled some terrorists and other criminals to move around easily and evade arrest and prosecution .

for example , at the time of the 2001 attacks , most eu member states lacked anti - terrorist legislation , or even a legal definition of terrorism .

without strong evidence that a suspect had committed a crime common to all countries , terrorists or their supporters were often able to avoid apprehension in one eu country by fleeing to another with different laws and criminal codes .

moreover , although suspects could travel among eu countries quickly , extradition requests often took months or years to process .

as part of the eu's efforts to combat terrorism since september 11 , 2001 , the eu made improving law enforcement and intelligence cooperation with the united states a top priority .

the previous george w. bush administration and many members of congress largely welcomed this eu initiative in the hopes that it would help root out terrorist cells in europe and beyond that could be planning other attacks against the united states or its interests .

u.s. - eu cooperation against terrorism has led to a new dynamic in u.s. - eu relations by fostering dialogue on law enforcement and homeland security issues previously reserved for bilateral discussions with individual eu member states .

despite some frictions , most u.s. policymakers and analysts view the evolving partnership with the eu in these areas as positive .

like its predecessor , the obama administration has supported u.s. cooperation with the eu in the fields of counterterrorism , border controls , and transport security .

in 2011 , president obama's national strategy for counterterrorism asserted that in addition to working with european allies bilaterally , "the united states will continue to partner with the european parliament and european union to maintain and advance ct efforts that provide mutual security and protection to citizens of all nations while also upholding individual rights. .

the eu has also been a key u.s. partner in the 30-member global counterterrorism forum , founded in 2011 as a multilateral body aimed at mobilizing resources and expertise to counter violent extremism , strengthen criminal justice and rule - of - law capacities , and enhance international cooperation against terrorism .

over the past two years , u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation has focused heavily on ways to combat the foreign fighter phenomenon given increasing concerns that both european and american muslims are being recruited to fight with islamist groups in syria and iraq .

u.s. policymakers , including some members of congress , have expressed worries in particular about european foreign fighters in light of short - term visa - free travel arrangements between the united states and most eu countries .

in early july 2014 , then - u.s. attorney general eric holder asserted , "we have a mutual and compelling interest in developing shared strategies for confronting the influx of u.s. and european - born violent extremists in syria .

and because our citizens can freely travel , visa - free ... the problem of fighters in syria returning to any of our countries is a problem for all of our countries. .

in september 2014 , the white house noted that u.s. officials from the department of justice and the department of homeland security were "working closely" with eu counterparts on "a wide range of measures focused on enhancing counter - radicalization , border security , aviation security , and information sharing" to address the foreign fighter threat .

eu countries strongly backed u.n. security council resolution 2178 of september 2014 , which seeks to combat the foreign fighter phenomenon worldwide , and most eu member states are providing either military or other political or humanitarian support to the u.s. - led coalition against the islamic state .

in the aftermath of the january 2015 attacks in paris , the u.s. attorney general attended an emergency meeting of european and north american interior ministers to discuss terrorist threats and foreign fighters .

high - ranking european and eu officials were also key participants in the february 2015 conference on countering violent extremism hosted by the united states in washington , dc .

given the eu's largely open internal borders , u.s. officials have been encouraging european governments and the eu to bolster intra - european information exchanges and urging the eu to make greater use of existing eu - wide databases , such as the sis and those managed by europol .

u.s. officials also have expressed support for efforts to establish an eu pnr system .

following the november 2015 attacks in paris , president obama called on the eu "to finally implement the agreement that's been long in the works that would require airlines to share passenger information , so we can do more to stop foreign terrorist fighters from entering our countries undetected. .

furthermore , u.s. officials and analysts contend that the foreign fighter phenomenon underscores the importance of close law enforcement ties with european allies and existing u.s. - eu information - sharing arrangements , including those related to tracking terrorist financing and sharing airline passenger data .

nevertheless , some challenges remain in the evolving u.s. - eu counterterrorism relationship .

among the most prominent are long - standing data privacy and data protection concerns , which have complicated negotiations on a range of u.s. - eu information - sharing agreements over the years .

these issues have received renewed attention in the wake of the unauthorized disclosures since june 2013 of u.s. national security agency ( nsa ) surveillance activities .

other issues that have led to periodic tensions include detainee policies , differences in the u.s. and eu terrorist designation lists , and balancing measures to improve border controls and border security with the need to facilitate legitimate transatlantic travel and commerce .

u.s. legislation passed in december 2015 to strengthen the security of the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) — largely in response to worries about europeans fighting with or inspired by the islamic state — has also raised some concerns in the eu .

successive u.s .

administrations and many members of congress have supported efforts to enhance u.s. - eu cooperation against terrorism since the 2001 attacks on the united states .

although some skeptics initially worried that such u.s. - eu collaboration could weaken strong u.s. bilateral law enforcement relationships with eu member states , the george w. bush administration essentially determined that the political benefits of engaging the eu as an entity on police and judicial matters outweighed the potential risks given europe's role as a key u.s. law enforcement partner .

they also hoped that improved u.s. - eu cooperation on border controls and transport security would help authorities on both sides keep better track of suspected terrorists and prevent them from entering the united states or finding sanctuary in europe .

at the same time , observers note that u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation is complicated by different eu and member state competencies , and u.s. policy preferences .

an increasing number of policy areas relevant to counterterrorism — including data protection , customs , and visas — fall under the competence of the union ( i.e. , eu members adopt a common policy , agree to abide by its terms , and negotiate collectively with other countries ) .

however , at times , the united states continues to prefer to negotiate on some issues — such as the visa waiver program — bilaterally , and observers assert that this disconnect can lead to frictions in the u.s. - eu relationship .

despite periodic tensions , both the united states and the eu appear committed to fostering closer cooperation in the areas of counterterrorism , law enforcement , border controls , and transport security .

as noted previously , the obama administration has largely continued the bush administration's policy of engagement with the eu in these areas .

u.s. - eu cooperation against terrorism is increasingly viewed as key to combating potential threats posed by european and american citizens fighting with islamist groups in syria , iraq , and elsewhere .

aviation and cargo security , u.s border control measures , and visa policy may continue to be salient issues for congress that could affect how future u.s. - eu cooperation evolves .

in the 113 th and 114 th congresses , several hearings have focused all or in part on the potential threats posed by western foreign fighters in syria and iraq .

as noted previously , congress passed the visa waiver program improvement and terrorist travel prevention act of 2015 ( as part of p.l .

114-113 ) in an effort to strengthen the vwp's security controls in response to growing concerns about european citizens fighting with or inspired by the islamic state and other terrorist groups .

congressional decisions related to intelligence - gathering reforms and data privacy and protection issues may also have significant implications for u.s. - eu counterterrorism cooperation in the years ahead .

possible changes to the laws that govern u.s. surveillance activity will be closely watched in europe .

as discussed above , eu officials have welcomed passage of the u.s .

judicial redress act ( p.l .

114-126 ) as a positive step toward concluding the u.s. - eu "umbrella" data privacy and protection agreement and as a goodwill gesture on the part of the united states to help reestablish trust and confidence in u.s. - eu information - sharing arrangements and transatlantic data flows .

given the european parliament's growing influence in many of the areas related to counterterrorism and its new role since 2009 in approving international agreements — such as the u.s. - eu swift and pnr accords , and the proposed dppa — members of congress may increasingly be able to help shape parliament's views and responses .

many european parliamentarians appeared to appreciate efforts by some members of congress to engage in substantive dialogue on the alleged u.s. surveillance operations and their implications for eu data privacy rights .

in november 2013 , for example , representative jim sensenbrenner testified before the european parliament on possible changes to u.s. legislation governing surveillance practices , and urged parliament "to work pragmatically with the united states to continue balanced efforts to protect our nations. .

in late 2013 , senator chris murphy and representative mike rogers , then - chairman of the house permanent select committee on intelligence , led separate congressional delegations to europe to discuss the alleged u.s. intelligence activities with european parliamentarians and other european officials , and to reaffirm the importance of close u.s. - european political , security , and economic relations .

some members of congress have ongoing contacts with their counterparts in the european parliament , and the existing transatlantic legislators' dialogue ( tld ) brings members of the parliament and the u.s. house of representatives together twice a year to discuss various foreign policy and economic issues .

in recent years , some members of congress and many european parliamentarians have expressed interest in strengthening ties and cooperation between the two bodies further .

such exchanges could provide useful opportunities for enhancing transatlantic dialogue on the wide range of counterterrorism issues facing both the united states and the eu .

