the conservation reserve program began in 1985 as a program designed to remove highly erodible croplands from current crop production .

it was established by the food security act of 1985 and has been expanded and extended by subsequent legislation .

the program provides for "annual rental payments" to land owners or operators who agree to enroll their qualifying land in the program .

enrollment requires them to remove land from production and , generally , refrain from using the land commercially .

they must also follow an approved conservation plan .

in return , they receive annual payments .

these payments are referred to as "rent" in the statute , regulations , and contracts .

however , from the beginning , the internal revenue service ( irs ) has treated this income as self - employment income for those who continued to farm other land connected to the crp land .

although the irs initially treated the payments as rental income for those not otherwise engaged in farming , and , therefore , not subject to self - employment tax , that treatment has changed over the years .

in 2006 , the irs issued a proposed revenue ruling that would treat virtually all crp annual payments as self - employment income .

net self - employment income is subject to a 15.3% self - employment tax .

since crp annual payments are also subject to income tax , the total tax an individual must pay on crp payments is generally between about 25% and 56% of the total received if the crp payments are subject to self - employment tax .

several bills have been introduced in recent congresses to completely exclude crp payments from self - employment income .

most were simply referred to committee , and no hearings were held .

during the first session of the 110 th congress , two similar bills were introduced .

again , they were referred to committee .

however , in s. 2242 , the heartland , habitat , harvest , and horticulture act of 2007 , the issue was approached in a different manner .

this approach has been adopted in h.r .

2419 —the "farm bill. .

rather than exempting all crp payments from self - employment tax , while still including them for income tax , the farm bill provides two alternatives that would provide some relief to taxpayers .

the first offers an optional tax credit in lieu of crp payments .

the second explicitly exempts crp payments from self - employment tax for certain taxpayers .

crp annual payments would remain subject to income tax for all recipients .

the credit would be subject to neither income nor self - employment taxes .

for fy2008 through fy2012 , this provision , if enacted , would assure crp participants of a choice in the taxation of their crp benefits .

they could choose the nonrefundable credit and shield their benefits from both income and self - employment tax , but potentially postpone or even eliminate some of the benefit if their tax liability does not equal or exceed their credit .

they could choose to receive full payment benefits each year , pay income and self - employment tax on those benefits , and possibly generate future social security benefits .

the bill does not , however , assure participants a similar choice beyond 2012 , nor does it clarify whether crp annual payments generally should be treated as self - employment income—an issue that has not yet been addressed by congress .

