this report examines scenarios in which international trade could be heavily controlled or limited due to an avian flu pandemic .

each of the scenarios presented depicts the possibility that imports of goods into the united states could be curtailed due to the avian flu .

some experts argue that these scenarios are not likely to occur , because they believe that the united states would probably not implement a general ban on the importation of goods from affected regions .

it is believed that such a ban would not prevent transmission of the avian flu to the united states , because there is little evidence that inanimate objects could transmit the disease .

furthermore , opponents to a general ban on imports argue that such actions could unnecessarily cause economic and social hardship .

the united states depends on global trade for necessities such as food , energy , and medical supplies .

also , some observers point out that the nature of the "just - in - time" global economy is such that the united states does not stockpile these and other necessities .

finally , the world health organization does not recommend quarantining any individual country or closing international borders at any phase of an avian influenza pandemic .

if international borders are not closed to human passage , then it follows that there will probably not be direct trade restrictions .

while some experts believe that a general ban on imports either globally or from affected regions is highly unlikely , others contend that the strategy cannot be totally ruled out , particularly since there is already a u.s. ban on imports of poultry products from certain h5n1 ( highly pathogenic strain of avian influenza ) - affected countries and regions .

some experts argue that it may be possible to transmit the virus through any object that has had contact with infected feces , blood , or other bodily fluids .

some policy analysts predict that if the h5n1 virus were to become a pandemic with human - to - human transmission , then the united states might control the movement of people across its borders to slow the virus' arrival on u.s. soil .

this could involve limiting airline passenger flights into the country , but it could also mean limiting entry of cargo ships due to a fear of transmission from ship operators or stowaway birds .

these types of restrictions may result in a de facto import ban .

some experts believe these restrictions are unnecessary and potentially harmful , but they might nevertheless be implemented to give the appearance of strong preventative actions , in response to public concerns or political factors .

many believe that if such restrictive measures were adopted , they would likely be short - lived .

once the pandemic reached the united states , such measures would appear to serve little further purpose and could be abandoned .

a more likely scenario is that a supply - side constraint in the exporting country would limit u.s. imports .

pandemic - affected countries could curtail their exports , either voluntarily or involuntarily .

governments may nationalize assets and stop export operations .

an outbreak may also constrain production and key export infrastructure through excessive worker absences , to the point where exporting becomes difficult and is involuntarily slowed or halted .

such a slowdown in commerce could cause price increases or temporary shortages in certain goods within the united states , depending on the duration and breadth of the slowdown .

it could exacerbate the effects of slowed production and distribution networks within the united states , leading to decreased demand and supply and a recession .

several studies have been undertaken to estimate the effects of a pandemic on the u.s. and global economy .

according to one study , a mild pandemic could reduce global economic output by $330 billion , or 0.8% of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

the same study estimates that a pandemic of the worst case scenario severity could reduce global economic output by $4.4 trillion , or 12.6% of global gdp .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that a severe influenza pandemic might cause a decline in u.s. gdp of about 4.25% , and that a milder pandemic might cause a decline of about 1% .

other studies have found both greater and lesser economic effects , depending on the methodology and data used .

different studies also disagree on the extent to which international trade would be disrupted by an avian flu pandemic .

this section considers the potential economic and trade effects on the united states of import disruptions from countries affected by avian flu , either as a result of border closings in the united states or supply side constraints in the exporting country or region .

only countries with human avian flu cases confirmed by the world health organization ( who ) from january 2004 to january 2008 are considered , because these countries are arguably more likely to experience trade disruptions due to avian flu .

the relative likelihood of import disruptions from one country or region over another is not considered , because it is too difficult to ascertain .

as seen in table 1 , the united states imports far more from china than any other country that has thus far reported confirmed human cases of the avian flu .

in fact , china is the largest source of u.s. imports overall , accounting for over 16% of total u.s. imports in 2007 .

therefore , if imports from china were disrupted on a large scale over a long time period , it could have a significant effect on the u.s. economy .

however , a short - lived disruption in imports from china may not cause an immediate crisis .

forty - four percent of u.s. imports from china are in the category of machinery or electronic machinery , and include items such as computers , televisions , and parts .

a disruption in imports of these items could have implications for the domestic electronics market , but it may have a less severe effect on the u.s. economy as a whole .

one import category of special concern is medical supplies ; the united states imported over $5 billion in optical and medical instruments from china in 2007 , representing 10% of such u.s. imports .

many , but not all , products in this category are considered essential medical equipment .

for example , china was the second - largest supplier ( after mexico ) of respirator equipment to the united states , supplying over 13% of u.s. respirator equipment imports .

china has also been an important supplier of bandages ( 41% of u.s. imports in 2007 ) , boxed first aid kits ( 53% ) , clinical thermometers ( 50% ) , orthopedic appliances ( 9% ) , and syringes ( 13% ) .

some observers recommend that u.s. hospitals stockpile essential supplies to take a possible avian flu pandemic into account , especially considering that medical supplies are sourced from potential avian flu hot spots .

many of these essential medical supplies are reportedly not manufactured in the united states .

almost 15% ( about $1.5 billion ) of fish and seafood imports into the united states are from china , second only to canada ( $1.9 billion ) .

it is not clear whether a trade disruption with china alone would have a great impact on the u.s. food supply , since the united states also imports food from other countries and regions , in addition to having domestic production .

although the united states imports a great deal from china , many of these products originate elsewhere , and only their final stage of production takes place in china .

for some items , production could possibly be shifted to another location if a long - term trade disruption were to occur .

however , shifting production in the global supply chain may have great costs or not be feasible for other reasons .

thailand , indonesia , and vietnam have similar patterns of exports to the united states , although in different volumes .

among countries with confirmed human avian flu cases , thailand is the second largest supplier of u.s. imports .

however , thailand's total 2007 exports to the united states were just under $23 billion , and it ranked 18 th out of all exporters to the united states , with 1.2% of the u.s. import market .

indonesia and vietnam were ranked 26 th and 31 st , respectively , with $14 billion and $11 billion in 2007 u.s. imports .

like china , thailand's main exports to the united states are electrical machinery and machinery , comprising about 44% of thailand's exports to the united states .

thailand , indonesia , and vietnam all export large quantities of fish to the united states .

thailand is the largest exporter of prepared crustaceans and mollusks ( the second largest is china ) , and the second largest exporter of fresh crustaceans to the united states ( after canada ) .

indonesia and vietnam are the third and fifth largest suppliers of prepared crustaceans , and the fourth and third largest suppliers of fresh crustaceans to the united states .

thailand and indonesia also export optical and medical instruments to the united states , ranking 21 st and 28 th , respectively , in 2007 u.s. imports .

the united states imports medical supplies such as dialysis instruments , diagnostic instruments , syringes , needles , and ultrasound devices from thailand and indonesia .

in analyzing the trade data , it appears that if trade were disrupted between the united states and any one of thailand , indonesia , or vietnam , the effects would probably be minimal .

however , if u.s. trade was disrupted with all three countries and china ( considered more likely under a flu pandemic ) , the u.s. supply of seafood and medical supplies could be impaired .

reduced seafood imports could increase not only the price of seafood , but it could cause increased demand and possible price increases in substitute goods .

the impact of reduced medical supply imports could be more severe , possibly resulting in a shortage of certain medical supplies , since substitutes are generally not readily available .

oil comprised 95% ( $10.8 billion ) of u.s. imports from iraq in 2007 , representing 3% of u.s. oil imports .

iraq is the ninth - largest oil exporter to the united states .

if oil imports from iraq were to stop , the reduced supply of oil could cause domestic energy prices to increase .

however , there are many factors determining domestic energy prices , and other events could overshadow , exacerbate , or offset any disruption of trade with iraq due to an avian flu pandemic .

egypt , turkey , and azerbaijan all primarily export oil to the united states , though not in significant amounts relative to total u.s. oil imports .

in 2007 , azerbaijan , egypt , and turkey ranked 27 th , 33 rd , and 49 th , respectively , in exports of oil to the united states .

turkey's main export to the united states was stone for monuments and construction , with 14% of the u.s. import market .

cambodia's and azerbaijan's overall exports to the united states are relatively small and would likely have little impact on the u.s. economy if they were to be disrupted .

the united states is the largest global producer and exporter of poultry , and the second - largest global producer and exporter of eggs .

in 2005 , u.s. farm sales of poultry were $23.3 billion , while u.s. imports of poultry were only $130 million .

in 2007 the u.s. exported $3.3 billion in poultry , up from $2.2 billion in 2006 .

poultry exports to china have increased exponentially , from $15.7 million in 2004 to $578.4 million in 2007 .

china is the second - largest importer of u.s. poultry , after russia .

almost all u.s. poultry and egg imports are from canada , which has not been affected by the highly pathenogenic avian influenza , h5n1 .

some observers argue that as long as the united states remains unaffected by avian influenza the u.s. poultry industry may be positively affected by outbreaks of avian influenza elsewhere , as it may increase demand for u.s. poultry exports .

on the other hand , news about avian influenza cases in other countries could reduce consumer demand for all poultry , even if it is considered influenza - free .

if the united states were to shut its borders to trade completely , the impact could range from moderate to severe , depending on how long the restrictions were in place .

a very short - term trade shutdown of just a few days may not have significant long term effects .

as an example , in the days following september 11 th , 2001 , shipments to the united states were slowed dramatically ( though not stopped entirely ) because of tightened security at the borders .

once the borders were effectively reopened business resumed with little if any economic impact from the slowdown in trade .

a longer trade shutdown could have greater implications , both domestically and globally .

much would also depend on how wall street reacted .

a sharp fall in financial markets would be likely , but the question is how resilient the u.s. economy would be .

many countries rely on the united states as an export market .

the loss of that market even temporarily could cause economic hardships around the world and contribute to the beginning of a possible global economic slowdown .

the united states is a large economy and does not rely on trade to the same extent as smaller economies , but it is not self - sufficient .

there could possibly be an oil shortage , and energy prices could increase .

oil might not be available to all who need it .

this would have implications for the rest of the economy , as transportation costs increase and cause price increases for goods across the economy .

also , many u.s. businesses rely on imports , both for intermediate goods and consumer products .

it is difficult to determine which individual products could be in short supply , because many consumer goods that are generally not considered imported products depend on imports at some stage of their production .

also , some consumer goods that are imported have substitutes that may be produced in the united states .

finally , trade disruptions would account for only part of the economic impact of an avian flu pandemic .

other domestic and international economic events could have more severe impacts , which could be compounded by disruptions in global trade .

