as part of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations that successfully culminated in the establishment of the world trade organization ( wto ) in 1994 , wto members agreed to initiate new negotiations for continuing the agricultural trade reform process before the end of the implementation period ( i.e. , by the end of 1999 ) .

at a november 2001 ministerial conference in doha , qatar , the new round of multilateral negotiations — referred to as the doha development agenda ( dda ) or simply the doha round — was initiated .

the doha round's work program covers 20 areas of trade , which can be summarized into four broad categories of trade reform: agriculture , non - agriculture market access ( nama ) , rules , and services .

by early 2008 , substantial progress had been made in the doha round negotiations in narrowing or resolving differences in negotiating positions .

however , talks have been deadlocked ( and moribund ) since 2009 , when a wto ministerial conference in geneva failed to resolve differences .

an important goal of the doha round negotiations is to liberalize trade in goods and services , including agricultural products .

with respect to agriculture , new disciplines are being negotiated in three broad areas — domestic agricultural support programs , export competition , and market access — known as the three pillars of the wto agreement on agriculture , negotiated in 1994 .

the doha round negotiations have attempted to maintain a balance across the three pillars by simultaneously achieving concessions from exporters and importers alike in the form of tighter spending limits on trade - distorting domestic support ; elimination of export subsidies and new disciplines on forms of export competition ; and expansion of market access by lowering tariffs , increasing quota commitments , and limiting the use of import safeguards and other trade barriers .

the concessions already tabled as part of ongoing doha round negotiations are substantial and would likely have important implications for u.s. farm policy — they would significantly lower allowable spending limits for certain types of u.s. domestic support and eliminate export subsidies , while allowing u.s. agricultural products wider access to foreign markets .

this report focuses on the current set of doha round proposals — referred to as the draft "modalities" ( i.e. , specific formulas and timetables for reducing trade - distorting farm support , tariffs , and export subsidies , and for opening import markets ) — that relate to agriculture .

the draft modalities represent the general terms of agreement that would likely be part of a final agreement if such a resolution were to occur .

this report briefly considers what they might mean for u.s. domestic support programs in terms of compliance with proposed spending limits .

the final section of this report briefly summarizes the status of doha round negotiations and activities in 2014 .

the wto categorizes domestic support programs by the degree to which they distort price formation in agricultural markets .

a traffic light analogy is used to identify different limits and restrictions for the various program categories based on the severity of distortion .

in particular , wto member countries have agreed to specific spending limits on the most highly market - distorting domestic programs — such programs are counted under the aggregate measure of support ( ams ) and placed in the amber box .

member countries are allowed the ability to intervene in national agricultural policy by shifting their support to certain categories that are exempt from restrictions such as the green box .

in addition , certain market - distorting programs are exempted from spending disciplines under special circumstances — the blue box contains market - distorting but production - limiting programs , while the de minimis exclusions ( one at the individual product level , the other at the aggregate level ) comprise market - distorting policies that are deemed benign because spending outlays are small relative to a country's overall agricultural sector .

in general , wto trade negotiations have emphasized tightening spending limits on the most highly market - distorting domestic programs , while capping and reducing spending under the blue box and de minimis exclusions .

green box spending is presently unlimited and would remain so under the current negotiation proposals contained in the draft modalities .

by early 2008 , substantial progress had been made in the doha round negotiations in narrowing or resolving differences in negotiating positions .

however , a special 2008 wto negotiating session failed to narrow the gap on the most contentious issues .

a "modalities framework" was released in december 2008 , in an attempt to lock in the status of current negotiated concessions , while adding detail to outstanding issues as a basis for further , more specific talks .

as one of the world's largest trading countries — for both agricultural and nonagricultural products — the united states has a major stake in negotiations on trade rules and disciplines .

the u.s. congress will continue to seek to influence and monitor ongoing trade agreement negotiations , including multilateral negotiations within the context of the wto , to ensure that u.s. agricultural , food industry , and consumer interests are reflected in their outcomes .

