the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations , initiated in 1986 under the auspices of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , concluded in 1994 with the signing of the marrakesh agreement establishing the world trade organization ( wto agreement ) .

the wto agreement , which entered into force january 1 , 1995 , requires any country that wishes to be a wto member to accept all of the multilateral trade agreements negotiated during the round .

the uruguay round package of agreements not only carries forward long - standing gatt obligations ( such as according goods of other parties nondiscriminatory treatment , not placing tariffs on goods that exceed negotiated or "bound" rates , generally refraining from imposing quantitative restrictions such as quotas and embargoes on imports and exports , and avoiding injurious subsidies ) , but also expands on these obligations in new agreements .

the uruguay round package also includes the understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes ( dispute settlement understanding or dsu ) , which applies to disputes between wto members arising under virtually all wto agreements .

dispute settlement is administered by the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) , an entity consisting of all wto members .

the dispute settlement process consists of consultations , panels and possible appeals , and adoption by the dsb of the resulting panel and appellate reports .

if the defending member is found to have violated a wto obligation , it must implement the decision within an established "reasonable period of time. .

if the member has not complied within the established time period , the prevailing member may seek compensation from the non - complying member or obtain authorization from the dsb to impose retaliatory measures , such as increased tariffs on selected products exported from the non - complying member's territory .

congress approved and implemented the wto agreement and the other agreements negotiated in the uruguay round in the uruguay round agreement act ( uraa ) .

in enacting the uraa , congress comprehensively dealt with the legal effect in the united states of both the uruguay round agreements and wto decisions adverse to the united states resulting from dispute settlement proceedings under the new dsu .

the uraa addresses the relationship of wto agreements to federal and state law and prohibits private remedies based on alleged violations of wto agreements .

it also requires the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to keep congress informed of disputes challenging u.s. laws once a dispute panel is established , any u.s. appeal is filed , and a panel or appellate body report is circulated to wto members .

in addition , the uraa places requirements on agencies taking domestic regulatory action to implement wto decisions , including provisions specific to successfully challenged agency determinations in u.s. trade remedy proceedings .

as is the case with previous trade agreements , including the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and the gatt tokyo round agreements , congress considers the uruguay round agreements to be non - self - executing ; that is , their legal effect in the united states is based on their implementing legislation ( i.e. , the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) ) .

to this end , the uraa approves the agreements and contains provisions "necessary or appropriate" to implement them , including provisions setting out new and revised authorities as well as any needed repeals .

in addition , section 102 of the uraa , as well as its legislative history , indicates that domestic law supersedes any inconsistent provisions of wto agreements approved and implemented in the uraa and that wto decisions involving u.s. laws or regulatory actions that are successfully challenged in the wto do not have direct or automatic legal effect in the united states .

instead , specific congressional or administrative action , as the case may be , is required to implement these wto decisions .

the uruguay round agreements act sets out procedures that agencies must follow in implementing wto decisions that are adverse to the united states when existing statutes may allow them to do so .

section 123 of the uraa addresses regulatory modifications in general , while section 129 addresses the issuing of new determinations in certain domestic trade remedy proceedings .

in some cases , implementation of a wto decision may involve the exercise of authorities under both provisions .

although private rights of action based on uruguay round agreements are precluded under section 102 ( c ) of the uraa , wto panel findings have at times been brought to the attention of federal courts , most often in challenges to agency determinations in antidumping and countervailing duty proceedings brought under judicial review provisions contained in section 516a of the tariff act of 1930 .

section 129 determinations issued by the usitc and the commerce department to comply with wto decisions are also reviewable under this statute .

these cases are heard in the u.s. court of international trade ( uscit ) , which has exclusive jurisdiction over civil actions brought under section 516a .

the uscit's decisions may be appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit , whose decisions are reviewable by the u.s. supreme court .

federal courts must hold a final agency determination in an antidumping or countervailing duty proceeding or a section 129 determination unlawful if it is found to be "unsupported by substantial evidence on the record , or otherwise not in accordance with law. .

to determine whether an agency determination is in accordance with law , the court employs the two - step analysis for review of agency implementation of a statutory provision set out by the u.s. supreme court in chevron , u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council .

first , the court , using tools of statutory construction , determines whether congress has clearly spoken to the issue at hand .

second , if the underlying statute is silent or ambiguous , the court decides whether the agency's construction of the statute is permissible and will defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute provided it is reasonable .

it has also been argued that , in considering whether an agency construction is reasonable , the court should apply the canon of construction articulated by the supreme court in 1804 in murray v. schooner charming betsy .

this canon guides that where a statute does not require a specific interpretation ( that is , it permits more than one interpretation ) , it should be interpreted consistently with u.s. international obligations — in this context , a provision of a wto agreement either by itself or as interpreted in one or more wto decisions .

when read with c hevron , the charming betsy argument would come into play only where a statute is unclear as to the matter at hand ; where the statute is unambiguous , the statutory language prevails and the question of international obligation would no longer be pertinent .

because the underlying cause of action in domestic legal challenges to the agency actions described above is based in the tariff act and not on a provision of a wto agreement , courts have not viewed section 102 ( c ) of the uraa as preventing them from hearing a wto - based argument in these challenges .

when faced with such arguments , some federal courts have deemed wto decisions to be "persuasive" or a source of useful reasoning to inform a court's decision , but have stated that wto decisions are not binding on the united states , u.s. agencies , or the judiciary .

more commonly , however , federal courts have made clear that , given the statutory scheme established in the uraa for implementing adverse wto decisions , questions as to whether the united states should comply with an adverse wto decision and what the extent of u.s. compliance should be are matters falling within the province of the executive branch .

as a result , in ruling on whether an agency action is reasonable , courts have declined to base their decision making on a wto decision adverse to the united states where the executive branch has not taken the necessary domestic action to comply .

the issue of the interaction of chevron and charming betsy appears to have arisen most frequently in court cases challenging commerce department antidumping determinations in which dumping margins were calculated with the use of "zeroing," a practice under which the department considers only sales below fair market value — generally the price in the exporting country — and assigns a zero value to sales at or above this price .

the u.s. practice , which is alleged to improperly create or inflate dumping margins , has been successfully challenged in numerous wto dispute settlement proceedings as violative of the wto antidumping agreement .

at the same time , u.s. courts , using the chevron standard of review , have regularly held that , although the u.s. antidumping statute does not unambiguously require zeroing , the commerce department's interpretation of the statute as allowing the practice is a permissible one .

to respond to these adverse wto decisions , the commerce department used section 123 ( g ) authority to prospectively abandon the practice in original antidumping investigations in early 2007 and has recently proposed modifications in the use of zeroing in subsequent phases of u.s. antidumping proceedings .

in addition , where a specific antidumping order has been challenged in a wto proceeding , the commerce department has utilized section 129 ( c ) authority to issue a new antidumping determination in which the dumping margin was calculated without the use of zeroing and , as a result , has either amended or , in some cases , revoked the antidumping order involved .

legislation introduced in recent congresses generally reflected congressional concerns that the wto appellate body had interpreted wto agreements in an overly broad manner to the detriment of the united states and that the executive branch had in some cases too readily used existing statutory authorities to comply with these decisions , particularly where u.s. trade remedies were involved .

legislation focused particularly on the various wto disputes in which the u.s. use of zeroing in antidumping proceedings was successfully challenged and the u.s. response to one of the first wto decisions on this issue , discussed earlier in this report .

