the federal government , through the department of energy , operates four regional power marketing administrations ( pmas ) , created by statute , the bonneville power administration ( bpa ) , the southeastern power administration ( sepa ) , the southwestern power administration ( swpa ) , and the western area power administration ( wapa ) , each operating in a distinct geographic area ( see figure 1 ) .

congressional interest in the pmas has included diverse issues such as rate setting , cost and compliance associated with the endangered species act ( esa ; p.l .

93-205 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§1531 et seq .

 ) , and questions of privatization of these federal agencies .

with minor exceptions , these agencies market the electric power produced by federal dams operated by the corps of engineers ( corps ) and the bureau of reclamation ( bor ) .

pmas must give preference to public utility districts and cooperatives , and sell their power at cost - based rates set at the lowest possible rate consistent with sound business principles .

the pmas serve 60 million americans in 34 states .

in general , the pmas came into being because of the government's need to dispose of electric power produced by dams constructed largely for irrigation , flood control , or other purposes , and to promote small community and farm electrification — that is , providing service to customers whom it would not have been profitable for a private utility to serve .

though pmas were all created to market federal power , and they share the common mission of providing electricity at cost - based rates with preference to public customers , each pma also has unique elements and regional issues that affect its business .

they will be discussed in alphabetical order .

created by the bonneville project act of 1937 ( 16 u.s.c .

§832 ) just before the completion of two large dams in the pacific northwest — bonneville dam in 1938 and grand coulee dam in 1941 — bpa was the first pma .

though it serves a smaller geographical area , bpa is on par with wapa ( which serves the largest area ) in the size of its transmission system .

the agency constructed and maintains approximately 75% of the high voltage transmission lines in the northwest , a system of over 15,000 miles of transmission line and approximately 300 substations .

bpa differs from the other three pmas in that it is self - financed: it receives no federal appropriations .

since passage of the federal columbia river transmission system act of 1974 ( 16 u.s.c .

§838 ) , bpa covers its operating costs through power rates set to ensure repayment to the treasury of capital and interest on funds used to construct the columbia river power system .

bpa also has permanent treasury borrowing authority , which it may use for capital on large projects .

this money is also repaid , with interest , through power sales .

bpa borrowing authority totals $4.45 billion , through congressional allocations of $1.25 billion on three separate occasions and a final allocation of $700 million in 2003 .

the agency intends to use $461 million of its remaining borrowing authority in fy2007 and $538 million in fy2008 .

sepa is unique among the four pmas in two ways .

it is the smallest pma , with just over 40 employees , and , unlike the other three agencies , sepa does not operate or maintain any transmission facilities and thus contracts with other utilities for transmitting the federal power it markets to over 13 million consumers .

sepa , like the other pmas aside from bonneville ( with its self - funding provision ) , receives annual appropriations and subsequently repays this funding through power revenues .

sepa's fy2007 appropriation request was $6.5 million .

actual appropriations , reflecting an across - the - board rescission for the department of energy , were $6.4 million .

swpa serves over 100 preference customer utilities with over 7 million end - use customers in the south - central united states .

the agency manages nearly 1,400 miles of high - voltage transmission lines with 24 substations .

swpa returns revenues to the u.s. treasury for repayment , with interest , of the federal investment in generation and transmission facilities and , like sepa and wapa , for repayment of annual appropriations .

swpa requested an appropriation of $30.4 million in the president's fy2008 budget .

appropriations , reflecting a department of energy across - the - board rescission , were $30.2 million .

created by the department of energy organization act of 1977 ( p.l .

95-91 ) , wapa is the newest and largest of the pmas .

wapa's service area covers 1.3 million square miles , and its power — transmitted by a high voltage grid over 17,000 miles long — serves customers in 15 western states .

like the other pmas , wapa's electricity comes from federal dams operated by the corps and bor .

however , it also sells power provided by the international boundary and water commission and markets the united states' 24.3% share ( 547 megawatts ) of the coal - fired navajo generating station in arizona .

in addition to the types of public bodies traditionally served as preference customers by the other pmas , wapa has developed a policy to give preference to native american tribes regardless of their utility status .

for fy2008 , the agency made a budget request of $201.0 million .

actual appropriations , reflecting an across - the - board rescission for the department of energy , were $228.9 million .

an issue of importance to wapa is its role in relieving transmission congestion within its marketing area .

there are a number of constrained transmission paths in the west whose limited capacity to transfer power may reduce the ability of utilities to serve electric loads on a seasonal or ongoing basis .

examples are the main transmission link between northern and southern california called path 15 , and the transmission corridor between southeastern wyoming and northeastern colorado known as tot 3 .

while wapa does not currently have resources to fund construction of new lines or upgrades to these congestion points , the agency is interested in working collaboratively with other affected parties to resolve the problems .

wapa has expertise in transmission design and construction planning , land acquisition , and environmental assessments and may contribute these resources to transmission upgrade projects in the west .

under p.l .

110-161 , congress appropriated approximately $30 million more than the administration requested for wapa construction , rehabilitation , and o&m funding .

in the president's fy2006 budget request , wapa , sepa , and swpa proposed an alternative to the current method of appropriations that provides for their operating expenses .

the fy2006 budget proposal included a plan to reclassify receipts to allow these pmas to fund their program direction and their operation and maintenance ( o&m ) expenses through offsetting collections , also known as net - zero appropriations .

the pmas currently deposit receipts into the treasury and congress appropriates general treasury funds to the pmas for these expenses .

reclassifying the pma's receipts in this way would make them discretionary budget items ( they are now mandatory ) , putting them on the same side of the ledger as pma appropriations .

an effect of this change may be a reduction in reallocation of pma appropriations to other efforts , because the subsequent incoming receipts would be reduced by a similar amount .

congress did not agree to this change for fy2006 .

the proposal was not reported for fy2008 , but a renewed proposal to change to a net - zero appropriations approach to pma operations funding may be an issue for the 110 th congress .

