it takes an average of 15 years from the moment a manufacturer first approaches the food and drug administration ( fda ) with an idea for a new drug to its final approval for marketing .

steps in the development and approval of a drug or biologic ( eg , a vaccine ) involve actions by both the manufacturer and fda .

first , a manufacturer ( sometimes referred to as the sponsor ) submits to fda an investigational new drug ( ind ) application for permission to conduct clinical studies in humans .

second , the manufacturer completes phase i , ii , and iii clinical trials to establish that a product is safe and effective for a specific purpose and population .

third , the manufacturer submits to fda a new drug application or a biologics licensing application ( noted as nda / bla throughout this report ) for permission to market the product .

fourth , fda reviews the nda / bla for evidence of safety and effectiveness , a process that sometimes includes requests to the sponsor for additional information , the sponsor's response , and further fda review .

finally , fda decides whether to approve the application .

for drugs and biologics that address unmet needs or serious diseases or conditions , fda regularly uses three formal mechanisms to expedite the development and review process: fast track product development , priority review , and accelerated approval .

this report briefly describes ( in text and in table 1 ) those mechanisms , including their intended effects and statutory and regulatory bases , and examines whether fast track accomplishes two goals: making approval more likely and shortening approval time .

are products that receive fast track designation more likely to have their nda / bla approved by fda than products that receive no such designation ? .

the answer is we don't know , because , while fda provides statistics on the products it designates as fast track , it does not make public information on the nda / blas it receives unless and until the product is approved / licensed .

what we do know from material on the fda website: manufacturers have requested fast track designation for 569 drugs and 195 biological products since the fast track program was set into law .

fda granted the designation to 74.5% of those drug requests and 63.6% of those biologics requests .

of products with fast track designation , fda eventually approved 10.6% of the drugs and licensed 17.7% of the biologics .

what that means is obscured by what we do not know: for what percentage of products with fast track designation do sponsors submit nda / blas ? .

how many nda / blas submitted each year are for fast track products ? .

with only the numerator ( approved products ) , one cannot calculate the percentage of nda / bla submissions that are approved among fast track products .

fda receives approximately 100-130 applications a year , and has stated that "close to 80 percent of all filed applications will eventually be approved. .

the 10.6 and 17.7% figures for fast track are not a comparable statistic because they include the apparently large , but unquantified , number of product development attempts that manufacturers discontinue ( for safety problems , lack of effectiveness , business decisions , competing projects ) .

a useful analysis would account for the percentage of fast track and non - fast track products of which fda is aware ( eg , that have inds ) that result in submitted nda / blas .

how long it takes from the time a sponsor applies for marketing permission to the moment fda makes its decision varies greatly .

the length matters to the sponsor and its stockholders , to potential consumers and healthcare providers , and to fda .

two factors contribute to longer review times: review staff constraints at fda , and the quality and completeness of applications when they are first submitted .

pdufa and its three reauthorizations have addressed the staffing issue by authorizing industry user fees to support fda reviewers .

fda's web pages on the use of its fast track and priority review programs provide the review times for successful applications .

table 2 compares the review times , by year and type of review procedure , for all 787 approved nda / blas applications that were submitted from fy1998 through fy2006 .

these applications received either a standard review or a priority review , and the review times for these two procedures are summarized in the first two pairs of data columns in the table .

the third pair of columns summarizes review times for approved nda / bla applications for products that received a fast track designation .

as discussed below , most , though not all , of these 55 applications received a priority review and thus are counted in the priority review columns ; the remainder are captured in the standard review data .

the final pair of columns provide data on priority review times for ndas of new molecular entities ( nmes ) and new blas .

these applications represent a subset of all those subject to priority review , and are the group of products most similar to fast track products .

each row of table 2 corresponds to approved applications submitted during a specific year .

the total approval time includes the time fda spends to review an application , plus the time the sponsor takes to respond to questions , if necessary , plus the time fda spends on any additional review .

the table provides the median approval time for each submission year group , which is the value at the mid - point of times in a group .

fda uses the median in its reports , stating , "it provides a truer picture of our performance than average time , which can be unduly influenced by a few very long or short times. .

fast track submissions in theory differ from routine nda / bla submissions because they address unmet needs in the treatment of life - threatening or serious conditions .

similar criteria apply to drugs that fda gives priority review status .

in fact , 80% of fast track nda approvals were also given priority review , as were all of the approved fast track blas .

again , fda makes public detailed data only regarding the products that it approves / licenses .

using the data in table 2 to determine the impact fast track designation has on approval time is complicated by limitations in the data available .

these include the following: inadequate data: available fda tables aggregate applications by year and present only the median approval time value for each year .

this precludes using the individual application times in subsequent calculations .

missing data: data available for analysis come from approved applications .

inclusion of numbers of applications and total time to review decision ( approval or not ) would allow examination of additional aspects of the fast track program that may provide advantages that do not affect total approval time .

unavailable documentation of decisions: without detailed documentation of the many decisions embedded in the fda summary tables , accuracy or consistency in assignment to year of submission rather than year of approval cannot be assessed .

if an application is assigned to one year in the fast track column and to another in the all priority column , for example , relying on the annual median approval times could distort the comparisons .

overlapping categories: the all priority and all standard groups sum to the total number of approved applications in each submission year .

the other categories , however , overlap .

by definition , the priority nmes and new blas category is a subset of the all priority ndas and blas .

for the fast track ndas , at least 87% are counted in the priority nda group and at least 68% are also counted in the priority nme group .

 ( fda lists some fast track nme applications as assigned to standard review. ) .

as expected , based on program goals , times are shorter for priority review than for standard review .

for seven of the nine years , median fast track times were shorter than priority reviews , suggesting that fast track may have reduced time - to - market beyond the shortening of review time afforded by priority review .

a more detailed analysis of individual application data might indicate how group differences may be due to obvious exceptions , different procedures or application completeness or quality , or unknown factors or chance .

for example , how does the wide range of approval times — from 2.4 to 34.1 months — for the eight fast track product nda / blas submitted in 2001 affect group averages ? .

finally , review time from submission to approval is only one measure of fast track effect .

if a fast track designation enables a sponsor to submit a completed nda / bla sooner than it would otherwise , that advantage would not be evident in this comparison of review times that begins with submission .

