home and community - based services refer to a range of health and supportive services ( delivered in non - institutional settings ) that are needed by individuals who lack the capacity for self - care because of a physical , cognitive , or mental disability or chronic condition resulting in functional impairment ( s ) for extended time periods .

medicaid has covered home - and community - based services ( hcbs ) since the program's inception in 1965 through various service categories .

from the start , medicaid allowed states to cover a range of home health services and required states to cover those services for individuals who otherwise would require treatment in nursing facilities .

home health services include skilled nursing , aide services , medical equipment and supplies , and , often , therapy .

states also are permitted to cover rehabilitation and private duty nursing services .

rehabilitation can include a range of medical or remedial services recommended by a physician or other licensed practitioner to reduce the degree of physical or mental disability and restore functioning .

private - duty nursing is skilled nursing care for individuals who require services beyond what is available under medicaid's home health or personal care benefits .

over time , congress and the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) authorized states to cover other types of hcbs services as optional benefits .

states could offer hcbs services , such as personal care and case management , by including these services in their state plans .

personal care and case management services were added as optional medicaid benefits in 1978 and 1986 , respectively .

through personal care , beneficiaries are assisted with activities of daily living ( eg , dressing , bathing , eating ) , while case management includes services to assist medicaid beneficiaries in gaining access to needed medical , social , educational , and other services .

in addition to the medicaid state plan benefits , in 1981 , congress authorized hcbs waivers under section 1915 ( c ) of the social security act ( ssa ) .

hcbs , 1915 ( c ) waivers , enable states to cover a range of services for beneficiaries who otherwise would require institutional levels of care ( i.e. , nursing facility , hospital , or intermediate care facility for individuals with mental retardation ) .

under hcbs - waivers , the secretary of the department of health and human services is permitted to waive medicaid's federal "statewideness" requirement to allow states to cover hcbs services in limited geographic areas .

the secretary also may waive the requirement that services be comparable in amount , duration , or scope for individuals in particular eligibility categories .

hcbs waivers authorize states to limit the number of individuals served and to target certain populations ( eg , individuals with developmental disabilities , brain injuries , or the aged ) .

for hcbs waivers to be approved , states also must meet other requirements , such as a cost - effectiveness test , where average medicaid expenditures for waiver participants do not exceed costs that would have been incurred if these individuals resided in institutions .

all states cover hcbs for certain groups of medicaid beneficiaries .

in 2005 , 35 states and the district of columbia used the medicaid personal care state plan benefit to provide services for individuals with disabilities .

forty - nine states and the district of columbia have at least one hcbs - waiver for elderly individuals , younger adults with physical disabilities , or individuals with mental retardation or developmental disabilities .

states also use hcbs waivers to provide services for other groups , such as individuals with hiv / aids or brain injuries .

table 1 summarizes the number of states offering hcbs benefits , the number of beneficiaries receiving services , and total expenditures .

section 6086 of the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) authorized a new optional benefit that allows states to cover limited hcbs without waivers .

the requirements of this new optional benefit , section 1915 ( i ) of ssa , differ from other medicaid state plan benefits ( eg , home health and personal care ) and the section 1915 ( c ) hcbs - waivers .

table 2 compares key features of the new hcbs benefit with existing medicaid program authorities .

section 1915 ( i ) authorizes states to offer hcbs without a waiver beginning in january 2007 .

states can define beneficiaries' needs , and do not have to require that beneficiaries meet institutional levels of care to qualify for services .

also under 1915 ( i ) , states may amend their medicaid plans without demonstrating budget neutrality as they do under 1915 ( c ) waivers .

section 1915 ( i ) permits states to offer fewer hcbs services than are permitted under 1915 ( c ) waivers and to restrict eligibility to beneficiaries whose incomes fall below 150% of fpl .

states also may offer self - direction under the 1915 ( i ) option and may cap enrollment .

cms is developing regulations to guide states that want to offer hcbs under 1915 ( i ) and plans to issue a notice of proposed rule making in early 2008 .

cms also conducted training on the new state plan option for its regional office staff and for states' medicaid staff as well as drafting a state plan amendment ( spa ) preprint .

four states have submitted spas to provide hcbs services as permanent medicaid benefits .

three hcbs - spas are under review by cms .

iowa was the first state to submit a hcbs - spa and was approved in april 2007 to provide hcbs services to 3,700 seriously mentally ill beneficiaries in the first year and 4,500 beneficiaries by year five .

state utilization of the 1915 ( i ) option may lag behind expectations created by the recent rapid growth of hcbs waivers and program cost estimates .

data on states' plans for adopting the 1915 ( i ) hcbs option are limited , but an october 2007 survey of states on their ltc plans indicates that two states planned to submit hcbs - spas , while 16 other states and a territory ( guam ) were considering the option .

the remainder of this section discusses issues that could affect states' utilization of the section 1915 ( i ) option .

under 1915 ( c ) waivers , states may use higher income standards for determining beneficiaries' eligibility for services than income standards under 1915 ( i ) — up to 300 % of ssi for 1915 ( c ) versus 150% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) for 1915 ( i ) .

the more restrictive income eligibility standards under 1915 ( i ) limits states from "converting" beneficiaries in existing 1915 ( c ) waivers to 1915 ( i ) - spas , because many states' permit beneficiaries to have higher incomes than 150% of the fpl in 1915 ( c ) waivers .

in addition to more restrictive eligibility standards , 1915 ( i ) is limited to covering only services described in section 1915 ( c ) paragraph 4 ( b ) .

the 1915 ( i ) spa option prevents states from adding other services requested by states on a case - by - case basis , as permitted under 1915 ( c ) waivers .

under 1915 ( c ) waivers states have used the "other services clause" to address the needs of specific beneficiary groups .

for example , hcbs - waivers have been used to expand services to include transportation , apartment deposits , and even home modifications necessary for community living .

under 1915 ( c ) waivers , states may define eligibility based on diseases or conditions , such as brain injury or hiv / aids , or geographic area , such as a city or county .

under 1915 ( i ) , however , states must create different ways to measure qualification for services that rely on individuals' needs for service .

under hcbs - waivers , medicaid may use common medical measures , such as diagnoses , but assessing individuals' support needs using activities of daily living can be more difficult to measure for some populations .

