section 337 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

ยง1337 ) is the primary option available to u.s. companies to protect themselves from imports into the united states of goods made by foreign companies that infringe u.s. intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , such as patents , trademarks , and copyrights .

the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) administers section 337 investigations .

the itc is a quasi - judicial federal government agency responsible for investigating and arbitrating complaints of unfair trade practices .

the majority of unfair competition acts asserted under section 337 involve allegations of patent infringement .

these cases tend to be complex and require adjudication by the itc .

in the case of most copyrights and trademarks , the department of homeland security's customs and border protection ( cbp ) agency , is empowered to make on - the - spot determinations of ipr infringement .

in general , u.s. companies must fulfill three requirements in order to assert unfair competition under section 337 .

first , there must be an importation or a sale for , sale after , or potential future importation of the infringing product into the united states .

it is not necessary for the imports to be in commercial , or mass , quantities .

second , an unfair act of competition relating to the imported good must occur , i.e. , an infringement of a valid u.s. patent , copyright , or trademark .

third , a domestic company must be engaged in sufficient domestic activity , such as investment in plant and equipment or employment of labor and capital , in the united states related to the imported product in question .

u.s. citizenship is not necessary to meet this third requirement .

the itc grants two primary remedies to u.s. companies: exclusion orders and cease and desist orders .

the itc may not issue monetary damages to u.s. companies .

the time that it takes for remedies to become enforceable may vary because of differences in target dates and the possibility of appeals by respondents .

u.s. companies may request that the itc conduct expedited temporary relief proceedings and issue a temporary exclusion or cease and desist order while the regular investigation takes place .

for preliminary relief , u.s. companies must provide significantly more evidence prior to the hearing than for a standard case .

the itc's decision to grant preliminary injunctions is based on: the likelihood of success for the complainant's case and the extent to which the domestic industry , respondents , and the public interest would be adversely affected if a preliminary injunction was not issued .

for temporary relief proceedings , a final determination ( following an initial determination by the alj ) is granted 90 days after institution for standard cases .

for more complex cases , a final determination is granted 150 days after institution of the case .

in cases where the complainant receives a temporary remedy , the complainant is required to put up a bond .

following the preliminary ruling , the full section 337 standard case will proceed .

if the preliminary injunction is not upheld in the regular investigation , the complainant may lose the bond money .

in fy2008 , the itc reported a total of 88 active section 337 investigations and ancillary proceedings , up from 73 in fy2007 .

of the 88 active investigations in fy2008 , 43 represented new section 337 investigations and 7 represented new ancillary proceedings stemming from previously concluded section 337 investigations .

the section 337 investigations frequently involved advanced technology areas such as integrated circuits , computer components , consumer electronic products , and chemical compositions .

over 90% of the new section 337 investigations that were active in fy2008 involved cases of alleged patent infringement .

since 2002 , there has been a general uptick in the number of section 337 cases .

in fy2008 , the number of new cases was nearly four times higher than the number of new cases in fy2000 .

there also were over 50% more active cases in fy2008 , compared to fy2007 .

the overall rise in international ipr infringement has contributed to the increase in section 337 activity .

additionally , there has been increased publicity of the itc as an ipr border enforcement entity , partly due to recent high - profile rulings .

moreover , there is greater corporate awareness of the potential benefits of filing a section 337 case .

prior to 2006 , the average length for investigations ( in which a final decision was reached ) was less than 15 months .

in fy2008 , the average length for investigations rose to 16.7 months ; the shortest completion time was six months and the longest was 28 months .

in fy2008 , the itc issued two general exclusion orders , five limited exclusion orders , and 14 cease and desist orders .

in the prior year , the itc issued four general exclusion orders , five limited exclusion order , and 14 cease and desist orders .

u.s. companies also may bring lawsuits against foreign entities in the venue of u.s. district courts to challenge the entry of infringing products into the united states .

federal district courts , unlike the itc , can award monetary damages to the ipr holder and issue injunctions against infringers .

if the adjudicated infringer violates the injunction by continuing to import the infringing product , it may face sanctions if the rights holder claims the infringer has acted in contempt of court .

however , the federal courts do not possess direct authority to block imports , as the ability to issue exclusion orders enforced by the cbp rests with the itc .

if the adjudicated infringer lacks assets in the united states , enforcing a u.s. court's orders may prove difficult .

in addition , litigation in u.s. district courts tends to be more costly and to take longer to yield decisions than the section 337 venue .

some members of congress have expressed concern that the section 337 venue does not provide immediate relief to u.s. companies facing unfair import competition .

proponents of a faster process have argued that the u.s. economy and public health and safety may be adversely affected by the continued importation of ipr - infringing goods while section 337 investigations take place .

itc proponents maintain that the length of time for investigations has risen because of increased section 337 activity , which has contributed to heavier dockets for aljs and investigation backlogs .

in addition , they indicate that recent cases tend to involve more technologically complex products and that filings increasingly name multiple respondents , whereas previous cases generally named one respondent .

others point out that itc investigations are generally faster than litigation in federal district courts , where proceedings may take several years .

concerns also have been raised about cbp enforcement of exclusion orders .

a recent government accountability office ( gao ) report notes that u.s. companies spend millions of dollars to file section 337 complaints before the itc , but that enforcement of exclusion orders is limited because of a lack of resources .

as of july 2007 , cbp reported that 66 exclusion orders were in effect .

the number of exclusion order exams carried out by cbp has declined since fy2002 .

while u.s. capacity to carry out ipr enforcement has increased , according to gao , challenges remain because ipr enforcement frequently may not be a top cbp priority and there may not be adequate resources targeted to this effort .

