the supreme court has recognized several exceptions to the mootness doctrine that , if found to apply to a case , would permit federal court adjudication of the dispute .

in sibron v. new york , an individual convicted of unlawful possession of heroin had completed service of his prison sentence prior to supreme court review of the case .

the court explained that the case was not moot: although the term has been served , the results of the conviction may persist .

subsequent convictions may carry heavier penalties , civil rights may be affected .

as the power to remedy an invalid sentence exists , we think , respondent is entitled to an opportunity to attempt to show that this conviction was invalid .

this exception to the mootness doctrine thus applies in the criminal context , when there is a "possibility that any collateral legal consequences will be imposed on the basis of the challenged conviction. .

even a "remote" possibility of such consequences is enough to save a criminal case from becoming moot .

some disputes or injuries may arise in the short - term and have the potential for recurrence , but always fail to last long enough to permit federal judicial review .

in such a situation , federal courts have justified an exception to the mootness doctrine .

a classic example is the landmark abortion case , roe v. wade .

the supreme court explained why the exception should be invoked in this instance: [w]hen , as here , pregnancy is a significant fact in the litigation , the normal 266-day human gestation period is so short that the pregnancy will come to term before the usual appellate process is complete .

if that termination makes a case moot , pregnancy litigation seldom will survive much beyond the trial stage , and appellate review will be effectively denied .

our law should not be that rigid .

pregnancy often comes more than once to the same woman , and in the general population , if man is to survive , it will always be with us .

however , the court has held that this exception applies only in "exceptional situations," where the plaintiff "can make a reasonable showing that he will again be subjected to the alleged illegality. .

if a defendant voluntarily terminates the allegedly unlawful conduct after the lawsuit has been filed but retains the power to resume the practice at any time , a federal court may deem the case nonmoot .

the "heavy burden" of persuading the court that a case has been mooted by the defendant's voluntary actions lies with the party asserting mootness , and the standard for such a determination is a "stringent" one: "if subsequent events ma[ke] it absolutely clear that the allegedly wrongful behavior [can] not reasonably be expected to recur. .

this exception is supported by the supreme court because , in addition to ensuring that the defendant is not "free to return to his old ways," there is "a public interest in having the legality of the practices settled. .

for example , an environmental group had filed a citizen suit under the clean water act against laidlaw , a company that operated a wastewater treatment plant , alleging that the plant had discharged far more toxic pollutants into a river than it was allowed under terms of a government - issued permit .

however , after the lawsuit began , laidlaw began to comply with the discharge limit .

the supreme court held that this case was not moot because it was a "disputed factual matter" whether the company's substantial compliance with its permit requirements , or its closure of the facility in question ( which had occurred after the court of appeals had issued its decision ) , would make "it absolutely clear that laidlaw's permit violations could not reasonably be expected to recur. .

when the claim of the named plaintiff in a certified class action becomes moot , the class action will not be dismissed so long as a member of the class continues to have a sufficiently adversarial relationship to constitute a live controversy .

for example , a plaintiff brought a class action to challenge a one - year residency requirement in a state divorce statute , on the ground that it violated the u.s. constitution .

by the time her case reached the supreme court , she had long since satisfied the state's durational residency requirement , a development that , had she filed the suit only on her own behalf , would have made the case moot because she no longer retained a personal stake in the outcome .

however , the court noted the significant fact that she had brought the lawsuit as a class action in a representative capacity , which affected the mootness determination: "when the district court certified the propriety of the class action , the class of unnamed persons described in the certification acquired a legal status separate from the interest asserted by [the named representative]," and therefore the article iii "cases or controversies" requirement was satisfied .

