in 1986 , congress enacted the emergency medical treatment and active labor act ( emtala ) to address the problem of "patient dumping" in hospital emergency departments .

patient dumping refers to instances in which a hospital turns away indigent or uninsured persons seeking treatment so that the hospital will not have to absorb the cost of treating them .

although attempts to facilitate indigent access to emergency health care already existed in state and federal law , legal frameworks prior to emtala were plagued with poor enforcement mechanisms and vague standards of conduct .

amid graphic media reports of hospitals sending away critically ill patients without proper stabilization treatment and delivery rooms unwilling to accept indigent or uninsured women in labor , congress passed emtala as part of the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 .

emtala's statutory scheme has traditionally been deconstructed into two principal categories: ( 1 ) provisions that ensure an appropriate medical screening , and ( 2 ) provisions that require stabilization before transfer or discharge .

emtala only requires stabilization of whatever emergency conditions a hospital detects , and does not provide a right to indefinite care for anyone who comes to an emergency room .

emtala's requirements may be suspended by the secretary of health and human services during national emergencies , such as the recent landfall of hurricane ike in texas .

hospitals and physicians that fail to comply with these requirements may be fined $50,000 and / or excluded from participation in medicare , and hospitals may also be held civilly liable to persons who suffer personal injury .

only hospitals that ( 1 ) participate in medicare and ( 2 ) maintain an emergency department are required to screen patients under emtala .

hospitals that do not have a "dedicated emergency department" are not subject to the screening requirement of emtala .

similarly , emergency care providers that are unaffiliated with a hospital need not comply with emtala , even where those providers are the only medical care facilities reasonably accessible .

for example , in rodriguez v. american int'l ins .

co. of puerto rico , the first circuit declined to extend emtala protections to a 24-hour emergency room clinic in rural puerto rico because the clinic was not associated with a hospital .

the federal district court for the district of puerto rico had initially held that , because the clinic was the primary provider of 24-hour emergency health care in its area , applying emtala to the clinic best furthered the statutory goal of universal access to emergency medical care .

however , the first circuit reversed , holding that any considerations of the goals of congress were inappropriate where the text of the statute was clear .

like the screening requirement , the stabilization requirement applies to all medicare participating hospitals with a dedicated emergency department .

however , in some cases the stabilization requirement may also apply to a medicare participating hospital even if it does not have an emergency department .

for example , if treatment of an individual's medical condition requires a particular hospital's unique equipment or expertise , federal regulations compel that hospital to accept a transfer of that patient from any nearby u.s. hospital .

the stabilization requirement is triggered when a hospital discovers that an individual has an emergency medical condition .

actual knowledge of an emergency medical condition is required .

therefore , if a hospital fails to accurately detect an individual's emergency condition and discharges that individual without stabilizing the medical condition , the hospital may not have violated emtala's stabilization provisions .

however , the hospital may still be civilly liable to the individual based upon state medical malpractice claims if the failure to detect an emergency condition was due to negligence during the screening exam .

emtala provides a civil remedy to "any individual who suffers personal harm as a direct result of a participating hospital's violation. .

in 2009 , the sixth circuit held that this language provided a civil remedy to third parties that were injured as a direct result of a violation of either the screening or stabilization requirements .

in the case before the court , the hospital was alleged to have improperly discharged an emergency room patient who was psychiatrically unstable .

ten days after his discharge the patient murdered his wife .

the wife's estate subsequently brought suit against the hospital alleging that the hospital's failure to stabilize before discharge was a direct cause of her death .

the defendants argued that the patient's wife lacked standing under emtala because it only permitted civil claims by persons that were personally denied treatment in violation of the statute .

in support of this argument , the defendants noted that , during consideration of emtala , the house judiciary committee had issued a report stating [the civil suit provision of emtala] authorizes only two types of actions for damages .

the first of these could be brought by the individual patient who suffers harm as a direct result of [a] hospital's failure to appropriately screen , stabilize , or properly transfer that patient .

the second type of action could be brought by a medical facility which received an improperly transferred emergency patient .

because third parties were not mentioned in the legislative history , the defendants argued that this suit should not be permitted .

the sixth circuit disagreed , noting that where a house committee's explanation of the meaning of a statute seems to differ from the statute's actual wording , this court should not rely on that committee's statement as the exclusive explanation for the meaning of the statute.... we recognize that our interpretation of the civil enforcement provision may have consequences for hospitals that congress may or may not have considered or intended .

however , our duty is only to read the statute as it is written .

in the court's view , the statutory text afforded a civil remedy to " any individual who suffers personal harm as a direct result" of the hospital's actions , and the most logical reading of this text permits suits to be brought by harmed third parties .

