the federal employee dental and vision benefits enhancement act of 2004 was enacted on december 23 , 2004 , requiring the office of personnel management ( opm ) to establish arrangements under which supplemental dental and vision benefits are available to federal employees , members of congress , annuitants , and dependents .

opm established the federal employees dental and vision insurance program ( fedvip ) , with coverage first available on december 31 , 2006 .

enrollees are responsible for 100% of the premiums , and opm does not review disputed claims .

employees who are eligible to enroll in the federal employees health benefits ( fehb ) program , whether or not they are actually enrolled , may enroll in fedvip .

annuitants , survivor annuitants , and compensationers ( someone receiving monthly compensation from the department of labor's office of workers' compensation program ) may also enroll in fedvip .

eligible family members include a spouse , unmarried dependent children under age 22 , and continued coverage for qualified disabled children 22 years or older .

former spouses receiving an apportionment of an annuity , deferred annuitants , and those in fehb temporary continuation of coverage are not eligible to enroll in fedvip .

there are four nationwide dental plans , and three additional dental plans that are only available regionally .

the nationwide plans also provide coverage overseas .

there are three vision plans , which all provide both nationwide and overseas coverage .

eligible individuals may enroll in a fedvip plan during the standard open season for fehb plans ( for 2008 coverage , open season is from november 12 through december 10 , 2007 ) .

individuals may change plans during open season each year , or following a qualifying life event .

as with fehb , new employees have 60 days to enroll .

fedvip enrollment can be done through the internet at http: / / www.benefeds.com , or , for those without internet access , by calling 1-877-888-feds .

individuals may choose a self - only , self +1 , or a family plan .

this set of options differs from the fehb plans , which only allow for two choices: a self - only or a family plan .

individuals who choose to enroll in fedvip are not required to enroll in both a dental and a vision plan ; they may choose only one type of coverage or both .

individuals are not required to enroll in the dental plan offered by their fehb plan ; for example , an individual whose health insurance is provided by geha may enroll in metlife's dental plan and in blue cross blue shield's vision plan .

however , any coverage for dental and / or vision services provided under the individual's fehb plan is the primary source of coverage , and the fedvip supplemental dental and vision plans pay secondary .

additionally , active workers ( not annuitants ) may still contribute to a flexible spending account ( fsa ) to cover any qualified unmet medical expenses , such as dental copayments or deductibles .

premiums vary by plan , by whether the enrollment includes other family members , and by residency ( for dental plans only ) .

unlike nationwide fehb plans , individuals enrolled in a fedvip dental plan pay different premiums depending on where they live in the country or overseas .

active employees pay fedvip premiums on a pre - tax basis ( called premium conversion ) .

however , unlike fehb plans , employees may not opt out of premium conversion .

pre - tax premiums are not available to annuitants , survivor annuitants , or compensationers .

while there are no preexisting condition exclusions for this coverage , there are waiting periods for orthodontia .

individuals must be in the same plan for the entire waiting period , and switching to a new plan may require beginning the waiting period over again .

there are no waiting periods for vision services .

while the statutes allow for more stringent waiting periods for individuals who do not enroll at their first enrollment opportunity , the brochures for 2008 do not indicate that plans have imposed additional restrictions .

enrollees will pay less out - of - pocket costs if they use in - network services .

for 2008 , the four nationwide dental plans are aetna , geha , metlife , and united concordia .

both geha and metlife have two options—a high and a standard option .

there are also three regional plans: triple - s ( covering puerto rico ) , ghi ( covering new york and parts of pennsylvania , connecticut , and new jersey ) , and compbenefits ( covering 19 states , washington , d.c. , and parts of maryland ) .

only the nationwide plans also provide coverage overseas .

the benefits provided by these plans include , but are not limited to , the following: ( 1 ) class a ( basic ) services—oral examinations , prophylaxis , diagnostic evaluations , sealants , and x - rays ; ( 2 ) class b ( intermediate ) services—restorative procedures such as fillings , prefabricated stainless steel crowns , periodontal scaling , tooth extractions , and denture adjustments ; ( 3 ) class c ( major ) services—endodontic services such as root canals , periodontal services such as gingivectomy , major restorative services such as crowns , oral surgery , and bridges , and prosthodontic services such as complete dentures ; and ( 4 ) class d ( orthodontic ) service .

premiums for these plans vary by geographic area .

for example , an aetna enrollee in washington , d.c. , will pay a monthly premium of $28.97 for self - only coverage .

monthly premiums for aetna's plan range from $26.35 to $36.83 , depending on where the enrollee resides .

for all dental plans , self + 1 premiums are approximately twice the plan's self - only premium , and family premiums are about three times the plan's self - only premium .

thus , comparing plan premiums is slightly more complex than comparing nationwide fehb plan premiums , for which everyone in the same self - only plan pays the same premium , regardless of where they live , and for which there is no self + 1 option .

similar to the fehb program , premiums also vary by high or standard options .

table 1 , below , compares the national dental plans , including the monthly premiums for the washington , d.c. , area .

monthly self - only premiums range from $22.71 for metlife's standard plan to $37.90 for geha's high option plan .

only aetna had no premium increase over last year , with other plans increasing self - only premiums from about $1 per month ( geha high option , with about a 2% increase ) to $4.50 per month ( united concordia , with about a 15% increase ) per month .

the percentage of services covered by a plan varies by class of service , with only geha's standard plan requiring a copayment for preventive services .

enrollees who choose out - of - network services pay their coinsurance plus any amount over the plan's payment .

the united concordia plan pays only for emergency out - of - network services .

all of the plans cover underserved areas , as well as those overseas .

the plans also impose an annual benefit limit for total class a through c services of $1,200 for all plans , except metlife's high option plan with a $3,000 limit .

there is a lifetime orthodontia limit , which is $1,500 for all plans , except metlife's high option plan , which has a $3,000 limit .

for 2008 , the three vision plans are fep bluevision ( blue cross and blue shield ) , spectera , and vision service plans ( vsp ) .

each of these plans has both a high and a standard option , and also provides both nationwide and overseas coverage .

annual premiums for the three plans are similar ; annual self - only coverage is $71.76 for spectera , $99.36 for vsp , and $103.20 for fep bluevision's plan .

the high - option plans cost about $20 to $40 more per year .

premiums for self + 1 plans are about double the costs of self - only plans , and premiums for family plans are about triple the costs .

for 2008 , spectera had a very small premium increase ( for self - only standard coverage , premiums increased by $0.20 per month , and high plan premiums increased by $0.39 per month , each about a 5% increase ) .

the other vision plans' premiums remained the same .

the more significant differences are found in benefits and network limitations .

for example , under the fep bluevision plan , enrollees must stay in - network for covered services , with two exceptions: those who living in a limited access area or those who receive services overseas .

enrollees are responsible for any difference between the amount billed by the provider and the actual plan payment .

spectera and vsp both allow for reimbursement for visits to out - of - network providers .

generally , covered services are limited to eye exams , a choice between lenses for glasses or contacts , and extra discounts and savings on non - covered services , such as progressive lenses and additional glasses .

the services are provided according to a schedule , such as eye exams every 12 months and new frames every 24 months .

additionally , plans cover low vision coverage on a limited basis .

as shown in table 2 , an individual enrolled in either of spectera's plans could have an exam and new lenses and frames once during the course of a year .

the copayment would be $10 for the exam and $10 for the lenses , or $25 for both lenses and frames , if new frames were purchased .

spectera's standard option includes scratch - resistant coating and polycarbonate lenses , and the high option also covers basic progressive lenses , tinted lenses , and uv coating .

plan brochures provide more detail on the differences between the standard and high options .

the choice of covered frames is also limited .

for those using services outside the network , the plans provide a schedule of payments .

enrollees may opt for contact lenses in lieu of glasses , subject to each plan's limits ( i.e. , generally a limit on disposable contacts , supplying only enough for part of the year ) .

several factors should be considered in deciding whether or not to enroll in fedvip , including ( 1 ) coverage of these services in a fehb plan—more likely for those enrolled in a health maintenance organization ( hmo ) , ( 2 ) likelihood of using services covered by the plans , and ( 3 ) placing the same dollar amount that would be used toward dental and / or vision benefits premiums in an fsa ( available to employees and not annuitants ) .

each prospective enrollee must weigh these considerations and others against his or her own level of risk aversion , as well as the fact that the individual pays 100% of the premium .

under the fedvip program , any coverage provided by an individual's fehb health plan is primary , and the fedvip plans are the secondary payers .

however , generally , the nationally available fehb plans , have limited dental and vision coverage .

this year , geha added limited vision coverage under its plans , offering an annual eye exam with a $25 copayment .

geha , similar to some of the other national plans , has an arrangement with certain providers for discounted eyewear , but the enrollee would still be responsible for 100% of the discounted cost .

in contrast , some of the fehb hmo - type plans offer more comprehensive dental and vision benefits .

some high - deductible plans also provide some coverage .

it is important to compare fehb coverage to determine if also enrolling in fedvip is beneficial .

while some enrollees know that they will use services , such an individual who wears glasses or a dependent who will need orthodontics , some services cannot be as easily predicted , such as an individual needing a root canal .

individuals must weigh their expected benefits against the premiums .

for example , an individual who wears glasses , has a yearly eye exam , and uses a provider in - network may find that paying the premium will result in lower costs than paying for each of these services separately , even with pre - tax fsa funds for employees .

on the other hand , an individual who does not wear glasses may not benefit from vision supplemental insurance .

there is not , however , a one - to - one correlation between buying any insurance and the expectation of using the services .

there is still a large share of unknown risk that any insurance protects against , so that some individuals may find themselves using services that they did not anticipate using .

both fedvip premiums and fsa contributions are pre - tax for employees , so that they may decide to enroll in one , none , or both .

 ( annuitants can not contribute to an fsa or pay premiums with pre - tax dollars. ) .

enrollees who choose both can use funds in the fsa for any copayments , coinsurance amounts , deductibles , amounts exceeding annual or lifetime maximums , or amounts above the plan's payment for out - of - network services .

some individuals may decide that they prefer to only contribute to an fsa and not enroll in either the dental or vision plan , and instead use their fsa funds to pay for any dental or vision expenditures .

while using fsa funds provides the most flexibility , it may be that the dental and vision premiums cover more than the same dollars in the fsa .

individuals who are not sure they will use the services provided under fedvip can "wait and see," and if they do not use dental or vision services , they can use the fsa dollars for other qualified medical expenses .

others may choose to enroll only in fedvip and minimize their out - of - pocket expenditures by staying in - network .

decisions about fedvip and fsa can be revisited every year during open season .

