the purpose of this report is to provide data on the size and composition of usps's workforce between fy1995 and fy2014 .

reforms to the size and composition of the workforce have been an integral part of usps's strategy to reduce costs and regain financial solvency , particularly after the onset of substantial revenue losses in fy2007 .

historical context on usps's workforce size and composition is therefore useful to understanding the magnitude of these workforce reforms and their impact on usps's financial condition .

in recent years , the usps has experienced significant financial challenges .

after running modest profits from fy2004 through fy2006 , the usps lost $51 billion between fy2007 and fy2014 .

as usps's finances have deteriorated , its ability to absorb operating losses has diminished .

between fy2005 and fy2014 , usps's debt rose from $0 to $15 billion .

the government accountability office ( gao ) added the usps's financial condition "to the list of high - risk areas needing attention by the congress and the executive branch. .

among the causes for the usps's financial downturn is the large drop in mail volume in that stretch of time .

between fy2007 and fy2014 , the number of mail pieces delivered per year fell from 212 billion to 155 billion .

as a result , operating revenues were $7 billion lower in fy2014 ( $67.8 billion ) than in fy2007 ( $74.8 billion ) .

the usps's challenging financial circumstances have prompted it to undertake cost - cutting measures .

one strategy has been to reduce the size and cost of the usps workforce , as personnel costs comprise the majority of usps's expenses .

in fy2014 , for example , personnel costs represented 78% of usps's total operating expenses .

two initiatives that usps pursued between fy2007 and fy2014 to reduce workforce size and cost included ( 1 ) attrition and separation incentives , and ( 2 ) increased utilization of non - career employees .

usps has reduced its workforce size through voluntary attrition and separation incentives to retire or resign .

between fy2007 and fy2014 , there was a reduction of 168,052 employees from usps's workforce .

to increase the voluntary attrition rate , usps has offered certain employees separation incentives to resign or retire early .

those incentives have ranged from $10,000 to $20,000 per person .

between fy2010 and fy2014 , 55,473 employees accepted a separation incentive ( table 3 ) .

usps has utilized separation incentives to avoid reductions in force ( rifs ) , which involve involuntary employee layoffs upon the abolishment of agency positions .

on january 9 , 2015 , however , usps implemented a reduction in force for 249 postmasters who did not accept a separation incentive offered in fy2014 .

of the 249 postmasters subject to the reduction in force , 169 opted for a discontinued service retirement ( dsr ) , and the remaining 80 who were not eligible for dsr received severance pay based on their age and years of service .

according to usps , all postmasters affected by the rif were offered part - time career positions at usps .

it is unclear if usps will continue to use separation incentives to reduce the size of its career workforce .

usps's 2012-2017 business plan , which was updated in april 2013 , included a goal to reduce its career workforce to approximately 404,000 employees through attrition by 2017 .

this represents a 17.3% decrease ( 84,300 fewer employees ) from fy2014 staffing levels .

in october 2015 , usps staff stated that the agency was developing an updated five - year business plan .

it is possible that the updated plan might contain new strategies for increasing the cost efficiency of the workforce , including the alteration or removal of workforce reduction goals .

the use of separation incentives , therefore , might be affected by such altered goals .

usps has also increased its use of non - career employees in an effort to contain costs .

the number of non - career employees increased by 28.1% between fy2007 and fy2014 , from 101,167 to 129,577 .

the number of career employees , in contrast , decreased by 28.7% over the same time period , from 684,762 to 488,300 .

the most substantial increases occurred between fy2011 and fy2014 , during which time the number of non - career employees rose by 46.1% ( 40,878 more employees ) .

the influx of non - career employees during that time period was primarily attributable to the creation and staffing of pses ( fy2011 ) , ccas ( fy2013 ) , and mhas ( fy2013 ) .

these three employee categories constituted 51% of the usps non - career workforce in fy2014 .

according to usps and the usps office of the inspector general ( oig ) , pses , ccas , and mhas were created to reduce the costs of , and provide more flexibility in , certain agency functions .

employees in these three positions can often perform the full range of duties undertaken by their career counterparts , but at lower wages .

for instance , ccas can perform the duties of career city letter carriers at a starting rate of $15.00 versus $16.71 per hour .

the wage difference between ccas and city letter carriers is even greater after accounting for benefits and overtime ( $19.35 versus $46.11 per hour , respectively ) , according to a 2014 gao report .

usps asserted that ccas reduced the cost of the city mail delivery function by $120 million in fy2013 .

in addition , the usps oig reported that pses could be used in place of career employees earning overtime , and thus could reduce compensation costs .

usps's use of certain non - career employees is governed by postal labor union contracts , which limit the number of non - career employees that can comprise the total usps workforce .

more recent labor contracts that created pses , ccas , and mhas , however , raised the number of non - career employees that can be used for certain functions ( table 4 ) .

for example , the 2006-2011 contract between usps and the national association of letter carriers ( nalc ) limited the total number of non - career transitional employees to no more than 3.5% of the total number of career city letter carriers covered by the agreement or 6% of the total number of career carriers in a postal district .

the 2011-2016 contract , however , raised the limit to 15% of the total number of career carriers in a district .

usps's initiatives to reduce the size and cost of its workforce have contributed to lowered compensation expenses in recent years .

usps's total compensation costs decreased $526 million from fy2013 to fy2014 .

a 2015 postal regulatory commission ( prc ) report found that 36.1% of that amount ( $190 million ) resulted from increased use of non - career employees and a decrease in employee work hours .

the remaining 63.9% of the reduced amount ( $336 million ) reflected a one - time cost of separation incentives that were paid in fy2013 , according the prc report .

a 2014 gao report on the usps workforce , however , found that usps's overall expenses did not decline alongside reduced workforce size and employee work hours .

rather , the report found that usps's total expenses fluctuated between fy2006 and fy2014 .

the report attributed the fluctuation to required annual retiree health benefits fund ( rhbf ) payments , which varied by year .

usps's overall expenses still declined at a slower rate compared to employee work hours ( 7.1% versus 24% , respectively ) when excluding rhbf payments , according to the report .

in response to the gao report , usps attributed the slower rate of decline in overall expenses to increased hourly wage and benefit costs , increased non - personnel expenses , and other fixed costs that do not decline with decreases in mail volume .

usps's 2012-2017 business plan includes several legislative proposals that could affect the size and cost of the workforce .

however , usps staff have indicated that these legislative proposals are no longer being pursued .

the agency is focusing on consensus building among stakeholders rather than pursuing a specific legislative agenda .

career employees area offices personnel: includes persons who work in the usps administrative units that oversee postal operations in usps's nine geographic areas throughout the united states .

building and equipment maintenance personnel: includes persons who maintain and repair usps facilities .

clerks: includes persons who work directly with the public in usps retail facilities and who manually sort mail .

city delivery carriers: includes persons who deliver mail in urban and non - rural areas .

headquarters: includes persons who work in a variety of capacities at the two central offices of the u.s .

postal service , which are located in washington , dc , and rosslyn , va. headquarters — related field units: includes persons in offices administered from usps's headquarters , but who are located elsewhere .

inspection service — field: includes persons who work for the postal inspection service , which protects usps property and employees and investigates alleged misuse of the mails for criminal purposes .

inspector general: includes persons who work for the usps office of inspector general , which audits and investigates usps activities .

mail handlers: includes persons who move mail containers in mail processing centers .

motor vehicle operators: includes persons who drive mail trucks .

nurses: includes persons who work in usps medical units and attend to injured employees .

postmasters / installation heads: includes persons who serve as managers of retail postal facilities .

professional administrative and technical personnel: includes persons performing administrative assistance and technical support duties .

regional offices: included persons in the administrative unit that oversaw usps operations within geographic regions .

regional offices were replaced with area offices .

rural delivery carriers — full - time: includes persons who deliver mail in non - urban areas .

special delivery messengers: discontinued position that employed persons to make deliveries that required expedited delivery .

supervisors / managers: includes persons who supervise other persons or who manage programs or processes .

vehicle maintenance personnel: includes persons who perform preventive maintenance and repair of usps vehicles .

non - career employees casuals: includes persons hired temporarily to assist usps career employees in mail processing facilities .

city carrier assistant: time - limited position created in 2013 that provides the usps with flexibility in hiring for the city delivery function .

city carrier assistants may perform the full range of duties undertaken by career city delivery carriers and are entitled to certain employee benefits such as raises , health benefits , and leave .

mail handler assistant: time - limited position created in 2013 that provides the usps with flexibility in hiring for the mail delivery function .

mail handler assistants may perform the full range of duties undertaken by career mail handlers and are entitled to certain employee benefits such as raises , health benefits , and leave .

non - bargaining temporary: includes persons hired temporarily to perform administrative duties in usps offices .

postal support employees: time - limited position created in 2011 that provides the usps with flexibility in hiring within the clerk craft and the maintenance and motor vehicle craft .

pursuant to a bargaining agreement , postal support employees are entitled to certain employee benefits such as raises , health benefits , and leave .

postmaster relief / leave replacements: includes persons who serve temporarily as managers of retail postal facilities .

rural subs / rca / rcr / aux: includes rural substitute carriers , rural carrier associates , rural carrier relief carriers , and auxiliary carriers , all of whom provide temporary assistance to usps in the delivery of mail in non - urban areas .

transitional employees: includes persons who staff usps's remote encoding centers ( recs ) , which provide assistance concerning mail processing machines .

