the source of federal copyright law originates with the copyright and patent clause of the u.s. constitution , which authorizes congress "to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries. .

the copyright act offers legal protection to creators of original works of authorship that are fixed in a tangible medium of expression .

such original works must be captured in some form that is sufficiently permanent or stable for it to be perceived , reproduced , or otherwise communicated for a period beyond a transitory duration .

the types of creative works that are potentially eligible for copyright protection fall into several categories , including literary works ; musical works ; dramatic works ; pantomimes and choreographic works ; pictorial , graphic , and sculptural works ; motion pictures and other audiovisual works ; sound recordings ; and architectural works .

in addition , copyright protects compilations and derivative works .

however , copyright protection does not extend to any underlying abstract idea , procedure , process , system , method of operation , concept , principle , or discovery , but rather it only protects the manner in which those ideas are expressed .

works of the federal government are statutorily excluded from the scope of copyright protection .

this includes the written opinions of federal courts , federal reports and documents , administrative regulations , and public laws .

these materials are considered to be in the public domain .

works in the public domain are available for anyone to use without concern of infringement .

the grant of copyright bestows several rights upon the creator of a work ( or the individual having a legal interest in the work ) that permit the copyright holder to control the use of the protected material .

these statutory rights allow a copyright holder to do or to authorize the following: the reproduction of the copyrighted work ; the preparation of derivative works based on the copyrighted work ; the distribution of copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work ; the public performance of the copyrighted work ; and the public display of the copyrighted work , including the individual images of a motion picture .

the copyright act contains several statutory limitations on the copyright monopoly .

these include the "first sale doctrine" that limits the copyright owner's exclusive control over distribution of the material objects in which a work is expressed .

the "first sale doctrine" permits the owner of a particular copy of a copyrighted work to sell or dispose of that copy without the copyright owner's permission .

other limitations involve allowing certain reproductions by libraries and archives , limited performances and displays for educational purposes or in the course of services at a place of worship , and certain performances for non - profit , charitable causes .

the doctrine of "fair use" in copyright law recognizes the right of the public to make reasonable use of copyrighted material , under particular circumstances , without the copyright holder's consent .

for example , a teacher may be able to use reasonable excerpts of copyrighted works in preparing a scholarly lecture or commentary , without obtaining permission to do so .

the copyright act mentions fair use "for purposes such as criticism , comment , news reporting , teaching , scholarship , or research. .

however , a determination of fair use by a court considers four factors: the purpose and character of the use including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes , the nature of the copyrighted work , the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole , and the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work .

because the language of the fair use statute is illustrative , determining what constitutes a fair use of a copyrighted work is often difficult to make in advance — according to the u.s. supreme court , such a determination requires a federal court to engage in "case - by - case" analysis .

in 1998 , congress passed the digital millennium copyright act ( dmca ) .

section 1201 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the dmca prohibits any person from circumventing a technological measure that effectively controls access to a copyrighted work .

this newly created right of "access" granted to copyright holders makes the act of gaining access to copyrighted material by circumventing digital rights management ( drm ) security measures , itself , a violation of the copyright act .

prohibited conduct includes descrambling a scrambled work ; decrypting an encrypted work ; or avoiding , bypassing , removing , deactivating , or impairing a technological measure , without the authority of the copyright owner .

in addition , the dmca prohibits the selling of products or services that circumvent access - control measures , as well as trafficking in devices that circumvent "technological measures" protecting "a right" of the copyright owner .

in contrast to copyright infringement , which concerns the unauthorized or unexcused use of copyrighted material , the dmca's anti - circumvention provisions prohibit the act of drm circumvention , as well as the design , manufacture , import , offer to the public , or trafficking in technology used to circumvent those copyright protection measures , regardless of the actual existence or absence of copyright infringement activity .

the rights conferred on a copyright holder do not last forever .

copyrights are limited in the number of years a copyright holder may exercise his / her exclusive rights .

in general , an author of a creative work may enjoy copyright protection for the work for a term lasting the entirety of his / her life plus 70 additional years .

at the expiration of a term , the copyrighted work becomes part of the public domain .

the unauthorized use of one of the exclusive rights of the copyright owner constitutes infringement .

for example , unauthorized copying of a copyrighted work is an infringement of the copyright owner's exclusive right of reproduction .

anyone interested in doing anything with a copyrighted work that implicates one of the holder's exclusive rights must either ( 1 ) obtain the permission of the copyright holder , ( 2 ) comply with the terms of compulsory licenses established by law , or ( 3 ) assert that such use falls within the scope of certain statutory limitations on the exclusive rights such as the "fair use" doctrine .

the copyright act has both criminal and civil provisions for infringement .

civil copyright infringement involves a violation of any of the exclusive rights of the copyright owner that are provided by 17 u.s.c .

§§ 106-122 , 602 , including the right to control reproduction , distribution , public performance , and display of copyrighted works .

criminal copyright infringement includes the following offenses: copyright infringement for profit , 17 u.s.c .

§ 506 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2319 ( b ) ; copyright infringement without a profit motive , 17 u.s.c .

§ 506 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2319 ( c ) ; pre - release distribution of a copyrighted work over a publicly accessible computer network , 17 u.s.c .

§ 506 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2319 ( d ) ; circumvention of copyright protection systems in violation of the digital millennium copyright act , 17 u.s.c .

§ 1204 ; bootleg recordings of live musical performances , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2319a ; unauthorized recording of motion pictures in a movie theater ( camcording ) , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2319b ; and counterfeit or illicit labels and counterfeit documentation and packaging for copyrighted works , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2318 .

the direct infringer is not the only party potentially liable for infringement ; the federal courts have recognized two forms of secondary copyright infringement liability: contributory and vicarious .

the concept of contributory infringement has its roots in tort law and the notion that one should be held accountable for directly contributing to another's infringement .

for contributory infringement liability to exist , a court must find that the secondary infringer "with knowledge of the infringing activity , induces , causes or materially contributes to the infringing conduct of another. .

vicarious infringement liability is possible where a defendant "has the right and ability to supervise the infringing activity and also has a direct financial interest in such activities. .

the statute of limitations for initiating a civil action for copyright infringement is within three years after the claim accrued , while a criminal proceeding must be commenced within five years after the cause of action arose .

federal courts determine the civil remedies in an action for infringement brought by the copyright owner , among those statutorily authorized .

if the federal government chooses to prosecute individuals for copyright violations , the imprisonment terms are set forth in the statutes describing the particular copyright crime ( mostly in 18 u.s.c .

§ 2319 ) , while the criminal fine amount is determined in conjunction with 18 u.s.c .

§ 3571 ( specifies the amount of the fine under title 18 of the u.s. code ) .

for a copyright owner who prevails in a copyright infringement lawsuit , the court may approve the following legal remedies: injunctions , 17 u.s.c .

§ 502 ; impounding , destruction , or other reasonable disposition of all copies made in violation of the copyright owner's rights , as well as all plates , molds , matrices , masters , tapes , film negatives , or other articles by means of which such copies may be reproduced , 17 u.s.c .

§ 503 ; actual damages suffered by the copyright owner due to the infringement , and any profits of the infringer attributable to the infringement , 17 u.s.c .

§ 504 ( b ) ; statutory damages ( at the copyright owner's election to recover in lieu of actual damages and profits ) , in the amount of not less than $750 or more than $30,000 as the court deems just , 17 u.s.c .

§ 504 ( c ) ( 1 ) .

for willful infringement , a court may increase the statutory damages award to a sum of not more than $150,000 , 17 u.s.c .

§ 504 ( c ) ( 2 ) ; and costs and attorney's fees , 17 u.s.c .

§ 505 .

willful infringement of copyright for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain is subject to criminal prosecution , and is punishable by up to 10 years in prison and a fine of up to $250,000 .

another additional remedy for criminal copyright infringement is civil and criminal forfeiture of all infringing copies and all devices and equipment used in the manufacture of such infringing copies .

