on may 22 , 1998 , president william j. clinton issued presidential decision directive 62 ( pdd 62 ) — protection against unconventional threats to the homeland and americans overseas .

pdd 62 established a framework for federal department and agency counter - terrorism programs , which addressed terrorist apprehension and prosecution , increased transportation security , enhanced emergency response , and enhanced cyber security .

pdd 62 also designated specific federal departments and agencies as the lead agencies in the event of terrorist attacks .

the u.s. secret service ( usss ) was designated as the lead agency with the leadership role in the planning , implementation , and coordination of operational security for events of national significance — as designated by the president .

other lead agencies for counter terrorism activities included the federal emergency management agency , the department of defense , and the department of health and human services .

on december 19 , 2000 , congress enacted p.l .

106 - 544 , the presidential threat protection act of 2000 , and authorized usss — when directed by the president — to plan , coordinate , and implement security operations at special events of national significance .

the special events were entitled national special security events ( nsses ) .

some events categorized as nsse include presidential inaugurations , major international summits held in the united states , major sporting events , and presidential nominating conventions .

prior to the establishment of dhs in january 2003 , the president determined what events of national significance were designated as nsses .

since the establishment of the department , the dhs secretary — as the president's representative — has had the responsibility to designate nsses .

nsse designation factors include: anticipated attendance by u.s. officials and foreign dignitaries ; size of the event ; and significance of the event .

recent nsses include the 2009 inauguration of president barack obama , the republican and democratic presidential candidate nominating conventions in 2008 , and the state funeral of former president gerald ford on january 3 , 2007 .

when an event is designated an nsse , usss becomes the lead federal agency in developing , exercising , and implementing security operations .

the goal of these security operations is to "develop and implement a seamless security plan that will create a safe and secure environment for the general public , event participants , secret service protectees , and other dignitaries. .

the usss's major events division ( med ) is responsible for nsse planning and coordinates with other usss headquarters and field offices .

some of the coordination includes advance planning and liaison for venue and air space security , training , communications , and security credentialing .

additionally , med coordinates and conducts liaisons with other federal , state , and local agencies — primarily law enforcement entities .

nsse security is planned , exercised , and implemented through a unified command model that is comprised of representatives of participating federal , state , and local agencies with nsse responsibilities .

during the nsse's planning phase , each participating agency is tasked according to their expertise or jurisdictional responsibility .

usss states that , "with the support of hundreds of federal , state , and local law enforcement and public safety organizations , each of these events has successfully concluded without any major incidents. .

nsse operational plans include the use of physical infrastructure security fencing , barricades , special access accreditation badges , k - 9 teams , and other security technologies .

to ensure consequence management , dhs prepositions domestic emergency support teams , urban search and rescue teams , national emergency response teams , nuclear incident response teams , and the strategic national stockpile and mobile emergency response system .

specific teams and groupings of teams are designed for each event based on coordination with other federal entities , state and local jurisdictions , available local resources , and mutual aid agreements .

additionally , usss sponsors training seminars for command - level federal , state , and local law enforcement and public safety officials to provide principles for managing security at major events and strategies for reducing vulnerabilities related to terrorism .

the seminars also discuss key strategies and lessons learned from past nsses .

even though nsses have been conducted since 1998 , congress has only appropriated funding specifically for a general nsse fund since fy2006 .

congress has , however , appropriated funding for five specific nsses .

the first two were the 2004 democratic and republican presidential nominating conventions in boston , ma , and new york city , ny , respectively .

the next two were the 2008 democratic and republican nominating conventions in denver , co , and minneapolis - st. paul , mn , respectively .

the 108 th congress appropriated a total of $100 million for presidential nominating convention security at these two events .

this $100 million was administered through the department of justice's ( doj ) edward byrne memorial state and local enforcement assistance programs ( the byrne programs ) .

doj used the majority of this funding to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities for overtime costs because usss did not have a mechanism to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities for nsse security costs .

the most recent nsse funding was $15 million for "emergency planning and security costs" for the district of columbia which was used for the january 20 , 2009 , inauguration of president barack obama .

additionally , former president george w. bush declared a state of emergency for the district of columbia , which authorizes the federal government to reimburse the district for emergency preparedness activities and expenditures that exceed the $15 million congress appropriated in p.l .

110 - 329 .

additionally , congress appropriated , in the fy2009 omnibus , $39.2 million for emergency planning and security costs in the district , however , this funding is not specifically for nsses .

federal funding for national special security events ( nsse ) costs incurred by federal , state , and local entities is one issue congress may wish to address .

in fy2008 , congress appropriated $1 million for nsse costs within the secret service .

some might argue that the $1 million congress has annually appropriated for nsses in the past couple of fiscal years may not have be adequate to fund nsse expenditures , such as the recent presidential inauguration .

the amount appropriated could be additionally problematic considering that the secret service is not authorized to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities' overtime costs associated with nsses .

any security costs incurred by the secret service could be funded with appropriations specifically designated for the agency , whereas federal reimbursement of any security costs incurred by state and local jurisdictions would have to be appropriated through other federal assistance programs — such as the $100 million appropriated for the 2008 presidential nominating conventions through doj's office of justice programs .

congress might consider establishing a program within secret service that not only provides the agency with additional funds for unexpected nsse security costs , but also authorizes the secret service to reimburse state and local law enforcement entities for security costs .

presently , state and local jurisdictions can use dhs grants , such as the state homeland security grant program ( shsgp ) and the urban area security initiative ( uasi ) for nsse security activities .

the grant approval process for these programs , however , is not flexible , so the programs have limited application to nsses .

states and localities would need to plan shsgp and uasi funding for nsse security annually in their grant applications .

for unexpected nsses — which may be the result of an unexpected death of a president or a change in location of a planned nsse — states and localities are unable to plan use shsgp or uasi funds to in advance for security costs .

dhs does authorize states and localities to reprogram shsgp and uasi funding with the dhs secretary's approval ; however , that may result in states and localities not funding other planned homeland security activities .

