congress may continue to consider fiscal stimulus as unemployment remains high even though the economy is recovering from the 2007-2009 recession and a recent provision has been acted to avert much of the so - called fiscal cliff , a set of tax increases and spending cuts .

several types of tax cuts were partially or fully enacted for purposes of short run economic stimulus in the recent past ( 2001-2008 ) .

these tax revisions were the first in some time that were motivated , at least in part , by the need for expansionary fiscal policy .

in the late 1990s , the economy experienced a protracted period of significant growth , and , in the decade prior to that most tax legislation addressed a need for deficit reduction ( the objective of most tax change between 1982 and 1997 , as was the case in the 1990 and 1993 tax changes ) or a desire for structural change ( in the 1986 and 1997 tax revisions ) .

different types of stimulus provisions were enacted in the period 2001-2008: the 2001 tax cut was aimed at individuals , but most of its provisions , especially the rate cuts , which were phased in over a number of years , were not based on the recession that was apparent in 2000 and that appeared in the spring of 2001 .

when concerns about the economy continued towards the end of 2001 and in 2002 , the congress enacted bonus depreciation .

and , in 2003 , the tax provision advanced to stimulate the economy was a reduction in dividend taxation .

in february 2008 , a stimulus package containing a rebate similar to the 2001 rebate , and bonus depreciation , was adopted .

in february 2009 , as the recession continued , a package consisting of a mix of spending and tax cuts was adopted ( the american recovery and reinvestment act ) .

in this case , the income tax cut was in the form of a two - year income tax cut that appeared in withholding rather than a rebate , in part in response to views of some economists that lump - sum rebates were less effective .

during 2010 as unemployment continued to be high , no general individual tax cuts were enacted , although in march 2010 , a temporary credit against payroll taxes was allowed to employers for hiring workers who had been unemployed .

this tax provisions was small compared to the 2008 and 2009 tax cuts ( $13 billion ) .

bonus depreciation was extended , but that extension was largely retroactive .

in december of 2010 , a package that extended the bush tax cuts for two years and provided for a one - year reduction in payroll taxes for workers was adopted ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

it also increased bonus depreciation to 100% for 2011 , returning to 20% in 2012 .

in recent legislation , to address the fiscal cliff , most of the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts were made permanent ( except for very high income taxpayers ) , including rate cuts and dividend reductions .

bonus depreciation was extended for a year , but the payroll tax was not extended .

of course , the policy issues did not solely reflect the need for short run stimulus .

however , the crucial element in evaluating alternative provisions is whether they induce spending .

this report discusses the rebate and bonus depreciation as mechanisms for stimulating the economy in the short run based on evidence of the effectiveness of these proposals in expanding spending .

the findings reported below suggest that one - time rebates are effective in stimulating spending , and that the effects of tax cuts are largest in lower - income households , while provisions directed at businesses and investment income may have more limited effects .

the 2001 tax cut was not primarily enacted because of concerns about a recession and most of the provisions were phased in over a number of years .

however , concerns about a slowing economy did motivate the advance tax rebate provided in 2001 .

because the tax cut was enacted close to mid - year ( in may ) it was difficult to provide a tax cut for 2001 that could be reflected appropriately in withholding .

by the time withholding changes could be put into place , much of the year would have passed and either withholding changes would be inadequate ( deferring tax cuts until returns were filed the following year ) , or if made larger to compensate for the partial year effect would have resulted in a withholding increase for some taxpayers at the beginning of 2001 .

the rebate proposal provided for the mailing out of checks to taxpayers in the fall of 2001 that were advance reductions for the introduction of a 10% rate bracket for 2001 .

they were , however , based on taxpayers' 2000 tax returns and any excess credits did not have to be repaid when returns for tax year 2001 were filed .

 ( taxpayers whose credits were smaller than those allowed on 2001 returns , however , received additional relief when tax returns were filed ) .

the checks were mailed out between july and october .

the rebate met some important standards for an effective tax cut stimulus .

unlike many stimulus proposals in the past , particularly in the 1960s and 1970s , where the stimulus occurred during the recovery rather than the recession phase ( potentially adding to inflationary pressures ) , its impact occurred during the recession .

in addition , tax cuts are most effective as a stimulus if they are spent , and the tax reductions affected lower and moderate income taxpayers who have a high propensity to spend .

at the same time , there was some concern that lump sum payments might be spent in the same fashions as a continued increase in income through tax reductions .

there was some evidence that temporary rebates in the past were not spent .

it appears , however , that most of the rebate was spent fairly quickly: at least 20% to 40% in the quarter received and two - thirds by the end of the second quarter after receipt .

studies of the 2001 rebate also point to the importance of directing the rebate to households with low incomes and with fewer liquid assets .

in the study by johnson , parker , and souleles , households with low incomes were estimated to have increased spending by more than the rebate , while middle - income individuals spent less than 20% .

households with few liquid assets also increased spending more .

another study found that households with lower credit card limits , or who were near their limits , or used their credit cards intensively , increased spending the most .

the joint tax committee study discusses some important administrative issues surrounding a cash rebate .

following the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , concerns once more arose about the economy .

a tax package proposal that included a business tax cut in the form of reduction in the corporate alternative minimum tax and an acceleration of rate reductions failed to achieve passage in 2001 .

in 2002 , a bill was adopted and the centerpiece , as far as tax provisions were concerned , was a temporary , two - year , provision for bonus depreciation .

this provision , responding to a concern about lagging business investment , allowed businesses to deduct 30% of the cost of most business equipment purchases when incurred rather than depreciating them over several years ( typically five to seven years ) .

bonus depreciation was increased to 50% in 2003 and extended through 2004 .

among the business tax incentives , a temporary investment subsidy should have the most "bang for the buck. .

by directing the subsidy at investment , the stimulus does not provide a windfall for existing capital .

by making the provision temporary there is an incentive to make investment now rather than later .

nevertheless , a study of the effect of temporary expensing by cohen and cummins at the federal reserve board found little evidence that bonus depreciation was effective in stimulating investment .

they suggest several potential reasons for a small effect .

one possibility is that firms without taxable income could not benefit from the timing advantage .

in a treasury study , knittel confirmed that firms did not elect bonus depreciation for about 40% of eligible investment , and speculated that the existence of losses and loss carry - overs may have made the investment subsidy ineffective for many firms , although there were clearly some firms that were profitable that did not use the provision .

cohen and cummins also suggested that the incentive effect was quite small ( largely because depreciation already occurs relatively quickly for most equipment ) , reducing the user cost of capital by only about 3% , that planning periods may be too long to adjust investment across time , and that adjustment costs outweighed the effect of bonus depreciation .

knittel also suggests that firms may have found the provision costly to comply with , particularly because most states did not allow bonus depreciation .

a study by house and shapiro found a more pronounced response to bonus depreciation , given the magnitude of the incentive , but found the overall effect on the economy was small , which in part is due to the limited category of investment affected and the small size of the incentive .

their differences with the cohen and cummins study reflect in part uncertainties about when expectations are formed and when the incentive effects occur .

a study by hulse and livingstone found mixed results on the effectiveness of bonus depreciation , which they interpret as weakly supportive of an effect .

one issue that these studies do not provide insight to is the desirable length of time to allow the temporary provision .

if the time is too long , the provision is not very effective because the stimulus may be delayed , but if it is too short firms do not have time to make adjustments .

cohen and cummins also report the results of several surveys of firms , where from 2 / 3 to over 90% of respondents indicated bonus depreciation had no effect on the timing of investment spending .

overall , bonus depreciation did not appear to be very effective in providing short - term economic stimulus .

it is possible , however , that a stimulus during current times , when losses are not as large as they were in 2002-2004 when the economy was already in a recession , could be more successful .

the february 2008 stimulus package included an individual tax rebate .

unlike the 2001 rebate , this rebate provided for refundability for taxpayers with at least $3,000 of earnings , social security benefits , or veterans benefits .

it also included bonus depreciation of 50% for one year .

in a preliminary study of households , broda and parker found that 20% of the rebate was spent in the first month .

they predict that the 2008 rebate will have a significant effect on spending in subsequent months .

their study also found higher levels of spending for lower income households and those with fewer liquid assets .

parker , souleles , johnson , and mcclelland , examining the timing of payments and spending , found 12% to 30% was spent on consumption in the first three months , and adding spending on consumer durables raised the share to 50% to 90% .

they also found that a larger fraction of the payment was spent by lower - income households .

finally , they tested whether self - reporting provided a reliable measure of spending and concluded that self - reporting understated the amount of spending .

