bulgaria is a parliamentary democracy that has held generally free and fair elections since the overthrow of the communist regime in 1989 .

bulgaria held its most recent parliamentary elections on june 25 , 2005 .

the winner of the vote was a coalition led by the left - of - center bulgarian socialist party ( bsp ) , which received 82 seats in the 240-seat national assembly , bulgaria's unicameral parliament .

the national movement for stability and progress ( nmsp ) , a centrist group , finished second with 63 seats .

the movement for rights and freedoms ( mrf ) , representing the country's ethnic turkish minority , won 34 seats .

ataka ( attack ! .

 ) , a group that mixes far - right xenophobia with leftist economic populism , won a surprising 21 seats .

three center - right groups won the remaining seats: the union of democratic forces ( 20 ) ; democrats for a strong bulgaria ( 17 ) ; and the bulgarian national union coalition ( 13 ) .

in an effort to boost turnout , the government introduced a lottery in which voters could win televisions , cars , and other prizes .

nevertheless , turnout was only 55% , the lowest since the end of communism .

all parties pledged to exclude ataka from the government .

nevertheless , analysts were concerned about the group's electoral success , which shows significant public dissatisfaction with bulgaria's political class .

experts note that it has been a common phenomenon in central and eastern europe that when a former communist party ( such as the bsp ) moves to the center , often as part of european integration efforts , its place in the political spectrum is often taken over by populist and nationalist groups .

the process of forming a new government proved difficult , in part because of the scattered distribution of the vote and personal animosity among party leaders , including within the center - right portion of the political spectrum .

the stalemate was finally resolved on august 15 , when the parliament approved a new coalition government .

it is composed of the bsp , mrf , and nmsp , with bsp leader sergei stanishev as prime minister .

critics claim that stanishev is a relatively weak leader and that real power rests in the hands of party barons , particularly in the bsp and mrf .

this situation , they say , has hindered reform implementation and the fight against corruption .

despite the defection of some nmsp deputies to the opposition in 2007 , the government retains a majority and appears determined to stay in power until 2009 , when new elections must be held .

a new party , citizens for the european development of bulgaria ( cedb ) , is not currently represented in parliament , but could win a large number of seats in new elections .

the cedb , led by sofia mayor boiko borisov , espouses pro - eu and pro - law - and - order policies .

the current coalition could face a serious challenge if a number of small center - right parties in the current parliament can form an alliance with the cedb .

president georgi purvanov , backed by the bsp , won re - election in 2006 .

although purvanov is one of bulgaria's most popular political figures , most political power is held by the prime minister and government ; the bulgarian presidency is relatively weak .

bulgaria is one of the poorest countries in europe .

according to the world bank , its per capita income is only 56% of that of the eight central and eastern european countries that joined the eu in 2004 .

as in many other transition countries , sofia and other urban areas are more prosperous than rural ones , which have suffered an exodus of young people .

bulgaria is also battling a rapidly shrinking and aging population , due partly to a low birth rate and partly to the emigration of large numbers of young bulgarians to better - paying jobs in western europe .

mistakes and fitful reforms made by previous governments , culminating in disastrous policies pursued by a previous bsp government in 1995-1996 , were serious setbacks .

however , bulgaria's economic situation has improved substantially since 1997 , when the country's currency was pegged to the euro under a currency board arrangement , which gives the bulgarian central bank little discretion in setting monetary policy .

from 1998 through 2005 , bulgaria has had an average economic growth rate of more than 5% per year .

gross domestic product ( gdp ) grew by just under 6% in the first three - quarters of 2007 .

unemployment has fallen from 18.1% in 2000 to 7.8% in 2007 .

bulgaria ran a government budget surplus of 3.5% of gdp in 2007 .

the central bank is working to restrain rapidly expanding commercial bank lending in order to maintain stable growth .

however , inflation remains high ; average consumer price inflation was 8.4% in 2007 .

persistent inflation is likely to delay bulgaria's efforts to adopt the euro as its currency for a few years , at least .

due to strong import demand , bulgaria had a large current account deficit of 20% of gdp in 2007 .

on the other hand , bulgaria has seen a surge of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in recent years .

fdi amounted to $8.4 billion in 2007 , or nearly 20% of gdp .

bulgaria is attractive to investors because it can supply not only cheap labor , but qualified experts in such fields as computer science .

organized crime and corruption are very serious problems in bulgaria .

powerful organized crime kingpins continue to operate in bulgaria with relative impunity , and dozens have died in contract killings and gang shootouts in the past few years .

organized crime groups are involved in such activities as trafficking in persons , drugs and weapons , money laundering , counterfeiting , optical disc piracy , and credit card fraud .

high - level corruption is also a critical issue .

powerful politicians are perceived as operating their ministries as corrupt fiefdoms with relative impunity .

one of bulgaria's biggest challenges is long - delayed judicial reform .

the bulgarian system remains weak , corrupt , and sometimes politicized .

experts believe that bulgaria must also overhaul its education and health care systems .

bulgaria's foreign policy in recent years has focused on joining nato and the european union .

bulgaria joined nato in april 2004 , in part due to strong u.s. support .

bulgaria has deployed over 400 troops to afghanistan as part of the nato - led international security assistance force ( isaf ) .

they are stationed in kabul and in the southern afghan city of kandahar .

bulgaria is considering providing training to afghan security forces .

bulgaria has deployed 42 soldiers to kfor , the nato - led peacekeeping force in kosovo , as well as to sfor , the former nato - led peacekeeping force in bosnia .

sfor has been replaced by an eu - led force , in which bulgaria is also participating , with 152 soldiers .

bulgaria has supported extending membership invitations to albania , croatia , and macedonia at the nato summit in bucharest on april 2-4 , 2008 .

bulgarian officials say the move would strengthen peace and stability in the region .

bulgarian officials say that military modernization has proceeded slowly in part because of the costs of participating in overseas deployments .

in april 2005 , gen. nikola kolev , chief of general staff of the bulgarian army , said that it will take at least 10 years for bulgaria to achieve full integration in the alliance , citing in particular the need for new equipment .

he said that bulgaria was focusing on preparing at least one mechanized brigade for use in the full range of nato's missions , as well as several smaller , specialized units , totaling over 5,000 men in all .

some observers have expressed concern that some of the soviet - trained officers holding senior positions in the bulgarian military and intelligence services may continue to have links with russian intelligence agencies .

in 2004 , several senior bulgarian nominees to nato posts were denied nato security clearances .

bulgaria joined the eu in january 2007 , but under stringent conditions .

it must provide regular reports to the eu commission on its progress toward specific benchmarks in several areas , including the fight against organized crime and corruption , and judiciary reform .

the eu may apply sanctions ( suspending judicial cooperation , for example ) against bulgaria if the benchmarks are not met .

in february 2008 , the european commission released a report on bulgaria's progress .

it recognized progress in judicial reform and fighting corruption on bulgaria's borders , but noted shortcomings in such areas as corruption in local government , healthcare , and education .

the report particularly stressed the need to make stronger efforts in fighting high - level corruption and organized crime .

no sanctions have been taken against bulgaria yet , but the eu has suspended funding for some projects in bulgaria , due to irregularities in how the money has been spent , including corruption concerns .

russia and bulgaria have traditionally had good relations , due to longstanding historical and personal ties .

however , some analysts have expressed concern about russia's dominance in bulgaria's energy sector .

bulgaria is almost entirely dependent on russia for its oil and natural gas needs .

russian firms own major oil refineries , a key commercial natural gas distribution company , and many retail gasoline stations in bulgaria .

as in other countries in central europe , some analysts are concerned that russia could use this control and its links with some politicians ( particularly in the bsp ) and business leaders to manipulate the country .

bulgarian - russian energy relations became closer in january 2008 , when president putin won bulgaria's support for russia's south stream natural gas pipeline .

bulgaria's position on the black sea may make it an important transit point for oil and natural gas supplies from russia and the caspian sea region to western europe .

routes through bulgaria would avoid turkey's crowded bosporus and dardanelles straits .

south stream , which would run though bulgaria and the balkans to western europe , may increase europe's dependence on russian energy by reducing the prospects for the u.s. - and eu - sponsored nabucco project .

nabucco is intended to supply central asian gas to europe without transiting russia .

russian and bulgarian leaders also signed agreements on a proposed oil pipeline from the bulgarian city of burgas to the greek port at alexandropoulos on the aegean sea and on building two russian nuclear reactors in bulgaria .

the united states and bulgaria have excellent bilateral relations .

in april 2006 , the united states signed a defense cooperation agreement with sofia on use of military bases in bulgaria .

 ( even before the agreement , the united states was already using bulgarian bases for joint exercises with bulgarian and other troops , as well as for u.s. forces in transit to iraq and afghanistan. ) .

the bulgarian government eagerly sought such bases , viewing them as an economic stimulus and as useful in cementing strategic bonds with the united states .

the bases involved include the bezmer and graf ignatievo air bases and the novo selo training range .

about 2,500 u.s. troops are expected to be deployed to the relatively spartan facilities at the bases at any one time , each group staying for only a few months .

in february 2008 , the united states signed additional agreements needed to implement the 2006 accord , including on customs procedures , taxes , and other issues .

bases in bulgaria are likely to be less expensive than bases in western europe and subject to fewer constraints on training and exercises .

bulgaria is also closer geographically to the middle east than western europe .

at the same time , bulgaria's infrastructure is inferior to that of countries such as germany .

bulgaria contributed 450 troops to u.s. - led coalition forces in iraq , despite the deployment's unpopularity among bulgarians , according to opinion polls .

bulgaria suffered casualties in iraq: 13 soldiers have died .

in march 2005 , a bulgarian soldier was killed in a friendly - fire incident involving u.s. troops .

in may 2005 , with the parliamentary elections looming , the bulgarian parliament voted to withdraw the bulgarian contingent by the end of the year .

although the 450-man infantry battalion was indeed withdrawn at the end of 2005 , bulgaria sent a 150-man unit to guard a refugee camp north of baghdad in march 2006 .

bulgaria is also helping to train iraqi security force members in bulgaria .

the state department's 2007 trafficking in persons report said that bulgaria is a "transit country and to a lesser extent , a source country" for human trafficking .

it is a "tier 2" country , meaning that it does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking , but is making significant efforts to do so .

the report said that bulgaria improved its victim assistance infrastructure and continued to demonstrate increased law enforcement efforts .

however , bulgaria's national anti - trafficking commission could not effectively monitor and improve national and local efforts due to inadequate staffing , according to the report .

in fy2006 , bulgaria received $35 million in u.s. total aid .

fy2006 was the last year that bulgaria received assistance under the seed program to promote political and economic reform , because of bulgaria's pending admission to the eu .

in fy2007 , bulgaria received $11 million in u.s. aid , including $9.6 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) and $1.4 million in imet military training funding to bring bulgaria's military closer to nato standards .

bulgaria will receive an estimated $8.5 million in u.s. aid in fy2008 .

of the amount , $6.6 million is in fmf , $1.6 million is in imet , and $0.3 million in funding to destroy excess small arms and ammunition stocks .

for fy2009 , the administration requested $11 million in aid for bulgaria .

this total includes $9 million in fmf and $1.6 million in imet .

another $0.4 million is aimed at helping bulgaria destroy small arms and ammunition stocks .

