the tanf block grant is a fixed amount of funding paid to each state based on a formula .

states design and administer benefits and services funded by tanf and have wide latitude in their use of block grant funds .

states are required to share a portion of the cost of tanf benefits and services by expending some of their own funds on tanf - related benefits and services through a "maintenance of effort" requirement .

tanf is the major federal - state program providing cash assistance to needy families with children .

while federal tanf grants help fund this cash assistance , states determine eligibility rules and benefit amounts which vary greatly among the states .

there are no federal rules regarding eligibility and benefits for ongoing cash welfare , other than the requirement that it be paid to families with children that meet a financial test of economic need .

table 1 provides some basic information on cash welfare benefits in the states affected by hurricane katrina and some of their neighboring states .

it shows both the maximum monthly benefit amount paid to a family of three as of january 2005 and the average number of families that received cash assistance in june 2006 .

the maximum monthly benefit is generally the amount paid to a family with no other income sources .

tanf cash assistance benefits in this region are relatively low compared with those paid in other regions and states .

for example , the comparable maximum cash welfare grant paid in new york city in january 2005 was $691 per month and the maximum cash welfare grant paid to a family of three in the urban areas of california was $723 per month .

tanf imposes some requirements on states with respect to families receiving cash assistance .

the purpose of the requirements is to ensure that receipt of cash welfare is temporary and to encourage movement off the rolls and into work .

tanf requires that a specified percentage of its caseload be engaged in work or job preparation activities , limits federally - funded assistance to five years , and requires that cash assistance recipients cooperate with child support enforcement rules ( establish paternity and assign child support to the state ) .

tanf also gives authority to states to pay "emergency assistance" benefits .

emergency benefits are those that: are considered "nonrecurrent , short - term benefits ; " are designed to deal with a specific crisis situation or episode of need ; are not intended to meet recurrent or ongoing needs ; and will not extend beyond four months .

families receiving such emergency benefits are not subject to the same requirements ( i.e , work requirements and time limits ) as are families that receive cash assistance .

as with cash welfare , states determine eligibility for and the scope of emergency benefits provided to low - income families with children .

in addition to ongoing cash welfare and emergency aid , tanf can fund a wide range of other social services for low - income families with children , such as child care , transportation aid , family preservation and support services , and similar types of services .

as with ongoing cash welfare and emergency assistance , states determine eligibility and the scope of benefits provided to needy families with children .

welfare programs are not usually associated with responses to natural disasters .

however , the scope of hurricane katrina's displacement of families , the strain placed on human service agencies responding to this displacement , plus the flexibility allowed states to design programs under tanf , made the block grant a potential source of help to the victims of this disaster .

while tanf funding is flexible and provides states with options to help needy families , the legislation passed by congress and signed by the president addressed some policy considerations .

tanf block grants are fixed amounts determined by formula in federal law , and absent federal legislation benefits paid by a host state to evacuees would come from that host state's tanf allocation .

p.l .

109-68 allowed states to draw from the tanf contingency fund to provide 100% federal funding for certain benefits paid to families that evacuated hurricane - damaged areas .

funding was capped at 20% per year of the host state's annual block grant .

in fy2006 , a total of $48.4 million was drawn from the tanf contingency fund to provide short - term benefits for evacuees .

table 2 shows tanf contingency fund grants for evacuees of hurricane - damaged areas .

the fixed tanf block grants do not adjust for changes in the circumstances of a state .

though tanf did contemplate extra funding in the case of a recession , it has no mechanism to increase funding in the event of a natural disaster .

p.l .

109-68 provided extra funding for fy2005 and fy2006 for the three hurricane - damaged states of alabama , louisiana , and mississippi , an extra 20% of the damaged state's block grant .

tanf recipients who receive ongoing cash assistance are subject to certain requirements , such as time limits and work requirements .

for fy2005 and fy2006 , p.l .

109-68 waived penalties on the states for failure to meet state work requirements as well as the penalty for having more than 20% of its caseload on the rolls for more than five years ( the tanf time limit ) .

it also gives the authority to states to provide short - term , nonrecurring benefits for evacuee families receiving benefits in other states and families in hurricane damaged states , to meet subsistence needs and not have that time count for purposes of work requirements or time limits .

