for many years , there have been divergent views with regard to sex and young persons .

many argue that sexual activity in and of itself is wrong if the persons are not married .

others agree that it is better for teenagers to abstain from sex , but are primarily concerned about the negative consequences of sexual activity , namely unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases ( stds ) .

these two viewpoints are reflected in two teen pregnancy prevention approaches .

the abstinence - only education approach centers on the abstinence - only message and exclusively funds programs that adhere solely to bolstering that message .

the title v abstinence education block grant administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) supports this approach .

the comprehensive sexual education approach provides funding ( through many other federal programs ) for both prevention programs ( that often include an abstinence message ) and programs that provide medical and social services to pregnant or parenting teens .

since 1991 , teen pregnancy , abortion , and birth rates have all fallen considerably .

in 2002 ( the latest available data ) , the overall pregnancy rate for teens aged 15-19 was 75.4 per 1,000 females aged 15-19 , down 35% from the 1991 level of 115.3 .

the 2002 teen pregnancy rate is the lowest recorded since 1973 , when this series was initiated .

however , it still is higher than the teen pregnancy rates of most industrialized nations .

after increasing sharply during the late 1980s , the teen birth rate for females aged 15-19 declined every year from 1991 to 2005 .

the 2005 teenage birth rate of 40.4 per 1,000 women aged 15-19 is the lowest recorded birth rate for u.s. teenagers .

in 2005 , the number of births to teens was 421,123 ( 10.2% of the 4.1 million births in the u.s. ) , of which 6,717 births were to girls under age 15 .

nearly 23% of all nonmarital births were to teens in 2005 .

although birth rates for u.s. teens have dropped in recent years , they remain higher than the teenage birth rates of most industrialized nations .

according to a recent report on children and youth , in 2005 , 34% of ninth graders reported that they had experienced sexual intercourse .

the corresponding statistics for older teens were 43% for tenth graders , 51% for eleventh graders , and 63% for twelfth graders .

about 30% of female teens who have had sexual intercourse become pregnant before they reach age 20 .

an october 2006 study by the national campaign to prevent teen pregnancy estimated that , in 2004 , adolescent childbearing cost u.s. taxpayers about $9 billion per year .

research indicates that teens who give birth are less likely to complete high school and go on to college , thereby reducing their potential for economic self - sufficiency .

the research also indicates that the children of teens are more likely than children of older parents to experience problems in school and drop out of high school , and as adults are more likely to repeat the cycle of teenage pregnancy and poverty .

the 2006 report contends that if the teen birth rate had not declined between 1991 and 2004 , the annual costs associated with teen childbearing would have been almost $16 billion ( instead of $9 billion ) .

in recognition of the negative , long - term consequences associated with teenage pregnancy and births , the prevention of teen pregnancy is a major national goal .

although a number of different techniques are available to evaluate the impact of policy changes , there is widespread consensus that well - designed and well - implemented studies that require random assignment to experimental and control groups provide more reliable , valid , and objective information than other types of approaches .

random assignment experimental studies generally assign potential participants to two groups .

individuals assigned to a control group are subject to current policies or practices ( no policy change ) ; individuals assigned to the experimental or treatment group are subject to a different policy initiative ( i.e. , intervention ) , such as abstinence - only education .

individuals are randomly assigned to these two groups , and any differences between the experimental and control group are attributed to the policy initiative being examined .

the random assignment experimental approach attempts to estimate a program's impact on an outcome of interest .

it measures the average difference between the experimental group and the control group .

for a policy to have an impact , it must be determined that the impact did not just occur by chance .

in other words , the difference must be determined to be "statistically significant. .

differences between experimental and control groups that pass statistical significance tests are reported as policy impacts .

the random assignment experimental approach generally is considered to provide the most valid estimate of an intervention's impact , and thereby provides useful information on whether , and the extent to which , on average , an intervention causes favorable impacts for a large group of subjects .

 ( for information about some of the problems with the experimental approach , see crs report rl33301 , congress and program evaluation: an overview of randomized controlled trials ( rcts ) and related issues . ) .

there is a significant difference between abstinence as a message and abstinence - only interventions .

while the bush administration continues to support an abstinence - only program intervention ( with some modifications ) , others argue that an abstinence message integrated into a comprehensive sex education program that includes information on the use of contraceptives and that enhances decision - making skills is a more effective method to prevent teen pregnancy .

a recent nationally representative survey found that 90% of adults and teens agree that young people should get a strong message that they should not have sex until they are at least out of high school , and that a majority of adults ( 73% ) and teens ( 56% ) want teens to get more information about both abstinence and contraception .

the american public — both adults and teens — supports encouraging teens to delay sexual activity and providing young people with information about contraception .

 ( for additional information on teen pregnancy prevention , see crs report rs20301 , teenage pregnancy prevention: statistics and programs , and crs report rs20873 , reducing teen pregnancy: adolescent family life and abstinence education programs , both by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

