doping in sport involves the use of substances or methods that artificially enhance athletic performance .

although doping is not a new phenomenon , policymakers remain concerned about the health effects and ethical implications associated with the continued use of performance - enhancing substances in competitive sports .

anti - doping rules have been in place for various sports and in various countries since at least the 1920s , but many claim that the enforcement of anti - doping rules is fundamentally limited by a lack of uniform standards across sports and across countries .

the international convention against doping in sport , adopted in 2005 by unesco , is the most recent response to such criticism .

it seeks to harmonize anti - doping commitments for sport .

eighty - seven states are parties , or states parties , to the convention as of july 2008 .

the administration states that ratification of this treaty is a priority .

on february 6 , 2008 , the president transmitted the treaty to the senate for its advice and consent to ratification .

upon the president's transmittal of the convention to the senate for consideration , the white house press secretary released a statement justifying the need for ratification , stating that it would "solidify our nation's place as a leader in the worldwide effort to rid athletics of cheating through chemistry. .

many , including members of congress , argue that international commitments to anti - doping can help set a positive example for elite and aspiring athletes and help discourage their use of performance - enhancing substances .

a major impetus for u.s. action on ratifying this treaty stems from a concern that lack of ratification would result in a ban from hosting and participating in some international competitions , including future olympic games .

the ioc requires that governments become a party to the international convention against doping in sport by january 1 , 2009 — and failure to do so would result in those countries being barred from participation in future games and could also affect a city's bid for hosting the 2016 olympics .

chicago is the u.s. olympic committee's candidate for the 2016 games .

the ioc plans to announce its selection for the 2016 olympics in october 2009 .

the international convention against doping in sport does not apply to u.s. professional sports .

some athletes of u.s. professional teams , however , may already follow the code — whose guidelines the convention embraces — when they participate in international tournaments under the jurisdiction of organizations that already implement the code .

this has already been the case , for example , when national basketball association or national hockey league players participate in the olympic games or world championships .

article 20 of the convention , however , requires that states parties encourage professional sports associations and institutions to develop anti - doping principles consistent with the code .

many observers argue that the value of international anti - doping efforts , including the international convention against doping in sport , are limited by a lack of effective anti - doping tests that can positively identify prohibited substances .

historically , the search for better methods to detect doping substances has lagged behind the discovery and use of new , undetectable substances .

for example , though the use of anabolic steroids was already reportedly "widespread" by the early 1970s , a reliable test method for detecting them was not found until 1974 , and they were only added to the ioc's list of prohibited substances in 1976 .

more recently , anti - doping efforts suffered setbacks related to the use of designer , or synthetic , steroids that have proven difficult to detect .

new concern currently surrounds the possibility of "gene doping," whereby genetic therapies may be used to enhance athletic performance .

the international convention against doping in sport requires states parties to adhere to the principles of the code .

some observers , however , question whether the code sufficiently protects athletes who may be accidentally implicated in a doping violation .

these critics argue that the code imposes excessively stringent punishments , including potentially career - ending suspensions , that offer little distinction between intentional doping and the detection of trace levels of prohibited substances originating from the consumption of contaminated or mislabeled nutritional supplements .

some of these concerns may be addressed in revised version of the code , which will go into effect january 1 , 2009 .

further , some question the legitimacy of wada as an authority in international anti - doping policy , accusing wada of not being sufficiently transparent in its decision making and resistant to outside scrutiny .

some critics have also questioned wada procedures for handling drug testing samples and avoiding contamination , as well as for dealing with false positives and other potential testing mistakes .

the international convention against doping in sport commits states parties to funding wada and domestic anti - doping tests .

although ratification of the convention does not impose new costs upon the u.s. government , it would commit the united states to continuing such funding in the future .

some critics argue that the cost of anti - doping activities , especially legal costs of adjudicating doping cases , outweighs the benefits of deterring the use of performance - enhancing substances in sport .

usada's legal expenses , for example , represented more than 15% ( $1.8 million ) of its total expenses in 2006 .

already in 2008 , usada has sought more than $1 million in external financial support from wada for its legal case against u.s. cyclist floyd landis , who was stripped of the 2006 tour de france title for a doping violation .

