appraisers provide an estimate of the value of real estate prior to the completion of a sale or refinance of the property .

lenders typically rely on independent real estate appraisers because the property serves as collateral for the loan used to finance the transaction .

the lender is in a position to seize and sell the property if the borrower defaults .

borrowers who are purchasing or refinancing the property may also desire an appraisal in order to reassure themselves that the price of the property is in line with an objective evaluation of its value .

either the buyer or the seller may be dissatisfied with the property appraisal if prices rise or fall rapidly after the sale ; as a result , reexamination of appraisal regulation is not unusual following a real estate related financial crisis .

current regulation of property appraisals is based on legislation passed following two financial crises linked to real estate bubbles .

legislation governing appraisal regulation includes title xi of the financial institutions reform , recovery , and enforcement act of 1989 ( firrea , p.l .

101-73 ) enacted after the savings and loan crisis , and the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act , p.l .

111-203 ) enacted after the subprime mortgage crisis .

in addition to the changes included in the dodd - frank act , requirements for appraiser independence were included in the housing and economic recovery act ( hera ) of 2008 .

firrea created a federal framework to oversee the state licensing and certification of real estate appraisers .

it did so by establishing the appraisal subcommittee ( asc ) within the federal financial institutions examinations council ( ffiec ) , but the licensing and certifying of appraisers was left to the states .

firrea required the states to establish licensing and certification requirements and to coordinate through the asc and a nongovernmental organization , the appraisal foundation , which establishes the uniform standards of professional appraisal practice ( uspap ) .

federal banking regulators established the threshold for requiring an appraisal for federally related loans , and the states created appraisal boards to license and certify appraisers .

the mortgage crisis that began in 2007 has primarily affected residential properties , not commercial properties .

the dodd - frank act transferred some of the regulation of residential mortgages to the new consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , established more specific criteria for residential property appraisals and the appraiser profession , and also required a property visit for appraisals financed by a high risk residential mortgage .

other changes mandated in the dfa include mandated independence for appraisers , requiring regulators to establish customary and reasonable fees for appraisal activities , requiring that banks separate the loan officers who underwrite loans from the people who pick the appraisers , and establishing standards for the professional education of licensed and certified appraisers .

the housing and economic recovery act ( hera , p.l .

110-289 ) included a provision designed to increase the independence of appraisers .

it prohibited mortgage lenders , mortgage brokers , mortgage bankers , real estate brokers , appraisal management companies , employees of appraisal management companies , and any other people with an interest in a real estate transaction from improperly influencing , or attempting to improperly influence , the development , reporting , result , or review of a real estate appraisal in connection with a federally related mortgage .

federal regulation of appraisals is typically linked to federally related transactions .

in practice , federal regulation applies to most of the mortgage market because it includes any loans from federally chartered or insured banks , thrifts , and credit unions .

it includes any loans that are part of a federal housing administration ( fha ) or department of housing or urban development ( hud ) program .

it also includes any loans originated with the intent to be eligible for sale to the housing government sponsored enterprises ( gses ) .

however , not all property sales and transfers require a mortgage ; therefore , there are some property transactions for which federal appraisal regulation would have limited applicability .

appraisers are licensed and certified at the state level .

more complex real estate transactions require a certified appraiser .

licensed appraisers may conduct less - complex appraisals .

in general , residential appraisals are considered less complex than commercial real estate transactions .

although state boards license and certify appraisers , the boards themselves are subject to oversight by federal authorities in the appraisal subcommittee .

the asc is a federal agency that oversees state licensing and certification of appraisers and appraisal management companies .

the asc is part of the federal financial institutions examinations council ( ffiec ) , which coordinates federal banking regulators .

the asc's board is appointed by the heads of related agencies .

each member agency of the ffiec ( banking regulators ) appoints one asc board member .

the head of the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) and the head of the cfpb each appoint one board member .

at least one member of the board must have demonstrated knowledge of the appraisal profession through licensure , certification , or designation .

the asc has a number of regulatory responsibilities and must report annually to congress .

the asc monitors the requirements established by the state boards for the certification and licensing of appraisers , state registration and supervision of appraisal management companies ( amcs ) , appraisal standards for federally related transactions , and the level of required appraisal ( licensed or the more stringent certified ) for federally related transactions .

the asc also maintains national registries of certified and licensed appraisers and of appraisal management companies .

the asc oversees the state codes of professional responsibility for real estate appraisers .

the appraisal foundation ( foundation ) is an independent non - profit organization for appraisal professionals , not a government agency .

however , the foundation was authorized by congress to establish standards for the appraisal profession , and receives funding from the asc .

the foundation's core activities include promulgating appraisal standards , appraiser qualifications , and appraisal practices .

the foundation's appraisal standards board ( asb ) issues and amends professional appraisal standards , called the uniform standards of professional appraisal practice ( uspap ) .

firrea requires appraisers to adhere to the uspap for all federally related transactions .

the uspap are not federal statutes , but they are the standards guiding industry professionals .

some readers may be helped by thinking of the uspap as similar to accounting standards , which are issued by industry professionals , but are used in many regulatory contexts .

the foundation also hosts the appraiser qualification board ( aqb ) and the appraisal practices board ( apb ) .

the aqb establishes the professional requirements ( education , experience , etc. ) .

for certification .

the apb is a relatively new ( 2010 ) professional board that focuses on technical issues , such as recognized valuation methods and techniques .

as described above , the dodd - frank act ( dfa ) made a number of changes to the regulation of property appraisals .

it set new federal standards for the independence of appraisers , particularly for properties on which higher risk loans were being made .

it eliminated the home valuation code of conduct ( hvcc ) .

other significant provisions include a requirement of a property visit for appraisals financed by a high - risk mortgage ; conditions for a second appraisal at no cost to the home purchaser ; mandated independence for appraisers ; portability of some residential property appraisals ; rules for customary and reasonable fees ; standards for appraiser education ; and a mandatory annual report to congress by the asc on its activities .

selected issues are described in more detail below .

regulators issue rules for appraisals within the statutory framework .

although the dodd - frank act required a number of rules related to appraisals , banking regulators had also been considering a number of changes to property valuations that they believe would support real estate transactions .

the federal reserve issued an interim final rule for appraisal independence in october 2010 .

although the dodd - frank act required the banking regulators to issue an interim rule on appraisals , the federal reserve had already been formulating many of the proposed changes under its truth in lending act ( tila ) authority prior to passage of the dfa .

some sections of the interim rule , such as reasonable and customary fees for appraisals , are directly related to specific dodd - frank act provisions .

the october 2010 rule contains five major provisions .

it prohibits coercion of appraisers to influence the appraised value of properties .

it prohibits appraisers and appraisal management companies having financial interests in the transaction .

it prohibits lenders from providing credit if they know beforehand of violations involving appraiser coercion or conflicts of interest .

it requires that lenders that have information about appraiser misconduct file reports with the appropriate state licensing authorities .

it sets the standards for the payment of reasonable and customary compensation to appraisers as required by the dodd - frank act .

the october 2010 rule is broad .

the covered transactions that it applies to are extensions of consumer credit that are or will be secured by the consumer's principal dwelling .

this includes home equity lines of credit .

the rule is not limited to appraisers .

it also applies to any person who makes a valuation of real estate for a covered transaction , including real estate agents .

the banking regulators issued fil - 82-2010 , "interagency appraisal and evaluation guidelines," on december 2 , 2010 .

the fil applies to lenders regulated by members of ffiec .

fils do not apply to nonbank lenders like mortgage companies that are funded solely by securitization .

the fil makes a number of substantive changes and clarifications to permitted methods of collateral valuation by banks .

it states that automated valuation models and similar technical systems cannot be substituted for an appraisal when the transaction requires an appraisal .

it prohibits covered lenders from relying on valuation methods that do not provide a property's market value , such as a broker price opinion .

it requires covered lenders to file a complaint with state appraiser regulatory officials when they suspect that an appraiser failed to comply with the uspap .

section vi of the fil prohibits banks from accepting appraisals under some circumstances .

the agencies stated that the independence of the appraiser is compromised if the borrower recommends the appraiser or bank's loan production staff selects the appraiser .

the fil requires banks to separate their loan officers from the staff that selects the appraisers .

borrowers cannot recommend the appraiser , or offer an appraisal that was submitted to another lender ; however , a borrower may tell the bank that another appraisal exists , and the bank can request the appraisal report directly from the other institution .

in december 2011 , the cfpb issued an appraisal rule .

the dfa had transferred some regulatory authority under tila as well as some personnel from the federal reserve to the cfpb .

the 2011 cfpb rule confirmed the federal reserve's 2010 rule , and has been effective since april 2011 .

however , the cfpb continued to accept comments on the rule and may issue changes .

unlike the banking regulator's fil , the cfpb rule applies to all lenders , not just banks .

the federal housing administration ( fha ) insures qualifying residential mortgages .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 required that appraisers for fha loans be certified at the state level , not merely licensed .

only an appraiser listed on hud's fha appraiser roster may perform the appraisal .

the 2011 rule updated the fha roster and clarified additional standards that appraisers must meet to be chosen as an appraiser for an fha loan .

for example , and appraiser must not be listed on the general services administration's suspension and debarment list , on hud's limited denial of participation list , or in hud's credit alert interactive voice response system ( caivrs ) .

