federal aid to communities affected by base closures and realignments covers a wide range of activities and agencies: planning and economic adjustment assistance provided by the office of economic adjustment of department of defense ( dod ) , the economic development administration , and the rural development administration ; environmental cleanup at military bases ; disposal of surplus federal properties ; the federal airport improvement program ; community development block grants ; and community service grants .

there are a number of federal programs that can provide transition assistance to workers displaced by base closures .

these include various forms of transition assistance and benefits provided by dod to its workers as well as other types of assistance available to all dislocated workers ( eg , the dislocated worker job training program of the department of labor , unemployment compensation , and food stamps ) .

dod has the authority to provide numerous incentives and transition benefits to departing military personnel .

these include early retirement incentives , temporary continuation of medical care benefits , pre - separation counseling for separating service members , employment counseling and placement assistance , relocation assistance , and special gi bill education benefits .

in addition , the pentagon is also authorized to provide special benefits and incentives to civilian personnel displaced by a defense drawdown .

these include advance notification of a reduction in force , pre - separation counseling , a hiring preference system ( including the maintenance of a government - wide list of vacant positions ) with federal agencies to re - employ qualified displaced dod employees , financial incentives to encourage early retirement of eligible employees , and continued health insurance coverage for up to 18 months following involuntary separation .

the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ) , authorizes , among other programs , a program specifically for providing training and other services to dislocated workers .

dislocated workers are generally characterized as workers with an established work history who have lost their jobs as a result of structural changes in the economy and who are not likely to find new jobs in their former industries or occupations .

the wia program provides services to dislocated workers regardless of the cause of dislocation , and has been utilized in the past by workers affected by base closures .

all wia programs operate on a july 1 to june 30 program year ( i.e. , appropriations for fy2004 are for program year 2004 , which is from july 1 , 2004 through june 30 , 2005 ) .

the fy2004 appropriation for dislocated workers was $1.4 billion .

this was increased to $1.5 billion for both fy2005 and fy2006 .

the authorization for wia programs expired on september 30 , 2003 ; congress , however , has continued to fund the programs through annual appropriations .

of the funds appropriated for the dislocated worker program , approximately 80% are for formula grants to states and 20% are for a national reserve , which primarily funds national emergency grants ( negs ) .

 ( negs are discussed below. ) .

the governor can reserve not more than 15% of the state's formula grant for state level activities , and not more than 25% for "rapid response" activities .

at least 60% must be allocated to local workforce investment boards ( wibs ) by a formula prescribed by the governor .

rapid response activities are provided by specialists in the state's dislocated worker unit in the state's workforce agency as soon as possible after learning of a projected permanent closure or mass layoff .

activities include establishing onsite contact with employers and employee representatives , providing information and access to available employment and training activities , and providing assistance to the local community in developing a coordinated response and in obtaining access to state economic development assistance .

in addition to rapid response activities , there are three levels of services , provided sequentially , available to dislocated workers: core , intensive , and training .

to be eligible to receive intensive services , such as comprehensive assessments and development of individual employment plans , an individual must first receive at least one core service , such as job search , and have been unable to either obtain employment or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency .

to be eligible to receive training services , such as occupational skills training and on - the - job training , an individual must have received at least one intensive service , and must have been unable to obtain or retain employment .

individuals receive these services through a coordinated service delivery system called the "one - stop" system .

each one - stop system in a local area must include at least one physical center , which may be supplemented by affiliated sites .

in addition to these services , local wibs can decide whether to provide supportive services , such as transportation and child care , and need - related payments .

supportive services can be provided to individuals who are participating in core , intensive , or training services , and who are unable to obtain them through other programs .

negs , which are funded through the 20% of the dislocated worker appropriation allotted to the national reserve , provide supplemental dislocated worker funds to state workforce agencies and local wibs in order to meet the needs of dislocated workers and communities affected by significant dislocation events that cannot be met with the formula allotments .

in its may 24 , 2005 training and guidance letter , dol announced the availability of neg funds for phase i planning grants to states that may be affected by the 2005 brac .

the purpose of these grants is to plan a comprehensive response to a brac closure or realignment .

states eligible to receive the phase i planning grants are those states listed in the secretary of defense's may 13 , 2005 announcement of installations being recommended for closure or realignment .

it is expected that no state will receive phase i planning funds in excess of $1 million .

awards will be made in consultation with dod .

phase ii grants were made to states to provide employment and training assistance to affected workers , beginning in november 2005 when current brac actions were finalized .

in addition to the various federal programs designed to provide transition assistance to displaced workers , a variety of other programs might also provide assistance to those affected by base closure .

these include the following: post - secondary education and training assistance for students under title iv of the higher education act ; and vocational education programs under the carl d. perkins vocational and technical education act .

benefits related to past employment: unemployment compensation and temporary health insurance continuation .

benefits related to financial need: temporary assistance to needy families , food stamps , subsidized school meals , medicaid and housing assistance furnished by the department of housing and urban development .

