since assuming office in 2001 , president bush has been a strong supporter of free trade and trade liberalization .

in numerous statements , he has touted the virtues of trade expansion .

as he explained: "our goal is to ignite a new era of economic growth through a world trading system that is dramatically more open and free. .

the president has promoted trade liberalization on multiple fronts: globally , regionally , and bilaterally .

by pursuing multiple free trade initiatives , the administration has tried to create "competition in liberalization" and more options .

as explained by robert zoellick , president bush's first u.s. trade representative , if free trade progress becomes stalled globally , then we can move ahead regionally and bilaterally .

globally , the administration is now working to reach an agreement in the so - called doha round of multilateral trade talks being held among the 148 members of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

regionally , the administration is pursuing agreements with the countries of the southern african customs union , andean countries , and 34 countries of the western hemisphere to create a free trade area of the americas .

bilaterally , it is currently negotiating fta's with thailand , panama , and the united arab emirates .

the administration signed an fta with bahrain in 2004 and with oman in 2005 , and it is contemplating starting negotiations with a number of other countries .

possible new negotiating partners include egypt , malaysia , india and south korea .

the bush administration argues that these negotiations promote a host of u.s. domestic and foreign interests , both economic and political .

at home , it views trade liberalization as providing substantial gains to american consumers and companies .

cuts in u.s. trade barriers can help american families to pay less for consumer goods and u.s. companies to lower their operating costs as a result of access to cheaper imported components .

increased competition in domestic markets also promotes innovation , increases in labor productivity , and long - term growth .

better access to foreign markets facilitates increases in u.s. exports , thereby increasing employment in sectors that may pay higher than average wages .

u.s. investors can also benefit through rule changes and obligations that assure more dependable treatment by the host country .

trade liberalizing agreements , particularly ftas , also promote the u.s. trade agenda and foreign interests in a number of ways .

some ftas establish precedents or models that serve as catalysts for wider trade agreements .

many ftas reward and support market reforms being undertaken by the negotiating partner .

and still others help to strengthen u.s. ties with various countries and regions of the world .

for example , by forging stronger economic ties with countries in the middle east , such as morocco , jordan , and bahrain , the u.s. hopes to strengthen its strategic position vis - a - vis all countries in the region by promoting economic prosperity and opportunity .

at the same time , trade liberalizing agreements may carry economic and political costs .

increased foreign competition can lead to plant closings and job losses concentrated in certain regions and industries .

critics note that it may contribute to increased anxiety and wage pressures , as well as rising income inequality .

some of these concerns were central to the divisive debate in congress this year over cafta—an agreement that became a proxy , in part , for more generalized concerns about america's standing in an increasingly globalized world economy .

while cafta was approved by narrow margins in both houses , it is not clear how the outcome will affect the administration's future free trade agreement program .

the cafta was the most controversial free trade agreement vote taken by congress since the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) implementing legislation was passed in 1993 .

the senate passed the cafta implementing legislation on june 30 , 2005 by a vote of 54 to 45 and house passed the legislation on july 28 , 2005 by 217 to 215 .

besides being the lowest margin of victory for any modern fta agreement , the votes , particularly in the house , were highly partisan .

over 92% of house democrats voted against the agreement , while over 88% of house republicans voted in favor .

in both the senate and house debates , many proponents stressed a combination of economic and political arguments .

those in favor argued that , while imports from the cafta countries enter the u.s. virtually duty free , the agreement will level the playing field for u.s. commercial interests by eliminating 80% of the tariffs cafta countries impose on u.s. exports .

as a result , they maintained the u.s. goes from one - way free trade toward a more reciprocal trading relationship that will increase u.s. exports and jobs .

others emphasized that the agreement would contribute to bolstering more market - oriented and democratic governments in the region , longstanding u.s. foreign policy interests .

many lawmakers who opposed the agreement cited provisions dealing with the treatment of labor and sensitive industries ( sugar and textiles ) .

in addition , the agreement clearly triggered more generalized anxieties concerning globalization's impact on the american economy and labor force .

future congressional consideration of similar trade accords are likely to raise similar controversies and challenges , thereby prompting the administration to address these issues as part of its trade liberalizing agenda .

the bush administration is now actively negotiating a large number of trade liberalizing agreements .

the broadest and most ambitious initiative being negotiated is the doha round of multilateral negotiations .

negotiations are also taking place with panama , thailand , three andean countries ( colombia , peru , and ecuador ) , and the united emirates .

assuming that the divisions over labor issues , industry protection , and globalization anxieties that were imbedded in the cafta debate persist , these potential agreements could encounter differential obstacles .

an ambitious doha agreement is the administration's highest priority .

with 148 countries involved in the negotiation , this trade negotiation provides the largest potential benefits for u.s. firms , farmers , and consumers .

some analysts maintain that large gains or benefits accruing to a broad spectrum of american stakeholders are necessary to help mobilize political support to eliminate or reduce remaining u.s. restrictions on politically sensitive industries and products .

this is based on a belief that an ambitious agreement would require large concessions from trading partners that open substantially new market access opportunities for u.s. companies , and that these potential gains would be too tempting for u.s. industry not to support strongly .

while labor issues are not part of the doha negotiations , any big commercial agreement would likely trigger globalization anxieties among some segments of the body politic .

whether an ambitious agreement that provides large economic benefits to the u.s. economy might provide some impetus and support for devising a comprehensive adjustment program remains problematic .

in the past , implementing legislation for multilateral agreements has included the creation or expansion of adjustment programs .

the fta's being negotiated with thailand , panama , and the andean countries might encounter some or all the obstacles raised in the cafta debate .

thailand's labor conditions and exports of import sensitive products such as sugar and rice could prove contentious .

given that thailand is a larger trading partner than the five cafta countries combined , globalization anxieties could also play a role in this agreement as well .

in the case of panama and the andean countries , their labor laws and exports of sugar could raise concerns among some members of congress .

but given that they are both very small trading partners , globalization anxieties are less likely to play a key role .

to date , cafta - related controversies appear to be playing a small role in the ftas concluded with countries of the middle east—jordan , morocco , bahrain and oman .

these four agreements have received broad bipartisan support not only because they are viewed favorably for advancing u.s. security interests , but also because the countries in commercial terms provide little competitive threat to u.s. producers and workers .

