since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress has appropriated more than a trillion dollars for military operations in afghanistan , iraq , and elsewhere around the world .

the house and senate are now considering an additional request for $33 billion in supplemental funding for the remainder of fy2010 , and the administration has also requested $159 billion to cover costs of overseas operations in fy2011 .

in the face of these substantial and growing sums , a recurring question has been how the mounting costs of the nation's current wars compare to the costs of earlier conflicts .

the following table provides estimates of costs of major wars from the american revolution through conflicts in korea , vietnam , and the persian gulf in 1990-1991 .

it also provides updated estimates of costs of current operations .

estimates are in current year dollars that reflect values at the time of each conflict and in constant dollars that reflect today's prices .

the table also shows estimates of war costs as a share of the economy .

comparisons of costs of wars over a 230-year period , however , are inherently problematic .

one problem is how to separate costs of military operations from costs of forces in peacetime .

in recent years , the dod has tried to identify the additional "incremental" expenses of engaging in military operations , over and above the costs of maintaining standing military forces .

before the vietnam conflict , however , the army and the navy , and later the dod , did not view war costs in such terms .

figures are problematic , as well , because of difficulties in comparing prices from one vastly different era to another .

inflation is one issue — a dollar in the past would buy more than a dollar today .

perhaps a more significant problem is that wars appear more expensive over time as the sophistication and cost of technology advances , both for military and for civilian activities .

adjusted for inflation , the war of 1812 cost about $1.6 billion in today's prices , which appears , by contemporary standards , to be a relatively small amount .

but using commonly available estimates of gross domestic product , the overall u.s. economy 192 years ago was less than 1 / 1,400 th as large as it is now .

so at the peak of the conflict in 1813 , the war consumed more than 2% of the nation's measurable economic output , the equivalent of more than $300 billion today .

the data in the attached table , therefore , should be treated , not as truly comparable figures on a continuum , but as snapshots of vastly different periods of u.s. history .

for the vietnam war and the 1990-1991 persian gulf war , the figures reported here are dod estimates of the "incremental" costs of military operations ( i.e. , the costs of war - related activities over and above the normal , day - to - day costs of recruiting , paying , training , and equipping standing military forces ) .

estimates of the costs of post - 9 / 11 operations in afghanistan , iraq , and elsewhere through fy2009 are by [author name scrubbed] of crs , based on ( 1 )  amounts appropriated by congress in budget accounts designated to cover war - related expenses and ( 2 ) allocations of funds in reports on obligations of appropriated amounts by the dod .

data for fy2010 are dod estimates of costs defined quite similarly .

these figures appear to reflect a broader definition of war - related expenses than earlier dod estimates of incremental costs of the vietnam and persian gulf conflicts .

in years prior to the vietnam war , neither the army and navy , nor the dod , nor any other agency or organization attempted to calculate incremental costs of war - related operations over and above the costs of peace - time activities .

in the absence of official accounts of war expenditures , crs estimated the costs of most earlier wars — except for the american revolution , the confederate side of the civil war , and the korean conflict — by comparing war - time expenditures of the army and the navy with average outlays for the three years prior to each war .

the premise is that the cost of a war reflects , in each case , a temporary buildup of forces from the pre - war level .

during the korean war , however , the united states engaged in a large buildup of forces not just for the war , but for deployments elsewhere in the world as well .

for the korean conflict , therefore , crs compared outlays of the dod during the war with a trend line from average expenditures of the three years before the war to average expenditures of the three years after the war .

estimated costs of most conflicts , from the war of 1812 through the korean war , are based on official reports on the budgets of the army , navy , and , for korea , the air force .

no official budget figures are available , however , for the revolution or for the confederate states during the civil war .

the estimated cost of the american revolution is from a financial history of the united states published in 1895 and cited in a legislative reference service memo prepared in 1956 .

the estimated civil war cost of the confederacy is from the statistical abstract of the united states 1994 edition .

data on army and navy outlays prior to 1940 are from the department of commerce , historical statistics of the united states from colonial times to 1970 , part 2 , 1975 .

gdp estimates prior to 1940 are from louis d. johnston and samuel h. williamson , "the annual real and nominal gdp for these united states , 1790 - present. .

economic history services , october 2005 , at http: / / www.measuringworth.org / usgdp / .

outlays and gdp figures from fy1940 on are from the office of management and budget .

for each conflict , crs converted cost estimates in current year prices into constant fy2011 dollars using readily available inflation indices .

for years since 1948 , crs used an index of inflation in defense outlays from the dod .

for years from 1940-1947 , crs used an index of inflation in defense outlays from the office of management and budget .

for years prior to 1940 , crs used an index based on the consumer price index ( cpi ) that the u.s. department of labor , bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) maintains and updates quarterly .

that index extends back to 1913 .

for earlier years , crs used an extension of the cpi by academic researchers that is maintained at oregon state university .

that index also uses the official bls cpi from 1913 forward and periodically updates both earlier and later figures to reflect new , official cpi estimates .

inflation adjustments extending over a period of more than 200 years are problematic in many ways .

the estimates used here are from reliable academic sources , but other experts might use alternative indices of prices or might weight values differently and come up with quite different results .

in addition , over long periods , the relative costs of goods within the economy change dramatically .

by today's standards , even simple manufactured goods were expensive in the 1770s compared , say , to the price of land .

moreover , it is difficult to know what it really means to compare costs of the american revolution to costs of military operations in iraq when , 230 years ago , the most sophisticated weaponry was a 36-gun frigate that is hardly comparable to a modern $3.5 billion destroyer .

as a result , yesterday's wars appear inexpensive compared to today's conflicts if only because the complexity , value , and cost of modern technology are so much greater .

finally , a very technical and relatively minor point — the inflation indices used here are more specialized for more recent periods .

figures since 1940 are adjusted using factors specific to defense expenditures , but no such index is available for earlier years .

at least in recent years , cost trends in defense have differed considerably from cost trends in the civilian economy .

contemporary inflation indices capture such differences , while older ones do not .

