throughout the first session of the 110 th congress , the senate considered four nominations to the six - seat fec .

nominees robert d. lenhard ( d ) , hans a. von spakovsky ( r ) , and steven t. walther ( d ) served in recess appointments at the agency during that time and until their appointments expired at the end of the first session .

the fourth nominee , david m. mason ( r ) , served at the agency since 1998 and was renominated ( although his re - nomination was withdrawn in may 2008 , as was von spakovsky's ) .

throughout the first session of the 110 th congress , the von spakovsky nomination generated controversy .

in particular , some senators and others debated von spakovsky's actions on voting rights issues while serving at the justice department .

much of a june 13 , 2007 , senate rules and administration committee hearing and subsequent markup focused on von spakovsky .

on september 26 , 2007 , after being unable to reach agreement on reporting the nominations individually , the committee reported all four nominees en bloc without recommendation .

in the closing days of the first session , the senate was unable to reach a compromise over the nominees , including whether they should be considered on the floor separately or as a group .

the apparent stalemate over the nominations continued into the second session of the 110 th congress .

the lenhard , mason , von spakovsky , and walther nominations remained pending in the senate early in the second session of the 110 th congress , but because the three recess appointments expired at the end of the first session , just two commissioners — mason ( r ) and ellen l. weintraub ( d ) — remained in office .

both were previously confirmed by the senate and could continue serving in holdover status following expired terms .

few developments occurred in early 2008 .

however , additional nomination activity took place beginning in april .

first , lenhard requested that his nomination be withdrawn .

second , on may 6 , 2008 , president george w. bush made three new nominations to the fec and withdrew mason's re - nomination .

donald f. mcgahn ii ( r ) , an election lawyer , was nominated to the mason seat .

at the same time , the president withdrew lenhard's name and nominated cynthia l. bauerly ( d ) , a senate staffer , to that seat .

caroline c. hunter ( r ) , then a member of the election assistance commission ( eac ) , was nominated to the fec seat formerly held by michael e. toner .

 ( toner resigned from the commission in 2007. ) .

on may 16 , 2008 , von spakovsky requested that his nomination be withdrawn .

on may 22 , 2008 , following a hearing the previous day , the senate rules and administration committee favorably reported the bauerly , hunter , and mcgahn nominations .

also on may 22 , 2008 , the white house announced the president's intention to nominate matthew s. petersen ( r ) , a senate staffer , to the seat formerly held by von spakovsky .

walther's nomination also continued to remain pending .

on june 24 , 2008 , the senate confirmed bauerly , hunter , mcgahn , petersen , and walther .

the five new commissioners joined ellen weintraub , who continues to serve at the fec in holdover status .

fec appointments issues remained quiet until april 2009 , when the terms of commissioners mcgahn and walther expired .

they joined commissioner weintraub in holdover status .

as table 1 shows , even with three expired terms , six commissioners remain in office .

 ( the fec would not lose its policymaking quorum until fewer than four commissioners remained in office. ) .

on may 1 , 2009 , president obama announced his intention to nominate service employees international union ( seiu ) associate general counsel john j. sullivan to the commission .

the senate received the nomination on may 4 .

sullivan would replace commissioner weintraub .

the federal election commission was without a quorum of four commissioners for more than six months in 2008 .

commission staff and the remaining two commissioners continued to provide information to the regulated community and to prepare for additional commissioners .

in the interim , however , the absence of a quorum at the fec delayed administering aspects of the presidential public financing program , rulemakings , and enforcement actions .

immediate issues facing the repopulated commission included rulemaking to implement portions of the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga ) , pending enforcement cases and advisory opinion requests , and administering the presidential public campaign financing program .

the commission also needed to respond to ongoing litigation surrounding the bipartisan campaign reform act .

during 2009 , the commission continued to work through these and other issues that arose before , during , and after the shutdown .

the loss of a policymaking quorum would not occur again unless fewer than four commissioners were in office .

nonetheless , the 2008 "shutdown" may continue to be of interest to the 111 th congressional consideration of oversight or appropriations issues .

