the f - 22a raptor is the u.s. air force's , and according to many observers , the world's , most advanced manned combat aircraft .

developed principally to defeat soviet aircraft in air - to - air combat , the f - 22 exploits the latest developments in stealth technology to reduce detection by enemy radar , as well as thrust - vectoring engines for more maneuverability , and avionics that fuse and display information from on - board and off - board sensors in a single battlefield display .

current plans call for the u.s. purchase of 183 f - 22s , with the last aircraft being procured with fy2009 funds .

air force leaders say that they require 381 f - 22s , but lack the funds to purchase 198 additional aircraft .

the debate over the export of f - 22s , though not new , has become more pointed as the end of procurement funding ( fy2009 ) , and the closure of the assembly line , nears .

whether to continue production of the f - 22 is an issue that will confront the 111 th congress early in its first session .

the department of defense ( dod ) is officially neutral on whether the f - 22 should be exported , but senior leaders have suggested that they favor foreign sales of the f - 22 .

however , since 1998 , congress has prohibited the use of appropriated funds to approve or license the sale of the f - 22 to any foreign government .

this provision , known as the "obey amendment," was debated in the 109 th congress .

the house defense appropriations bill for fy2007 proposed to repeal the law , but export opponents in the house prevailed with the senate in conference .

the executive branch proposes and congress reviews arms sales on a case - by - case basis .

the sale of f - 22s to japan raises both broad questions about the security environment in east asia and questions that are specific to domestic interests .

factors that argue for a transfer include potential benefits to u.s. industry , contribution to the defense of allied countries , and promoting u.s. interoperability with those countries .

factors that argue against a particular arms transfer include the likelihood of technology proliferation and the potential for undermining regional stability .

there appear to be at least four u.s. alternatives to the f - 22 and several from europe that japan might consider .

each alternatives presents strengths and weaknesses in terms of operational capabilities , and also vis - a - vis the security , proliferation , and industrial base issues outlined in this report .

the jsf was designed from the beginning as a multinational aircraft .

technology transfer issues remain , but their resolution will likely be far easier than those presented by the f - 22 .

while the jsf is not as fast or nimble as the f - 22 , its radar and avionics are more advanced .

the jsf may be well suited to japan's self - defense requirements while presenting a less offensive capability .

the f / a - 18 / e / f super hornet is the most capable fighter aircraft flown by the u.s. navy .

it does not offer stealth technology like the f - 22 or jsf , but is expected to be in the active inventory through at least 2020 and will retain its combat edge through upgrades and modifications .

the super hornet's manufacturer , boeing , recently signed its first export deal with australia .

the f - 15 eagle has been the u.s. air force's top fighter aircraft since it was fielded in the 1970s .

today , japan operates 203 f - 15 aircraft .

by purchasing additional f - 15 aircraft instead of importing a new type of fighter , japan could potentially realize economies of scale savings in training , maintenance , and supplies by operating a larger fleet .

the f - 15 is not as capable as the f - 22 or jsf , but if upgraded , and operated in conjunction with support aircraft — such as awacs and electronic warfare aircraft — might be sufficiently capable to meet japan's needs .

another alternative would be to develop or import a ucav .

uavs such as the usaf predator are relatively well established weapons platforms , but limited compared to uavs designed from the beginning as combat platforms .

while advocates believe that ucavs represent the future of combat aviation , true , dedicated combat uavs have not yet been fielded .

pursuing ucavs versus manned aircraft could be perceived as either avant garde or premature .

japan could import an advanced combat aircraft from sweden ( the jas gripen ) , russia ( su - 30 flanker and mig - 29 fulcrum series ) , or from a consortium of european countries ( the eurofighter typhoon ) .

japan has relied almost exclusively on u.s. military imports in the past , and many believe it unlikely that it would import from non - u.s. sources .

purchasing european aircraft , however , would allow japan to establish a second source of technology , and thus some autonomy from the united states , and european governments would be expected to offer very attractive terms to penetrate the heretofore closed japanese market .

